Doxology;or;THE SCIENCE OF MORALITYIN WHICH THE. HARMONY AND CO-INCIDENCE OFDUTY AND Self-interest,VIRTUE AND FELICITY,PRUDENCE AND BENEVOLENCE,• ARE EXPLAINED AND EXEMPLIFIED.From the MSS. of JEREMY BENTHAM.ARRANGED AND EDITED BYJOHN Bowing.IN TWO VOLUMES.VOL. I.LONDON:Hangman, Trees, ORME, BROWNE, GREEN, AND Hangman.EDINBURGH:WILLIAM TAIT.1834.Vdiscontents—PART I.THEORY OF VIRTUE.TakePreface : . . .V toviIntroduction1 —CHAPTER I.General Statement7 —CHAPTER II.Doxology Explained21 —CHAPTER III.Anti-genealogical Propositions removed —Summum bonum38 —• 58CHAPTER IV.Pleasure and Pain — their relation to Good andEvil59 —■ 77CHAPTER \.Well-Being and Ill-Being78 —• 82CHAPTER VI.End of Action83 —■ 86CHAPTER VII.Sanctions . . . .87-- 121CHAPTER VIII.Causes of Immorality122 -- 131CHAPTER IX.Analysis of Confused Phraseology, by theDeontological Test132 -- 137CHAPTER X.Virtue Defined . . . .138-- 155VI CONTENTS.CHAPTER XL pageSelf-interest, or Self-regarding Prudence . 156 — 165CHAPTER XII.Prudence as regards others, or Extra-regardingPrudence . . . 166 — 175CHAPTER XIII.Effective Benevolence, — Negative . . 176—187CHAPTER XIV,Effective Benevolence, — Positive . .188 — 194CHAPTER XV.Analysis of Virtues and Vices . . 195 — 222CHAPTER XVI.Hume's Virtues . . . 223 — 258CHAPTER XVII.False Virtues . . . . 259 — 262CHAPTER XVIII.The Passions . . . 263 — 270CHAPTER XIX.Intellectual Faculties . . . 271 — 275CHAPTER XX.Conclusion of Theoretic Part . . 276 — 283History of the Greatest-HappinessPrinciple . . . 287 — 332PREFACE.This work was in the course of preparation forthe press when its great Author's earthly laborswere suddenly closed. He had, up to the latestperiod of his existence, been accustomed to recordthe desultory thoughts which occurred tohis mind on the important subject of which thevolume treats ; and I had the advantage, in myintimate communion with him, of seeking suchguidance from him as was necessary for theunderstanding and arrangement of the mass ofundigested fragments which he from time to timeplaced in my hands. It was a happy and aninteresting task to follow him through those investigationsin which benevolence and wisdom weremutual handmaids, — and emphatic indeed wasthe instruction which was so beautifully exemplifiedin every thought, and word, and action ofXllVil PREFACE.the Instructor. I took up my pen with alacrityT pursued my task with ever-new delight —I end it with feelings of gloom, for which I canfind no adequate expression. The charm isgone — the voice is silenced which conductedand gladdened me on my way. These pages asI turn them over seem to have the solemnity ofa sepulchral echo. I shall find a fitter occasionfor speaking of him who suggested them, whowas himself the virtuous man he drew,' — andI deliver them to the world, — my first offeringin discharge of those duties which have devolvedupon me as the legatee of those literary treasureswhich he, my Friend and Master, has confidedto my keeping and to my care.J. Bo.ERRATA TO VOL. I.Park26 for ' obstreperous,' read ' obstreperous.'53 four lines from bottom, dele ' be.'89 for ' premonitory,' read ' remuneratory.'143 first line, for ' harding," read ' regarding.'167 5 lines from bottom, for ' the interest in a family,' read ' the interestJdt in a family,'169 10 lines from top, for ' these thoughts,* read ' their thoughts.'204 13 lines from top, for ' action ' read • sanction.'236 6 lines from top, for ' in,' read ' for.'INTRODUCTION.If it be assumed that virtue should be the rule,and /lappifiess the object of human action, hewho shows how the instrument may best beapplied to the production of the end, and howthe end may be accomplished in the greatestobtainable degree, is undoubtedly engaged inthe exercise and entitled to the recompense ofvirtue. No small service will be done to mankind,if moral laws can be discovered suited to allthe circumstances of life, — if the habitual powercan be communicated to the honest inquirerof answering well and wisely that so oftenembarrassing question, which occurs to everyoneof us every day — every hour of our existence,— How shall I act ? and why ? Thepages which I have the privilege of now introducingto the world, are calculated, I trust, toillumine the dark parts of the field of morals —vol 1. vB2 Introduction.to unravel many entanglements, to solve manydoubts, — and to contribute much satisfaction tothe searchers after truth and virtue. The MSS.were put into my hands without reservation orrestriction as to the manner of their publication.The extreme indifference of their extraordinaryauthor to what is denominated literary fame,stands out in prominent contrast to that anxietywhich he has never hesitated to express, thathis opinions might go careering through theworld. He has always been rather desirousof digging out and refining the ore than ofstamping it with his own * image and superscription.'Not that futurity will forget itsbenefactor, or fail in honor due to him whomust and will exercise a mighty influence on itscondition. Of Bentham's writings, that mayfitly be said which Milton proclaimed of one ofhis almost forgotten volumes, that it * numberedhigh intellects.' Our author's doctrines havestrongly moved the philosophic few, and theircourse is rapidly opening and widening downwardsamong the improving many. Scoffersmay have insulted him in his progress, butINTRODUCTION. 3where is the sage who has scorned, or whohaving listened has been wanting in reverenceand gratitude to the man who first madelegislation a science ?The course which Bentham has taken is toemploy such language as would convey hisideas with the greatest precision to inquirers.A vague phraseology is necessarily the parentof vague ideas. In the minds of the welldisposed it is a source of confusion — in thehands of the ill disposed, an instrument ofmischief. Right and wrong — justice and injustice,are terms susceptible of very differentinterpretations. They may be used — theyhave been used, according to the caprice or theselfish interest of men for the production alikeof good and evil. When closely examined theywill generally be found nothing more than theexpression of the opinion more or less influentialof him who employs them ; and their value andfit application will depend on their capacity tostand the test of some other principle. Thelanguage of common parlance must, before itcan be made use of for the communication of4 INTRODUCTION'.correct ideas, be translated into the language ofhappiness and unhappiness — of pleasures and ofpains. Into these elements all moral resultsultimately resolve themselves. Here is a pointbeyond which there is no advancing. If therebe a greater good than happiness, let him whohas made the discovery produce it as a reward ;if there be a greater evil than misery, let itsinventor employ it for the ends of punishment.In the dictionary of pain and pleasure,our moralist has found all the machinery of hiscraft.Fiat experience was the axiom of Bacon ;an axiom which has been recognized as thefoundation of all genuine science. Fiat observation,is Bentham's apophthegm. What experimentis to the philosopher, observation is to themoralist. Bentham has examined humanactions through the pleasures and pains whichare consequent upon them, and has grounded allhis reasonings upon this examination. In suchpursuit truth can hardly have escaped him ;for truth and utility must go together hand inhand ; and he who discovers what is usefulINTRODUCTION. 5cannot be far off from that which is true. It is,in fact, more easy to overtake truth by pursuingutility, than to reach truth at all without utilityfor a guide ; since that which is useful is matterof experience, while conjecture is busied inasking, What is Truth ?To those who are acquainted with Bentham'sIntroduction to the Principles of Morals andLegislation,' and who have pursued the train ofreasoning there brought forward, the present workmay offer little that is new ; and perhaps there aresome who will think its contents have been alreadyanticipated and its utility superseded by thatmasterly monument of analytical and logicalpower. But for universal acceptance the principlestherein laid down assume too much theshape of axioms, and certainly wanted — as theinconsiderable circulation of the volume has evidenced— the attractions of popularity. The presentwork, whose especial object it is to approveitself to the general reader, is more desultoryand diffuse, and seeks to win its way by astyle less stern and severe. The former waswritten for the meditation of the profound thinker6 INTRODUCTION.this looks to a wider and more popular, butless elevated sphere of usefulness. Besides, theIntroduction ' has a more extensive and ambitiouscharacter, and is mainly occupied witha development of the true principles of Legislation,whose discussion, spite of its importance,can have few fascinations for mankind atlarge. In the volume before us it is not intendedto enter on the inquiries of jurisprudentialscience. Our concern is with private morality,and that has a claim to the attention of everybody,on every occasion in which thought,word, or action is engaged.GENERAL STATEMENT.CHAPTER 1.GENERAL STATEMENT ALLIANCE BetweenINTEREST AND DUTY.He who ill a deliberative assembly volunteersto bring any motion forward, confers on himselfa distinction, in which his prominency cannotbut be contrasted with the equality of the rest ;so, he who in the republic of letters choosesto range himself among the few who write, becomesnecessarily contradistinguished from themany who read, and both speaker and writertake upon themselves no inconsiderable responsibility.But, while in the case of a meeting fordiscussion, every impropriety of the speaker hasthe chance of immediate correction — in the caseof that fictitious and never assembled bodywhich creates the tribunal of public opinion, noinstant removal of error has place ; — secured forthe most part against contradiction, the publicwriter is liable to assume a confidence unwarrantedby his position. He has a motive to avoidgiving to his doctrines and precepts the supportof adequate reasons, the production of whichwould interfere with his love of ease, and theS Doxology.development of which would demand an additionalexercise of intellectual effort. The publiclegislator, with all his powers, is generally lessdespotic in his phraseology than the publicwriter — that self-constituted legislator of thepeople. He makes laws without giving reasons,— laws which generally convey only hissovereign will and pleasure. It is indeed amisfortune that men come to the discussion ofimportant questions, predetermined to decidethem only in one way. They are pledged, as itwere,, to their own minds, that certain practicesshall be wrong, and certain other practices right.But the principle of utility allows of no suchperemptoriness, and requires, before any practiceis condemned, that it be shown to be derogatoryto human happiness. Such an investigationsuits not the dogmatical instructor.With the principle of utility, therefore, he willhave nothing to do. He will have a principleof his own to do his own business. He willconvert his own opinion into a principle for itsown support. ' I say these things are notright,' he proclaims with a sufficient portion ofpositiveness — ergo, they are not right.It is plain this setting up of an opinion as thetrue foundation and sufficient reason for itself,must put every imaginable extravagance upon anequal footing with the most salutary persuasion ;GENERAL STATEMENT. 9nor does it offer any other or better standard ofright and wrong than the violence with which iturges its pretensions, or the number of thosewho asfree in them. But if violence be thestandard, as there is no possible way of measuringthe intensity of conviction but by its visible influenceon actions, — the opinion of him whoknocks down his opponent is better groundedthan that of him who only asserts his opinionvehemently, — of him who cuts his opponent'sthroat than of him who only knocks him down,and of him who tortures before he destroys hisopponent than of either ; so that, in truth, theopinions of the Inquisition bid fairest of any yetknown for being the very perfection of truthand right reason, and morality may be graduatedaccording to the miseries inflicted by persecution.If numbers decide. Idolatry woulddrive Christianity from the field, — and truthand morality would be in a state of everlastingvibration between majorities and minorities,which are shifting with all the vicissitudes ofhuman events.He who, on any other occasion, should say,It is as I say, because I say it is so,' would notbe thought to have said any great matter : buton the question concerning the standard of morality,men have written great books wherein10 Doxology.from beginning to end they are employed insaying this and nothing else. What thesebooks have to depend on for their efficacy, andfor their being thought to have proved any thingis, the stock of self-sufficiency in the writer,and of implicit deference in the readers ; bythe help of a proper dose of which, one thingmay be made to go down as well as another.Out of this assumption of authority has grownthe word obligation, from the Latin verb, oblige,to bind, — while such a cloud of misty obscurityhas gathered round the term, that wholevolumes have been written to disperse it. Theobscurity, notwithstanding, has continued asdense as before, and it can only be dissipatedby bringing in the light of Utility with its painsand pleasures, and the sanctions and motiveswhich spring out of them.It is, in fact, very idle to talk about duties ;the word itself has in it something disagreeableand repulsive ; and talk about it as we may, theword will not become a rule of conduct. Aman, a moralist, gets into an elbow chair, andpours forth pompous dogmatism about cutis —and duties. Why is he not listened to ? Becauseevery man is thinking about interests. Itis a part of his very nature to think first aboutinterests ; and with these the well-judging mo-generalSTATEMENT. 11moralist will find it for his interest to begin. Lethim say what he pleases, — to interest, dutymust and will be made subservient.To place prominently forward the connectionbetween interest and duty in all the concerns ofprivate life, is the object now proposed. Themore closely the subject is examined, the moreobvious will the agreement between interestand duty appear. All laws which have fortheir end the happiness of those concerned,endeavour to make that for a man's interestwhich they proclaim to be his duty. And inthe moral field it cannot be a man's duty todothat which it is his interest not to do.Morality will teach him rightly to estimate hisinterests and his duties ; and examination willshow their co-incidence. That a man ought tosacrifice his interest to his duty is a very commonposition, — that such or such a man hassacrificed his interest to his duty is a frequentassertion, and made the ground-work of admiration.But when interest and duty are consideredin their broadest sense, it will be seenthat in the general tenor of life the sacrifice ofinterest to duty is neither practicable nor somuch as desirable ; that it cannot, in fact, haveplace; and that if it could, the happiness ofmankind would not be promoted by it. It hasbeen almost invariably the usage in treating of12 Doxology.morals to speak of a man's duty — and nothingmore. Now, though it can scarcely be said withtruth that what is not a man's obvious interestis not his duty, it may be safely pronouncedunless it can be shown that a particular actionor course of conduct is for a man's interest, theattempt to prove to him that it is his duty, willbe but a waste of words. Yet with suchwaste of words has the field of Ethics beenhitherto filled. 'It is your duty to do this — itis your duty to abstain from doing that;' andthis is easy travelling for a public instructor.*'B\iiwhy\s, it my duty?' And the answer ifsifted will be found to be, — ' Because I bid youbecause it is my opinion — my will.' * Well,but suppose I do not conform myself to thiswill of yours?' ' O then you will do verywrong,' — which being interpreted means, * Ishall disapprove of your conduct.'It will scarcely be denied that every manacts with a view to his own interest — not acorrect view — because that would obtain forhim the greatest possible portion of felicity ; andif every man, acting correctly for his own interest,obtained the maximum of obtainable happiness,mankind would reach the millennium ofaccessible bliss ; and the end of morality — thegeneral happiness — be accomplished. To provethat the immoral action is a miscalculation ofGeneral Statement. 13sell-interest — to show how erroneous an estimatethe vicious man makes of pains and pleasures,is the purpose of the intelligent moralist. Unlesshe can do this he does nothing : — for, as hasbeen stated above, for a man not to pursuewhat he deems likely to produce to him thegreatest sum of enjoyment, is in the very natureof things impossible.The object then of these pages is to promotehuman happiness — the happiness of every man.Your happiness, reader, and that of all besides.It is to extend the dominion of happinesswherever there is a being susceptible of itsimpressions ; nor is the sphere of benevolentaction bounded by the human race. For if theanimals we call inferior have no title to our care,on what foundation stands the claim of our ownspecies ? The chain of virtue will be found togirdle the whole of the sensitive creation — thehappiness we can communicate to lower naturesis intimately associated with that of the humanrace, — and that of the human race is closelylinked to our own.It were, indeed, greatly to be desired thatsome benevolent moralist should take the animalcreation under his patronage, and establish theirclaims to the protection of legislation and to thesympathies of the virtuous principle. Perhapsthis event is hardly to be anticipated, while so14 Doxology.large a portion of the human race itself areexcluded from the influences of beneficence —and treated like the inferior animals — not aspersons, but as things. True, the animal tribeshave little power to act upon human sensibilitiesfew means of inflicting misery as a punishmentfor injustice and cruelty, and fewer stillof recompensing humanity and beneficence bythe communication of pleasure to man. Wedeprive them of life ; — and this is justifiable —their pains do not equal our enjoyments — thereis a balance of good. But why do we torment,why do we torture them ? It would be difficultto find a reason why law should deny tothem its interference. The real question is — arethey susceptible of pain? Can pleasure becommunicated to them ? Who shall draw theline, — and where is it to be drawn between thegradations of animal life, beginning with man,and descending to the meanest creature thathas any power of distinguishing between sufferingand enjoyment? Is the faculty of reason, orthat of discourse to determine ? * But a fullgrownhorse or dog, is, beyond comparison, amore rational, as well as a more conversableanimal than an infant of a day, or a week,or even a month old. And suppose the casewere otherwise, what would it avail ? Thequestion is not, Can they reason?? ? nor, CanGENERAL STATEMENT. 15they talk! but, Can they .w^cr /' — Introductionto the Principles of Morals, t*5'c. chap. xvii.p. 309.But, of sensitive beings, the human are thenearest and naturally the dearest to us. Andhow can their happiness be best provided for byyou ? How but by the exercise of the virtuesof those qualities the union of which isvirtue / Virtue divides itself into two branchesprudence* and effective benevolence" Prudencehas its seat in the understanding. Effectivebenevolence principally in the affections ;those affections which, when intense and strong,become passions.Prudence again has two divisions — that whichrespects ourselves, or the self-regarding whichThere is a narrow and exclusive meaning attached to thesword prudence, and attached in a sense disassociated fromany moral quality, namely, the apt application of means toan end. It is hardly necessary to say that it is not used inthis confined sense here.t It has been necessary to create a compound, as no singleword in our language conveys the idea of benevolence in astate of activity, or of benevolence and beneficence united.Benevolence without beneficence is a fruitless tree, addingnothing whatever to happiness; and beneficence apart frombenevolence is no virtue ; it is no moral quality — it belongsto a stock or a stone, as well as to a human being.I This is used instead of selfish, which conveys an idea ofa vicious preference.16 DEONTOLOGV.might have been exercised by the prototype ofRobinson Crusoe, Alexander Selkirk, in hisuninhabited island ; — and that which respectsothers, and which may be denominated extra-regardingprudence.Effective benevolence is either positive ornegative. Its operation is by action, or byabstaining from action. Its business is eitherwith the augmentation of pleasure or the diminutionof pain. When it operates positively bythe production of pleasure, power as well aswill must be possessed. When it operatesnegatively by abstaining from action, nothingbut the will is required. The power of benevolentaction is limited — the power of benevolentabstaining is unbounded ; and abstinence fromaction may involve a quantity of virtue or viceequal to that growing out of action itself. Thereare cases in which a man might as properly bepunished for murder who had failed to do whathe was bound to do in order to prevent murder,as the actual murderer himself.It is a sad reflection withal, that the quantityof happiness which any, even the mightiest, canproduce, is small compared with the amount ofmisery he may create by himself or others.Not that the proportion of misery in the humanrace exceeds that of happiness ; for the sum ofmisery being limited, to a great extent, by theGENERAL STATEMENT. 17will of the sufferer, he possesses, for the mostpart, some power of relief.But the tendency of effective benevolence isto increase by exercise. The more we pour outits wealth upon others, the greater does thestock of wealth become which we ourselvespossess. The diffusion of its riches is the verysource of its opulence. He who secures forhimself a pleasure, or avoids for himself a pain,influences his own happiness directly ; — he whoprovides a pleasure, or prevents a pain to another,indirectly advances his own happiness.What is happiness ? It is the possession ofpleasure with the exemption from pain. Itis in proportion to the aggregate of pleasuresenjoyed, and of pains averted. And what isvirtue ? It is that which most contributes tohappiness, — that which maximises pleasures andminimises pains. Vice, on the contrary, is thatwhich lessens happiness, or contributes to unhappiness.The first law of nature is to wish our ownhappiness ; and the united voices of prudenceand efficient benevolence, add, — Seek the happinessof others, — seek your own happiness in thehappiness of others.Prudence, in common parlance, is the adaptationof means to an end. In the moral field thatend is happiness. The "subjects on which pru-VOL. I. c18 Doxology.hence is to be exercised are ourselves, and allbesides ; ourselves as instrumental, and all besidesas instrumental to our own felicity. Toobtain the greatest portion of happiness for himself,is the object of every rational being. Everyman is nearer to himself, and dearer to himself,than he can be to any other man ; and no otherman can weigh for him his pains and pleasures.Himself must necessarily be his own first concern .His interest must, to himself, be the primaryinterest ; nor, on examination, will this positionbe found unfriendly to virtue and happiness ; forhow should the happiness of all be obtained tothe greatest extent, but by the obtainment byevery one for himself, of the greatest possibleportion ?Of what can the sum total of happiness bemade up, but of the individual units ? What isdemanded by prudence and benevolence, is requiredby necessity. Existence itself dependsfor its continuance on the self regarding principle.Had Adam cared more for the happiness of Evethan for his own, and Eve, at the same time, morefor the happiness of Adam than for her own,Satan might have saved himself the trouble oftemptation. Mutual misery would have marredall prospects of bliss, and the death of both havebrought to a speedy finale the history of man.And what is the important deduction fromGENERAL STATEMENT. thesepostulates ? Are they anti-social in theirconsequences ? Nay ! they are in the highestdegree philanthropic and beneficent. For how-cana man be happy, but by obtaining thefriendly affections of those on whom his happinessdepends ? And how can he obtain theirfriendly affections, but by convincing them thathe gives them his own in exchange ? And howcan he best convince them, but by giving themthese friendly affections in reality ; and if hegive them in reality, the evidence will be foundin his words and deeds. Helvetius said, thatin order to love mankind, we ought to expectlittle from them.' We must be moderate in ourcalculations — moderate in our exactions. Prudencerequires that we should not raise too highthe standard of our hopes ; for disappointmentwill diminish our own enjoyments, and our goodwillto others : whereas the unanticipated servicedone to us, coming with the charm of surprise,will bring with it a greater sum of pleasure,and strengthen the benevolent dispositionsin our relations with others.The principle of utility, then, in order to preserveits influence, must be habitually kept inview; and to this end, in the expression of everymaxim subordinate to it, let its relation to thatprinciple be seen. Let it not be thought sufficientthat the reason assigned for a practice is in itself20 Doxology.in conformity with an estimate of a supposedresult of happiness, — or with a vague notion ofsome useful object to be accomplished ; but letsuch conformity be constantly dwelt upon, bebrought forward for examination and approvaland traced into all its consequences of futuregood and evil. This is the only expedient toprevent persons not sufficiently imbued withthe principle— persons who have not climbedthose heights on which utility has fixed itsthrone — from being led astray by the despoticdogma of asceticism, or the sympathies of a miscalculatingand misdirected benevolence. Letthe moralist regard the great DeontologicalLaw, as steadily as the Turnsole looks upon thesun.DEONTOLOGY EXPLAINED. 21CHAPTER II.DEONTOLOGY EXPLAINED — TERM WllVADOPTED.Doxology is derived from the Greek words,TO Sion (that which is proper) and Aoyia, knowledge— meaning the knowledge of what is rightor proper ; and it is here specially applied tothe subject of morals, or that part of the fieldof action which is not the object of publiclegislation. As an art, it is the doing what isfit to be done ; as a science, the knowing whatis fit to be done on every occasion.But the inquiry, as applied by the individualto his own rule of conduct, resolves itself intoa question as to what he himself approves —what can be made to appear to himself as fitto be approved on the given occasion. Andwhy should he declare his approbation of aparticular course of conduct? Undoubtedly,because the approbation may lead to its adoption.And it will be thus conducive to it.Public opinion is made up of individualopinions ; and public opinion is that whichconstitutes the popular or moral sanction. A22 DEONTOLOGY.large quantity of recompense to act upon ourhopes, and a large quantity of punishment toinfluence our fears, are in the hands of popularopinion. Of this influential power, every individualin the community forms a part; andmay exercise and apply his portion of rewardor punishment, — reward for the acts whichmerit his approbation — punishment for those ofwhich he disapproves. He has thus a powerover motives, and that to the extent in whichhe can dispose of the matter of pleasure and pain.These motives may sometimes be broughtinto operation by merely indicating their existence; at other times they may be created :and under both circumstances they will influencehuman conduct ; nor can the effect bealways foreseen. The affections and the willare touched by the motives prescribed to them,just as the Eolean harp-strings vibrate to thepassing wind. By presenting motives, wenecessitate acts ; by awakening expectation ofeventual pain or pleasure, we influence character.In proportion to the confidence felt inthe opinions and friendly disposition of theteacher, will be the deference of the learner ;in proportion to the pain or pleasure excitedby the disapprobation, or approbation, whichthe instructor may be able to attach to differentactions, will be the power of the instructor toDEONTOLOGY EXPLAINED. 23enforce or to prevent those actions. And thetest of the value of the work he enters uponwill be its harmony with some recognisedprinciples, by which he consents that his instructionshall be tried.The business of the Deontologist is to bringforth, from the obscurity in which they havebeen buried, those points of duty, in which,by the hands of nature, a man's interests havebeen associated with his enjoyments, — in whichhis own well-being has been connected, combined,and identified, with the well-being ofothers ; to give, in a word, to the social, allthe influence of the self-regarding motive. Heis to use, for the production of the greatest sumof happiness, those elements of happinesswhich exist in the breast of every man ; toextend the domain of felicity, by developingthe principles which are co-extensive withthe existence of man — the self-regarding principlesbeing necessarily, and happily, thestrongest. For such an artist, there is no wantof work, — there can be no want of work, whileremediable evil is to be found in the world.His business is to establish his propositions,by bringing a balance of happiness, out of eachof them, — a balance to somebody — a balance tothe one, or to the many.The principle, then, on which Doxology is24 DEONTOLOGY.grounded, is the principle of Utility ; in otherwords, that every action is right or wrong —worthy or unworthy— deserving approbation ordisapprobation, in proportion to its tendency tocontribute to, or to diminish the amount ofpublic happiness. And that the public sanctionwill, in as far as the subject is understood, begiven to that line of conduct, which mostpromotes the public happiness, is a corollaryrequiring no arguments for its establishment.Three very obvious inquiries grow out ofthese remarks, and will be constantly kept inview during the progress of our investigations.1. What does the public happiness require?2. Is public opinion in harmony with the publicinterest or happiness ; and 3, as the practicalapplication, What line of conduct ought to bepursued in each individual case which presentsitself for consideration ?The end being marked out, and acknowledgedto be wise and good, it becomes the primaryobject to ascertain, whether that end is bestpromoted by the opinions held, and the conductpursued in accordance with these opinions ;whether, in a word, what the world callsmorality, is really that happiness-producinginstrument which it ought to become. And thequestion must be asked, and the test applied,in every portion of the field of conduct.DEONTOLOGY EXPLAINED. 25Morality, Religion, Politics, can indeed onlyhave one common object.If the politician, moralist, and divine, allknovv^ v^'hat they are about, their purposes canbe no other than the same.The politician's end is universally allowedto be happiness — the happiness of the state —the greatest happiness possible among the individualsof a state, during the present life.To the politician, as such, licence is givento make this his end, by all parties, whatevermay be their opinions on religion or morals,by all parties, without one dissenting voice.This being the case, it were strange if theends of the other two were allowed to be different.For were they so — if different and, uponoccasion, opposite were pursued — if the Divineand the Moralist contemplated resultscontrary to those intended by the Politician,they would be in a state of universal warfare.Each would be reduced, for his security, or forthe furtherance of his end, to fight against theother two with such weapons as he is master of.The divine would denounce his antagonist to thevengeance of the Celestial Tribunal ; wouldimagine, or would forge decrees from it, andendeavour to persuade the by-sanders to executethem. The moralist would thunder out theanathemas of his self-erected Court Moral, or.26 DEONTOLOGY.as some affect to denominate it, common sense ;would call his enemy fool, and villain, and hypocrite,and nonsense talker ; and make interestwith the by-sanders to treat him as if he wereso. And the politician, if incommoded by suchsort of artillery, would be driven to defend himselfby such means as he is provided with.And, indeed, if things were to come to this, thepolitician would be found rather too hard for theother two ; and the upshot of the fray wouldbe, did not his own principles, and the consciousnessof their value restrain him, that hewould set his arms akimbo, and, like LordPeter in the history, kick his obstreperous brethrenout of doors. Not that this is a conductby any means to be recommended to him,*(though upon the score of what is commonlycalled justice, they certainly would have noreason to complain) because, if anything can bepredicated of the future, it is that, in this countryat least, such violence never can be needful,needful to his own purpose ; a purpose whichthis volume is intended to forward. Here noThe tranquillity and good temper of a disputant is inproportion to the inward consciousness of the aptitude of hisarguments to produce conviction. Accordingly, mathematicians,so long as they confine themselves within the provinceof their science, cannot be, and accordingly never havebeen, otherwise than tranquil.DEONTOLOGY EXPLAINED. 27lesson will be given which persecution is toenforce. It were better far to join the ranks ofthe antagonists ; for nothing is so likely to frustratethe ends of truth, as to league it with theinfliction of useless suffering. This the Dentonwill not recommend to the Politician ;but what may be safely recommended to him(and it will be perfectly competent to the purposesas well of punishment as of defence) is, toletthe talkers talk on, and never to give himselfany trouble about what they say. Let him butpursue his end industriously, and show that hepursues it, he need not fear but that in a freeand enlightened country (indeed in any country,if he give such an example) the majority of thepeople will ultimately lend him their concurrence,and in the Deontologist he will find amighty ally.The line which separates the dominions of theLegislator from those of the Deontolodst istolerably distinct and obvious. Where legal rewardsand punishments cease to interfere withhuman actions, there precepts of morality comein with their influences. The conduct which isnot given over to the tribunals of the state forjudgment, belongs to the tribunals of opinion.There are a variety of acts in which judicialpunishment would be unprofitably wasted, butwhich may be safely and properly transferred to28 DEONTOLOGY.extra-official monitory visitations. Of conductinjurious to the community, a large portionnecessarily escapes the cognition and the visitationof penal law, while it falls under the observation,and is submitted to the award of, themore extensive and penetrating cognizance ofpopular retribution. Thus the crimes whichare recognised by the penal code, if they escapedetection and punishment, whether from want ofsufficient evidence, or any other cause, may bebrought into the field of Doxology. But it isnot of these that it is proposed to treat. It isdesirable, no doubt, to widen the field of moral,and to narrow that of political action. Legislationhas intruded too far into a territory whichdoes not belong to it. It has frequently interferedwith actions, when its interference hasonly produced a balance of evil ; and, what isworse, it has interfered with opinions, particularlyon religious topics, where its interferenceshave been in the highest degree pernicious. Inaword, Doxology, or Private Ethics, may beconsidered the science by which happiness iscreated out of motives extra-legislatorial — whileJurisprudence is the science by which law isapplied to the production of felicity.The object of every man's wish and of everyman's endeavour, from the beginning of life tothe end of it, is to increase his own felicity : —DEONTOLOGY EXPLAINED. 29his felicity — as connected with pleasure anddisconnected with pain.But again what is pleasure — and what ispain ? Does every man form the same estimate ?Far from it. That is pleasure which a man'sjudgment, aided by his memory, recommendsand recognises to his feelings as pleasure. Noman can allow another to decide for him as towhat is pleasure, — or what is the balance or theamount of pleasure. And hence a necessaryconsequence, that every man of ripe age andsound mind ought on this subject to be left tojudge and act for himself — and that the attemptsto give a direction to his conduct inconsistentwith his views of his own interest, is no betterthan folly and impertinence. And the moreclosely the matter is examined the more decidedlywill this be found to be the case.The business of the moralist, what then doesit become ? He can place before the eyes ofthe inquirer a sketch of the probable futuremore correct and complete than would havepresented itself to his view in the midst ofpresent influences. The moralist may assisthim in making reflections and drawing conclusions— in taking a more comprehensive auditof the past, — and from thence deducing calculationsor conjectures for the time to come.He may point out ends which had not suggested30 DEONTOLOGY.themselves, — and means by which they can beaccomplished. He may enable him to wiselychoose between balancing pleasures or pains.He may mark out occasions where enjoymentsmay be reaped or sufferings avoided. Andthus far he will be labouring in an honest andhonourable vocation. In fact, to be most usefulhe will be employed somewhat in the characterof a scout — a man hunting for consequences —consequences resulting from a particular coursecollecting them as well as he can, and presentingthem for the use of those who may bedisposed to profit by his services. His task ishumble — his labor is great — his reward canonly be the anticipation of good to be done.It is not thus that public instructors have generallyproceeded. They have erected for themselves,in the field of moral action, a high throne;thence, in the character of absolute and infalliblemonarchs, have they dictated to the world below,and sent out their commands and prohibitionsfor prompt and peremptory recognition. Thewantonness of a political ruler has often beenthe topic of animadversion ; the self-erectedarbitrator wielding like the madman in his cellhis imaginary sceptre, is, in truth, more egregiouslywanton. A certain sense of responsibility— a fear of reaction may control thedespotism of an acknowledged tyrant, but whereDEONTOLOGY EXPLAINED. 31is the control which is to check the waywardnessand presumption of the self-elected dictator ofmorals ?His tone is the tone of the pedagogue or themagistrate ; he is strong and wise, and knowingand virtuous. His readers are weak, and foolish,and ignorant, and vicious ; — his voice is thevoice of power, — and it is from the superiorityof his wisdom that his power is derived.And if all this were so without prejudice totothe public, it might be the gratification ofpride to the individual — pleasure to him — andso much pleasure gained. But the misfortuneis, that the assumption of this authority hasfor its natural attendants — indolence and ignorance.Even where precepts are founded ongood reasons, the development of those reasonsis a matter of considerable exertion and difficulty— it is a task to which few have been foundcompetent. But to set up laws and preceptsis a task of no difficulty at all — a task to whichall men are competent, the foolish as well as thewise, — a task which the foolish indeed are mosteager to engage in, — for ignorance has no moreconvenient cloak than arrogance.The talisman of arrogance, indolence, andignorance, is to be found in a single word, anauthoritative imposture, which in these pages itwill be frequently necessary to unveil. It is32 DEONTOLOGY.the word 'ought' — 'ought or ought not,' ascircumstances may be. In deciding * You oughtto do this — you ought not to do it,' — is notevery question of morals set at rest?If the use of the word be admissible at all, itought ' to be banished from the vocabulary ofmorals.There is another word, which has a talismanicvirtue too, and which might be wielded to destroymany fatal and fallacious positions. * Youought' — 'you ought not,' says the dogmatist.Why ! retorts the inquirer — Why ? To sayyou ought,' is easy in the extreme. To standthe searching penetration of a Why ? is not soeasy.Why ought I ? Because you ought — is thenot unfrequent reply ; — on which the Why ?comes back again with the added advantage ofhaving obtained a victory.It cannot, may it be answered, be the merelove of ease that drives the instructor to adoptthis phraseology ; the love of ease would notinduce him to write even thus glibly and unwisely,but would keep him from writing at all.But motives there are stronger than the loveof ease. There may be advantages of manysorts growing out of a particular line of argument.Out of conformity with public opiniongrows reputation — out of reputation, wealth andDEONTOLOGY Explained. 33power. A man must keep well with publicopinion. To oppose current prejudices, tobend back an established bias, can hardly betheconduct of him who desires to present himselfin fair proportions to the world.The world's judgment is on the side of severity; for in the restraints imposed upon hisneighbour, every man feels an increase of hisown power — a gratification of his own pride.He easily prepares for himself an exemption thatshall satisfy his own mind, while, by indulgingin the strong language of animadversion, he givesevidence that he is free from the offence whichhe so vehemently reprobates — for who would beforward in passing condemnation on himself?From laxity he has nothing to hope — everythingto fear ; from severity everything to hope, andnothing to fear — and so, with * ought' and ' oughtnot' for his instruments, he goes on layingcommands and prohibitions upon his fellows —imposing chains and burthens — not the lessgalling and afflictive because they have theirsource in metaphors and fictions.In all this there is seemingly much profit, andlittle pain. Little waste of toil — little waste ofthought. Observation, inquiry, reflection — theseare all superfluous, as superfluous as they are laborious.Folly and arrogance — the blindest follyand the most assuming arrogance — find themisI. D34 DEONTOLOGY.selves altogether at their ease. By these caterersto the moral taste, pleasures are ordered off thetable — pains ordered on instead of them, just asby the word of the physician of Barataria, themeat was marched away from the presence ofthe famished Sancho ; but the physician ofBarataria did not replace it by poison.Sacrifice — sacrifice is the demand of the everydaymoralist. Sacrifice, taken by itself, is mischievous,and mischievous is the influence thatconnects morality with suffering. Little does heseem to be aware how far morality may beeffective without any thing painful. Its associationsare cheerfulness and joy — not gloom andmisery. Certain it is, the less the sacrificemade of happiness, the more must there be ofhappiness remaining. Let it be obtained gratiswhere it can — where it cannot be had withoutsacrifice, let the sacrifice be as small as possible;where the sacrifice must be great, let it be ascertainedthat the happiness will be greater. Thisis the true economy of pleasure — this is the prolificcultivation of virtue.Doxology, or that which is proper, hasbeen chosen as a fitter term than any other whichcould be found, to represent in the field of morals,the principle of Utilitarianism, or that whichis useful. Utilitarianism offers too vague andundefined an impression to the mind. If theDEONTOLOGY EXPLAINED. 35term could be immediately and directly associatedwith the production of felicity, it might beappropriately and conveniently employed.The occasions on which the chronologicalprinciple is called into action, are either permanentor transient — public or private. Publicoccasions are those which exist between manand man, as members of society in general — alarge proportion of which occasions, which maybeproperly called political, do not come withinthe scope of this work. Man's private relationsare either natural or factitious — those which maybeconsidered as having birth for their source,and those which are accidental. These divisionswill be found convenient on the demand for thepractical application of the moral code.The word utility, with its conjugates, usefuland useless, uselessness and usefulness, hasnot been found applicable to all the cases wherethe principle itself is brought into operation.In some instances it appears too weak to expressthe force of the obligation of which it isdesirable to give the idea. The mind will notbe satisfied with such phrases as, * It is useless tocommit murder' — or, ' it would be useful to preventit :' and so of incendiarism and acts of greatmagnitude of mischief. Hence its insufficiencyin the field of legislation.The principles of asceticism and sentimentalDEONTOLOGY.ism being in a state of rivalry with the principleof utility, the employment of the term might bemade, on every occasion, the ground for rejectingpropositions which otherwise would beadmitted. It pre-supposes, as it were, the truthof the doctrine of utility.In the word propriety, with its conjugates,proper and improper, the desideratum appearsto have been found. It is a natural emanationfrom Doxology, or the knowledge of what isproper.There is no objection to it in respect of intensityof import : no crime, however heinous, butwill be admitted to be improper. It is true,that to the rhetorician, an expression thus usedmay appear unsuited to the occasion, and hemay deem the word itself imp7vpe?\ His objectbeing to put others in a passion, his course is toappear to be in a passion himself; while,by so unexciting a term, not passion, but theabsence of passion is expressed. But to thelogician such an objection will not be formidable ;and it is for logical, and not for rhetoricalpurposes, that the word is wanted.It has, too, the usefulness of impartiality. Itdoes not of itself decide between any of thesystems — and may be applied with equal proprietyto the development of each. Probablyneither the ascetic nor the sentimentalist willDEONTOLOGY EXPLAINED. 37regard it as inappropriate, unless on the groundof its coolness. Both will certainly admit to beproper that of which they approve ; both thatof which they disapprove, to be improper. Itwill, at all events, serve to express the twocharacters of an act, leaving any additional languageof praise or blame to be applied at will.It is the announcement of a judgment formed,and that without any intimation of the affectionswith which that judgment has been accompanied,or the ground on which it has been determined.To the Utilitarian it will have the convenienceof covering the whole domain of action, andgiving expression to the sentiment of approbationor disapprobation, to whichever part of thefield of duty the act may belong.3B DiONTOLOGY.CHAPTER III.ANTI-DEONTOLOGICAL PROPOSITIONS REMOVEDSUMMUM BONUM.Before the edifice of moral truth can beerected it is needful to clear away a vast heapof rubbish which obstructs the progress of themoral architect. Motives different from thosewhich utility recognises — ends hostile to thosewhich utility proposes, have been and are thetopics of self-elected moralists. When these aredisposed of, the path of the Deontologist will beclear ; until they are disposed of, his path willbe perplexed with their intrusions.The end of the Deontologist — it cannot betoo often repeated — is happiness. Somethingthat is not happiness, something different,something contradistinguished from happiness,was proposed by ancient philosophers. It wasthe summum bonn.And the summum bonum, the sovereign good,we can hardly better trace than in that accreditedhistory of it, to be found in the OxfordCompendium, once the text-book and authorityof that famous university.SUMMUM I30NUM. 39In what does the summum bonum consist ?The question was debated by multitudes, debatedfrom generation to generation, by menassuming to themselves the dictatorship of rightand wrong.The summum bonum, in what does it consist?What does the term signify ? Nonsense, andnothing more.The summum bonum, — the sovereign good —what is it '( The philosopher's stone that convertsall metals into gold — the balm Ilygeianthat cures all manner of diseases. It is thisthing, and that thing, and the other thing — it isany thing but pleasure — it is the Irishman'sapple-pie made of nothing but quinces.If it were any thing, what would it be? Couldit be anything but pleasure ? A pleasure, orthe cause of pleasure ? Supreme pleasure —pleasure without pain — happiness maximised ?What fool has there ever been so foolish as notto know that by no man, in no time, at noplace, has such a prize been ever found ?In every walk of discipline error is a sort ofvestibule through which men are condemnedto pass on their approaches towards truth.While Xenophon was writing history, and Euclidgiving instruction in geometry, Socrates andPlato were talking nonsense under pretence ofteaching wisdom and morality. This morality of40 DEONTOLOGY.theirs consisted in words, — this wisdom of theirswas the denial of matters known to every man'sexperience, and the assertion of other mattersopposed to every man's experience. And exactlyin the proportion in which their notionson this subject differed from those of the massof mankind, exactly in that proportion werethey below the level of mankind.The people who took no pleasure in theuttering of any such nonsense ; the people werecontented to reap common pleasures under theguidance of common sense. They were calledignorant and the vulgar herd, yet they crowdedinto their existence a balance of well-being,and most of them now and then a portion ofhappiness. Well-being their ordinary fare,happiness, a slight taste of it for an occasionalfeast. This was good enough for the ignorantvulgar ; not so for the learned sages, — men,who by whatever name they called their ownsage ships, were called by others wisest of men((To^torat), wise men (ao^ot), or lovers of wisdom(^tXoCTo^ot), who held their heads aloft and pouredforth their streams of sophistry.To the profane vulgar they left the enjoymentof any such pleasure as might fall in theirway. For their own disciples they reserveda thing — a beautiful thing which they calledTO ay aOov the summum bonum — the sovereignSUMMUM BONUM. 41good. What was it ? was it pleasure ? Oh no !pleasure was not good enough for them ; it wassomething better than pleasure, and it couldnot be better without being: different from it.Now had their practice been what theirpreaching was, it could only have been said thatthey resembled the dog who, snapping at theshadow, lost the substance, But theirs was nosuch folly. Pleasure was good for one thing —summum bonum for another; pleasure wastebe enjoyed, summum bonum to be talked of.While they were all of them chattering aboutthe summum bonum, each was amusing himselfwith the gross enjoyments of sense. They hadtheir favorites, without number, some whosenames are known, others whom no history hascanonized.*It is as amusing to look at some of the contestsamong men called sages, as it is instructiveto trace their results. While in later times aset of physical philosophers were hunting forthe universal panacea, the moral philosopherswere running after their summum bonum. independentas were the philosophers on public opinion,they knew better than to allow themselves to be governed, asJames the First was, by those who administered to theirpleasures. The uncontrollable character of the passion ofSocrates — of Socrates, the most prudent of the whole — isadmitted by himself in a very extraordinary confession.42 DEONTOLOGY.excellent objects both, and all agreed that bothwere in existence — both were finale, butthey did not agree as to where they were to befound.'The idea of good,' said one, — there it is, —there the summum bonum is to be found. Catchthe idea of good, and you have caught the summumbonum. And now, having caught it, areyou a bit the happier? are you, with your summumbonum, happier than the happiest of menwho has not got it? But when you have got it,what will you do with it ? — you need not perplexyourself with the question — it is timeenough to know when you have managed toget it.Two sets of philosophers took to this view ofthe matter : the Platonistss and the Academics ;the Platonistss, including, of course, the master-manufacturerof nonsense, from whom his followerstook their nonsense and their names.Nonsense is very like an eel : when you thinkyou have it fast, it slips through your fingers,and in comes another lot of nonsense in thestead of it ; for after giving the summum bonumof these philosophers — the idea of good,as if this were not unintelligible enough — in thesame breath, in the same sentence, and in thevery next words, in comes the compound matterwith a 6'lve — sive vision et friction Dei — i. e. theSUMMUM BONUM. 43vision and fruition — the seeing and enjoying ofGod.Two things are these — two separate things,and these separate things are synonymous withthe idea of good,' — the sight of God — the enjoymentof God. The God of Christianity, theGod of the Bible — this cannot be, for he is notto be seen — he is invisible; what can, indeed, bemeant by the God of the Platonistss and Academics? which of their Gods, as they were allheathens, and had Gods by thousands — whichof them did they ever enjoy ? and how did theyenjoy them ?But we are still at sea, and another set cryout, * The habit of virtue,' — the habit of virtueis the summum bonum : either this is the jewelitself, or the casket in which it will be found.Lie all your life long in your bed with the rheumatismin your loins, the stone in your bladder,and the gout in both your feet — have but thehabit of virtue, and you have the summum bonum.Much good may it do you. Your conditionwill be no impediment — negative virtueis virtue no doubt. It will not be easy to fallinto the practice of vice — and of your summumbonum, the seat, if it be any where, must be inyour head ; now, would you be content to havethe stone in your bladder, the rheumatism in44 DEONTOLOGY.your loins, and the gout in your feet, eventhough you could get your head crammed withsummum bonus ?Lest the sense of this nonsense should bemistaken, behold the Oxford Instructor, with aremark of kindred sagacity at his fingers' ends :For,' says he, 'reason shows that a nakedhabit is not of any, the least value, unless it bereferred to observation, and brought forward intoact and exercise.' A habit without an act? Ahabit in existence, and not so much as a singleact in it ! A habit formed, and out of the acts,which make the habit not so much as a singleact ever done ! and so, lest you should fall intoany such error, and, in consequence, any suchmisconduct, as that of persevering in the habitof virtue, without ever having performed a singleact of virtue, — the valuable information thusgiven is benignantly bestowed.But, to know where the summum bonum isnot, is of little service enough, unless you canalso learn where it is. And we have at last Virtue— virtue itself, that is the summum bonum.Ponendum est igitur summum hominis bonumin ipsa virtute. What? In the habit ofvirtue ? Oh no ! not in any such thing : that isthe very error against which you have just beenwarned — have virtue, you need not troubleSUM MUM BONUM. 45yourself about the habit of it. You may, indeed,have it, if you like, but no summum bonumwill you get by it.Ponendum est igitur summum hominis bonumin ipsa virtute. Nothing can be more positive,nothing more decided : whereupon, immediatelyupon the back of this concise nonsense comes atorrent of diffuse nonsense, by which everythingthat was settled is wasted away.And therefore,' continues the instructor,and therefore in acting according to the bestand most perfect virtue, consists the essence ofhuman felicity.' Yet, to entirety and perfectionof human felicity are required certain * goodthings of the body and fortune ; and, moreover,that serene pleasure of mind which is born'(though it should seem in a sort of sly way) —is born, * siibuasc'itu}\ from the conscience ofthings well done.''And this felicity,' he goes on to assure us, ' isa steady kind of good, and not easily can it belost.' With the assurance you have the groundsand reasons of the assurance : — * For,' says he,virtue, in which its foundation is laid (the summumbonum being itself the virtue), neither canit be snatched out of hands unwilling to partwith it ; nor, when the good things of the bodyand fortune are gone, does it immediately goalong with them. In a word, by the loss of46 DEONTOLOGY.external good things the essence of felicity isnot taken away ; all that happens to it is to bediminished, and to have its integrity mutilated.'But there was another class of philosophers ;hogs indeed, who did not see the visions, norenjoy the enjoyments of the Platonistss andAcademics, with their divinity or divinities ;nor stumble, with the Stoics, on their habits ofvirtue — the sensual hogs — the Epicurean. Thesummum bonum being the thing sought — wheredid they look — who would have thought it ?They, hogs as they were, looked for it in pleasure.So says the Instructor. It was in pleasure,yea! in bodily pleasure. Yet on the veryface of the story there is incorrectness in thisaccount of them. That to them pleasure waspleasure, is highly probable ; that if they hadbeen sent to hunt for summum bonum, theywould have looked towards pleasure, that, too,is very likely : but that in their account of pleasures,pleasures not bodily were omitted, isneither probable, a priori, nor is it true infact.Some pleasures have their seat in the body —others in the mind. To whom is this mostobvious fact unknown ? By whom is it unexperienced?Could these philosophers be ignorantof that with which every body is acquainted?SUMMUM BONUM. 47But having started the subject of bodily pleasure,the Instructor tells us that, at all events,the summum bonum is not there. And why ?Because the part of the human frame towhich they belong, is the ignoble part ;' and,secondly, ' They do not last' — they are short :and, thirdly, * Every now and then, when theyare over, they leave unsavoury recollections, andbring blushes.'They are ignoble. The life of A. is filled upwith pleasures, all of them ignoble, all of themintense — none of them alloyed with pains. Inthe life of B. such pleasures as there are, are ofthe noble kind, but all of them mingled and outweighedby pains. Whose lot of the two woulda man in his senses choose ?The part — the semi-ignoble, be it what itmay — is it less necessary than any other part ?Ignoble as it is, would the compendium-writer —would his master have liked to have been withoutit ? But, as thus applied, ignoble means anythingbut ignoble ; the sound of the word is allthere is in it. Let it mean, however, what hewill have it mean. Take two men, Felix andMiser. The life of Felix is crowded with pleasures— with ignoble pleasures — pure pleasures ;ie. pleasures unalloyed with pain. The life ofMiser has pleasures too — noble pleasures ; eachpleasure faint, and each of them outweighed by48 DEONTOLOGY.pains. Felix or Miser, tell us philosopher !which would you rather be ?Alas ! alas ! this all a mistake. It is not theparticular organ, it is the body, the wholebody, which is the ignoble thing. The organmay be subservient to the pleasure, but thepleasure is subservient to the body. Well,allowing ignoble, though it means nothing, tomean any thing, and that the body is as ignobleas heart can wish — what then ? The seat of thepleasure, be the pleasure what it will, is it notin the mind? Did any body ever see a bodythat felt pleasure when the mind was out of it ?Again, the duration of bodily pleasure is short.Good again ; and what if it be ? Take each byitself, there is but little of it. Well, and whatof that ? Take a guinea out of your pocket, andget the change for it — shillings — farthings:which is worth most, the guinea or the change ?Which is the heavier, a pound of gold or a poundof feathers ? When you have answered these,you shall be told, if you like, whether the objectionabout shortness has any thing in it butwords.Once more : the recollection of bodily pleasuresis unsavory, and demands blushes. Whenenjoyed in an improper manner, let the recollectionof them be ever so unsavoury, those enjoyedin a proper manner, will they be the worse forSUMMUM Boxuivr. 49it ? Let those which have been bought with abalance of pain, bring blushes — no blushes needthere be for those which have left a balance ofpleasure.All these summum botanists have their respectivenames ; there are three sets, however,without names : the denominated being all in thewrong, the denominated equally so. True !they are all in the wrong, if the Oxford Instructorbe in the right. Greatly in the wrong are they,even though they obtain what they desire, shouldthey suppose they had obtained the summumbonum ; and greatly in the wrong, again, if,having possessed themselves of what they value,they should value it at its worth.First comes the vulgus, — Anglice, the mob.These place their summum bonum in riches —riches in great quantities. These are all in thewrong box, though so many of them there be.And reason good ; for this wealth of which thevulgar are so fond, is but of small value, be thereever so much of it. In the first place, * it isslippery and unsteady;' in the next, * it is notloved for its own sake,' but for the sake of somethingelse that is to be obtained for it ; and, inthe third place, whom does it belong to ? ' Notto the owner, but to Fortune.'It is slippery and unsteady ; which is, in plainEnglish, the varnish being stripped off, it isVOL. I. E50 DEONTOLOGY.liable to be lost. But the question is, what isit worth, not to him who has it not, but to himwho has it ? And, as is well observed by AdamSmith, in England at least, the country wherethe tutor wrote, for one man who has lostwhat he had, you have a good thousand whohave not only kept it, but added to it. Butthese blindfold travellers in the paths of commonplace, are wholly heedless of the history ofman — heedless of the changes which time hasintroduced into the value and security of wealth.That treasure, which in ancient days was withgreat propriety associated with uncertainty andmutability, might now be made to representpossession in its maximum of security. In theheart of Greece — in Athens, when Aristotlewrote, land was at two years' purchase; inEngland it is worth thirty years' purchase.It is not desired for its own sake — it is onlydesired because something which is desired maybeobtained in exchange for it. And if by it,and for it, a man gets what he wants, in whatrespect is it the less valuable ? If a man obtainthe object of his desire, what more would hehave? and if he has not the summum bonumitself, has he not something just as good asever the summum bonum would be ?But, worst of all, it is not ours — it is not inour possession but in the temerity of Fortune.SUMMUM BONUM. 51Non in nostra potentate, sed in Fortunae temperate.'In this beautiful union of rhetoric withpoetry — in this dance of Fortune between thetwo states, lies the strength of the argument;which strength, by the way, in the process ofbeing decanted out of Latin into English, mostlyevaporates. And what remains but this, whichwas told us before, that wealth is a slippery sortof thing — that it glides out of people's handsthat it may glide out of ours ? for such news,once telling might well have sufficed.There may be something more. Yes ! welearn that Fortune is a woman, and that womana rash one. Good in rhetoric — but this is abook on Ethics. Good in rhetoric ? No ! noteven this ; for where design is not, neither canrashness be.Next come your politicians and votaries ofambition. In honor and in powder, in the oneor the other, and nothing better, do these menplace their summum bonum.The reasoning, if such a thing it can becalled, the reasoning is pretty much as before ;the language a little changed, for it was necessaryto say something new, and nothingness aswell as other matters may vary its shape.Riches were slippery and unstable. Honorand power are uncertain and deciduous ; —depending for the most part on popular breath52 DEONTOLOGY.or pretended favour. And, to add to thechance of the discovery, Horace is called in tosanction by his poetry the prose of our philosopher.When it was of riches that our moralist hadto speak, he told us that it was not for themselves,but for the sake of other things that theywere sought after. But neither in honor, no,nor yet in power, whatever their votaries mayfancy, is there any intrinsic dignity ; or, if therebe intrinsic dignity, it is not of that sort whichshould cause them to be either desired orpraised.As to caducity, has not the objection beenanswered when the objection of unsteadinesswas answered? But has it a meaning at all?If it have, he who has found a meaning for it, isnot the Oxford Instructor. Honore ? what meanshonore ? Honor or honors ; good reputation, orpolitical and factitious dignity : for in Englandthus wide is the distinction between singularand plural. Good repute — reputation — is itthat ? By accident, no doubt, may good reputeattend upon ill-desert ; and ill-repute upon good.But if this disastrous state of things be possibleif it sometimes be witnessed, its continuanceis of rare occurrence. Were there even moretruth in it than there is, the use of such an argumentlittle becomes a moralist ; to underrate theSUMMUM BONUM. 53power of the moral sanction, seems a strangeway of advancing morality : to thrown his weightinto the scale of false opinion, and employ thatfalse opinion as an instrument in his craft, is asad exhibition for the moralist to make. Othersmay undervalue, and cast aside the moral sanction; but is this fit for him to do ? To undervalueit is to undervalue his own occupation — to becomea tradesman flinging undeserved discrediton his own wares.Is it honors — factitious reputation — the pluralmeaning ? Here, as in the case of riches, theworse it is to lose, the better it is to have them;the continuation of their enjoyment must becontrasted with the cessation of their possession.It is in the keeping them, and not in the partingwith them, that any body Avould look for thesummum bonum, who expected to find themthere. To keep them, to increase them, is theordinary course ; to lose them is but the accidentalone.But whether it be honor, or whether it bepower, what does pretended, what does simulatedmean ? If favor has advanced a man to honoror dignity, why should it be called insincere ;and in what respect would be a man who is benefitedby it be the better or worse, if, insteadof a degrading title, it had all the adorning whichthe finest phraseology could gather around it ?54 DEONTOLO(?Y.Last of all come a band of men, whom, supposingthem to exist, he calls theoretic. Thesemen look to contemplation — to contemplationalone for the summum bonum.Contemplation ? To reach the summit of humanfelicity, a man has nothing to do but tocontemplate. Who would not be a theoretic ?Crete quod babes et babes. Believe you haveit, and it is yours ; and if there be any caseinwhich the truth of this maxim is exemplified,it is this ; — for between being happy,and fancying one's self happy, where, as longas the fancy lasts, where, what is the difference?Of these men surely may be said, and withno less propriety, what Cicero said of another setof men. *Istos vires sine contumely mittimus: sunt enim boni viri, et quando qui dem itasibi isis videtur beati.' They are a good setof men ; and forasmuch as they are blessed intheir own opinion, — blessed are they.Not so our moralist. Happy though theymay dream themselves, it is all a mistake oftheirs. He will show them why.Why then? ' We are born for action,' he says;for action ; and in order to prove it, he summonsthe fabric of our nature' to give evidence :whereupon he observes, that * if ' in our actionsno action — * no action of offices (or duties) takesSUMMUM BONUM. 55place, then the highest knowledge on arts orsciences is in a certain sort defective, and willbe of little service to mankind.' This is rathera roundabout way of coming at a matter offact. If scribere est agere, better proof was hegiving while scribbling his philosophy. Andthere are only two objections to be urged —the first, that all this means nothing : the second,that if it did, it is nothing to the purpose.But let the theoretic be produced, wraptup in his contemplations, thinking about anythingelse, or nothing else, and fancying himselfhappy — so happy as to have found the summumbonum, — and let our philosopher come withhis * fabric of our nature* to batter down thetheoretic felicity. Will the theoretic believehis own senses, which tell him that he has gotthe summum bonum, or our philosopher whoassures him he has not ?In line, let him fling away the Platonistss,Academicians, and Stoics ; they shall be asmuch in the wrong as he pleases ; but for therest, there is not one of them so completely inthe wrong as he. Every one of the others —whether he found the sovereign good or not, foundsome good, but not an atom of good has ourphilosopher found where he looked for it. Howshould he? It was not there. They might5G DEONTOLOGY.have been wrong, but they did not contradictthemselves — did not bring out one sentencejust to have it annihilated by another.His summum bonum — any summum bonum,must amount to nothing without a dose of thoseother things on which he pours out his scornand drags through the kennel. But what dose?This he does not pretend to know ; it is amoderate dose, and that is all he can say aboutit. With any other summum bonum than hisyou have at all events something — with his youhave nothing but moonshine, and not moonshineenough to show you your way.It may be urged, after all, that however badthe logic of these different pretenders, theirethics were good — that the effect was good,whatever may have been the cause ; and thatthe badness of the argument matters little, ifthe effect were good. Were you to choose foryour friend, between two men, one of whomalways reasoned well and acted ill towards youwhile the other reasoned ill but acted well ;should you hesitate in the selection ? Certainlynot. But of the antique sages, much of theirlogic has come down to us, and few of theiractions. Arguing as they argue, their conductmight have been good or bad : nothing is morecommon than for men to have two theories ; oneSummum BONUM. 57for show, and another for use. If bad logic,however, be any where mischievous, it is in thefield of morals. Such doctrines as we havebeen exhibiting, could never have been held butat the expense of the understanding ; and deepindeed must be the prostration of the understanding,enfeebled indeed must its strengthhave become, ere trash like this could havemastered it.But these are valuable articles of ammunitionin the hands of those who think for the public,to let fly among men whom precedents serveinstead of brains, who, knowing or caring littleabout what had best be done in future, willhear of nothing but what has been done before.There is great ground for suspicion in themeantime, that in all this there is but little honestadvocacy. He who loses sight of the only trueand useful morality, that which leaves a balanceof pleasure as its results — he who seems ratherdesirous of leading a conversation, than of findinga rule for action ; he, in a word, who putsforward, on all occasions, the silly and banefulfallacy that what is good in theory is bad inpractice ; he is not really entitled to that attentionwhich implies respect. When philosophy ismeant for talk and parade, its absurdities mayserve as decorations ; but if morality be good,58 DEONTOLOGY.and if happiness be good, no nonsense will makethem bad. The moral sanction, understood anddeveloped, will take them under its wing ; andthe common interest will give more and moreefficiency to truth and reason — those greatallies by whose aid it will establish its ownsovereignty.OF PLEASURE AND PAIN. 59CHAPTER IV.OF PLEASURE AND PAIN THEIR RELATION TOGOOD AND EVIL.Every pleasure is prima facie good, and oughtto be pursued. Every pain is prima facie evil,and ought to be avoided.The fact, that after experience of its enjoymenta man pursues a pleasure, is in itself evidenceof its goodness.Every act whereby pleasure is reaped is, allconsequences apart, good.Every act by which pleasure is reaped, withoutany result of pain, is pure gain to happiness;every act whose results of pain are less than theresults of pleasure, is good, to the extent of thebalance in favour of happiness.Every person is not only the best, but theonly proper judge of what, with reference tohimself, is pleasure, and what pain.To say, that * If I do this, I shall get nobalance of pleasure, therefore if you do it, youwill get no balance of pleasure,' is mere presumptionand folly.To say, that * If I do this, I shall get no presDEONTOLOGY.pondering pleasure ; but if you do this, you mayget a preponderant pleasure, yet it is not properyou should do it,' is absurdity; and if I applyevil in any shape to prevent the act, it is injusticeand injury; and if I call in the powers ofgovernment to prevent the act, it is tyranny.Keeping out of view future contingent consequences,the fact of the long continuance of thefree and habitual exercise of any act by an individual,is evidence that it is productive to himof pure or preponderant good, and therefore fitand proper to be pursued ; that is to say, by thefree exercise of the act, it is here implied, thatit is not of a character to be visited by rewardor punishment from any extraneous source.To warrant the assumption that any given actis an evil one, it is incumbent on him who impugnsit to shew, not only that evil will be theresult of it, but that the sum of evil will begreater than the sum of good which it produces.If, by misrepresentation of consequences, orerroneous reasoning, and still more by fear ofpunishment, whether physical, popular or moral,political or religious, a man is prohibited fromthe enjoyment of any pleasure, an injury isinflicted on him, equal in amount to the balanceof pleasure of which he is deprived.The amount of delinquency of such an injurywill be graduated by the state of the delinquent'sOF I'LKASUHE AND PAIX. 61mind with reference to the consequences of theact. Absence of evil consciousness m ill diminishthe offence, though it will not diminish theinjury. The offence will be maximized whenthe maladies is maximized in the breast of theoffender.The amount of injury done by the inhibitionof a pleasure which might have been enjoyed, isequal to the infliction of a pain to a similaramount, which otherwise would not have beensuffered.Penal legislation throws its protection overproperty, solely on the ground that property isan instrument for the attainment of pleasure orthe avoidance of pain. Except where pleasureand pain are concerned, legislation is wasted.If, by erroneous reasoning, another man isdebarred of pleasure, there is no sufficient reasonfor visiting the erroneous reasoner with punishment,for erroneous reasoning is best met andmost successfully extinguished by sound reasoning: and it is not by punishment, or the fear ofpunishment, that its erroneousness can be provedand exposed. In proportion to the erroneousnessof an opinion will be the demand for punishmentin its support ; and there can be no morepresumptively conclusive evidence of the erroneousnessof an opinion than that it should62 DEONTOLOGY.employ, or seek to employ, punishment as itsauxiliary.He who, for the purpose of obtaining wealth,reputation, or power for himself, endeavours todebar others from those acts which leave a preponderanceof enjoyment to them, resembles theman who, in an upper story, should with onehand be piling guineas, and with the other beflinging nuisances on the heads of passengers below.And he who, on the subject of morals, dealsout at random, without any specific reasons, hisought,' and his * ought not,' may be properlycompared to the careless housemaid, who emptiesher receiving-pail from a chamber-window,indifferent to all who may chance to be goingThe value of pains and pleasures must beestimated by their intensity, duration, certainty,proximity, and extent. Their intensity, duration,proximity, and certainty, respect individuals;their extent the number of persons undertheir influence. The greater amount of any ofthese qualities may counterbalance the lesseramount of any other.A pleasure or a pain may be fruitful, or barren.A pleasure may be fruitful in pleasures,or fruitful in pains, or fruitful in both ; and apain, on the contrary, may be fruitful in PLEASURE AND PAIN. 63sures or pains, or both. It is the province ofDoxology to weigh them, and to draw the ruleof conduct from the result.The estimate of pain and pleasure, then, mustbe made by him who suffers or enjoys the oneor the other. Even the short-sighted and unreflectingmultitude are better satisfied to trustto their own experience and observation, thanto take the word of they know not whom.Accordingly, the only way of turning the ideaof pain in this way to any account, is to fix it tosome known species : and it is by this that thosereligious teachers who deal most in specificimages and lively portraiture of the pains ofhell, owe that superiority of influence whichthey possess over regular divines. The ecclesiasticwho, by study and critical research,should satisfy himself that the language of scriptureis metaphorical with regard to the peculiarcharacter of the future pains of the wicked, necessarilyemploys, if acting according to his conviction,a much less efficient instrument of terrorthan he who introduces the material sufferingscreated by unquenchable fire, and burningbrimstone, and gnawing worms, and all thoseobjects which most vividly appeal to thesenses.Even the pleasures with which the morepopular religious instructors embellish the manseDEONTOLOGY.sons of the blessed, are pleasures of love, which,though separated in their descriptions from theirearthly basis, fail not, under favour of a certainconfusion of terms and ideas, to draw, secretlyand imperceptibly, much of their force from theregions of sense. To figure to themselves thetransports of heaven, they aid their conceptionswith associations of transports they have experiencedupon earth : transports which, althoughseemingly removed from the sexual passions,could not, for all that, have existed, but for thosesexual passions. A proof of this is, that noword, such as friendship, which offers to themind the affection entirely separated from thisbasis, is among those which they have chosen todwell on, as the best adapted to the creation ofthose lively impressions they design to produce.In the analysis of pleasures and pains, or ratherin the separation of pleasures and pains intotheir different classes or kinds, it may be necessaryto travel over the ground again which waslaid out in the Introduction to the Principles ofMorals and Legislation (Chapter V).First on the list stand the pleasures and painsof sense; comprising those of taste, smell, touch,sound, and sight, those derived from the sexualorganization, from health or indisposition; thepleasures of novelty, and the pains of weariness.Secondly, The pleasures of wealth, whetherOF PLEASURE AND PAIN. 65of acquisition or possession ; the correspondingpains of which, being pains of privation, mustbe referred to other heads.Thirdly, The pleasures of skill, and the painsof awkwardness.Fourthly, The pleasures of amity,* and thepains of enmity.Fifthly, The pleasures of good reputation, andthe pains of ill repute.Sixthly, The pleasures of power.Seventhly, The pleasures of piety, or the religiouspleasures, with their contrasted pains ;pleasures derived from the belief of possessingthe favour of the Divine Being, — pains derivedfrom an apprehension of his disapproval.Eighthly, The pleasures and the pains ofsympathy or benevolence.Ninthly, Those of malevolence.Tenthly, Those of memory.Eleventh, Those of imagination.Twelfthly, Those of expectation ; andLastly, Those of association.One general class of pains there are whichmust be resolved into all the classes of correspondingpleasures. These are the pains ofprivation, — the pains arising from the absenceThe pleasure of love is a mixed pleasure, composed ofthe pleasures of amity, superadded to those of sex.VOL. I. FG6 DEONTOLOGY.of enjoyment. Some of these vibrate, as itwere, between the regions of pain and pleasure.Desire, for example, may belong to either ; itslong continuance, without being satisfied, makesit almost invariably painful. When enjoymentseems so adjacent, or so certain as to createassurance, and the expectation of its arrivalsuddenly ceases, come the pains of disappointment.When an enjoyment is over, and its returncannot be anticipated, come the pains ofregret. Pains there are grounded on pleasures,and pleasures grounded on pains — as the pleasuresof relief, when pain ceases or abates. Ofthe whole list of pains and pleasures, twoclasses only regard others — they are those ofbenevolence and malevolence. All the rest areself-regarding.These pleasures and pains — the obtaining thepleasure, the avoidance of the pain — are thesole motives of human conduct. To most ofthem a phraseology has been adapted, conveyinga bad, an indifferent, and a good sense ; for instance,the love of reputation, in a bad sense,is denominated false honor, pride or vanity ;in an indifferent sense, ambition, — a word susceptibleof interpretation, leaning towards eithervirtue of vice ; in a good sense, honor, or thelove of glory : the religious motive takes allthe shades of zeal, piety, devotion, superstition,Of PLEASURE AND PAIN. 67enthusiasm, fanaticism. But, however variedthe phraseology, these motives \\'\\\ be found, itis believed, to belong to one or other of theabove classes of pains and pleasures.There are many pleasures and pains which,though capable of acting, and acting, in fact, asmotives to conduct, have only a remote connectionwith the subject. The pleasure ofnovelty, for example, is the anticipation of anundefined, or only partly defined, enjoyment :it is the acquisition of a new article of knowledge; it may even be a sort of pleasurabledisappointment ; it sometimes takes the shapeof a difficulty overcome — the pleasure, and thecause of the pleasure, it is frequently very difficultto link together.The pleasure of memory is the pleasure ofpower — the power over things which promiseutility, through the medium of ideas. To recallwhat we desire to recall, is a sort of triumphboth of the will and the intellect ; for amidstthe strange workings of the human mind, wefrequently seek to recollect what we cannot,while we recollect what we Mould not ; thatwhich we most desire to repossess glides awayfrom our memory, while that which is mostdisagreeable to us hangs about it with stronginfluence and power. The pleasures of conceptionor imagination depend, for their connection6S DEONTOLOGY.with vice and virtue, on their subject andtheir source.The susceptibility of any individual to theinfluence of pain and pleasure in general, or tothe influence of any particular pain or pleasure,depends on bodily and intellectual organization— on knowledge — habit — domestic andsocial condition — sex, age, climate, government ;in a word, on circumstances so various andintricate that, to developed the exact extent andcharacter of each, is ' perhaps, if not absolutelythe most difficult, at least, one of the most difficulttasks within the compass of moral physiology'*Nor would it repay the toil of followingthe investigation into its boundless ramifications,since, after all, every man must be thebest judge of his own sensibilities, and of thepains and pleasures which act most influentiallyupon them. In the penal field such considerationsare highly important, because the amountof crime and the quantum of punishment will, toa great extent, have to be estimated by them.But, in the Deontological field, a man standsconstantly at his own tribunal — far less frequentlyat that of others.Into these regions, then, of pain and pleasure,it is the business of the moralist to bringIntroduction to Morals and Legislation, p, xlii.OF PLEASURE AND PAIN. 69all human actions, in order to decide on theircharacter of propriety or impropriety, vice orvirtue. And, in truth, it will be found on examinationthat, from the beginning of time, menhave, often imperceptibly, and in spite of themselves,been applying this utilitarian standard totheir actions, even while they have been boldlydecrying it.The world has, indeed, seen men who haveimagined that, by the infliction of misery onthemselves, they were acting wisely and virtuously.But their motives, after all, were thesame as those of the rest of mankind, and theyscourged themselves, or starved themselves, onthe same calculation of a result of happiness.But they reasoned, that the harvest of futurepleasure was to grow out of the soil of presentpain, and in the anticipation of that harvest —bountiful and boundless in their eyes — theyfound the result of enjoyment. And thenthey argued farther, that patience was a virtue,and courage was a virtue, and that a just beingwould find a recompense for their exercise. Itseems not to have occurred to them that theDivine Being, if just and good, could never desirethat any happiness should be thrown needlesslyaway, or any suffering be uselessly inflicted.Their asceticism was utilitarianism turnedr70 DEONTOLOGY.upside down ; they imagined they approved ofactions, because those actions brought miserywith them ; disapproved of actions, because theywere pregnant with felicity. Perhaps a certainportion of mystery and difficulty was intentionallymixed up with their theory. The DivineBeing they worshipped they were unwilling toinvest in attributes of the same character withthose which they could not but call justice andwisdom, and prudence and benevolence in men ;for mystery naturally likes to revel in theregions of imagination. Hence they framedand fancied other principles of conduct for theDeity, and amused themselves by setting uptheir authority, and exercising their ingenuityto reconcile the irreconcilable, and prove theimpossible. They introduced impostures, andcalled them pleasures, while genuine pleasurestook to themselves wings and flew away fromtheir frown.The ascetic principle then is but the misapplicationof the greatest-happiness principle,while every other standard of morals will befound to be despotism and egotism. LordShaftesbury's moral sense is but a declarationthat the opinion — the moral sense — of the actoris the true rule of action. To assume its existenceis, after all, but begging the question.OK riJ£ASURE AND PAIX. TTIf men have it, it is well : but it is their nothaving it that makes it necessary to look for it,or to find something instead of it.The danger of assuming it as the principleor originator of right actions, and the adoption ofits pretended decisions, is, that they wouldeither exclude or interfere with all other principles— the principle of utility itself. Where isthe line to be drawn ? How is the discordanceto be reconciled? Opposing forces might negativeeach other. From thenceforward all is inconfusion. Caprice itself is erected into a rule.Its utter incapacity ever to become practicallyserviceable should alone, one would think, besufficient to give its patronizers a disgust to it.Dr Battle's common sense is a pretension ofthe same character, since he would reckon nocommon sense a fit standard which differed fromhis own. Dr Price's understanding would rebelagainst the understanding of the man that wasguided in a career of morals unlike that he wasembarked in ; and so the whole round of arrogancemay be seen — reason, right reason, nature,and natures law, natural justice, naturalright, natural equity, good order, truth — all arebut the dogmas of men who insist on implicitobedience to their decrees. And, indeed,nothing can be more flattering to the indolent,the disingenuous, the domineering spirit which72 DEONTOLOGY.lurks, more or less, in all men, than a pretencefor uniting, in one's own person, the charactersof Advocate and Judge.The moral sense, say some, prompts to generosity,but does it determine what is generous ?It prompts to justice, but does it determinewhat is just?It can decide no controversy — it can reconcileno difference. Introduce a modernpartizan of the moral sense, and an ancientGreek, and ask each of them whether actionsdeemed blameless in ancient days, but respectingwhich opinions have now undergone greatchange, ought to be tolerated in a community.By no means, says the modern ; as my moralsense abhors them, therefore they ought not.But mine, says the ancient, approves of them ;therefore they ought. And there, if the modernkeep his principles and his temper, the mattermust end between them. Upon the groundof moral sense there is no going one jot further ;and the result is that the actions in question areat once laudable and detestable. The modern,then, as probably he will keep neither his principlesnor his temper, says to the ancient, * Yourmoral sense is nothing to the purpose ; yours iscorrupt, abominable, detestable : all nations cryout against you.' ' No such thing,' replies theancient; *and if they did, it would be nothingOF PLEASURE AND I' A IN. 73to the purpose ; our business was to inquire,not what people think, but what they ought tothink.' Thereupon the modern kicks the ancient,or spits in his face ; or, if he is strongenough, throws him behind the fire. One canthink of no other method that is at once naturaland consistent, of continuing the debate.If you can persuade them both to take theprinciple of utility for their guide, the discoursewill take another turn ; the result will be citherthat they will agree, or that if they disagree,it will be about some facts ; and there is nooccasion for supposing either of them to be sounreasonable as to be angry with his opponentfor entertaining a different opinion from his ownconcerning a matter of fact ; they will sej)ai atewith a resolution to make inquiries that tend toclear up some of the facts, if they are in theirnature capable of being cleared up to the satisfactionof the inquiring party, or in theconviction of the impossibility of coming to anagreement, with the resolution of each actingup to his own opinion, satisfied, at least in somedegree, with seeing upon what the point of thedispute turns.Thus the subject of their disagreement, whenthey came to a conclusion, would be certainfacts, und such must be the only conclusion ;74 DEONTOLOGY.for such, if they proceeded on the principleof utility, would all along be the object ofinquiry ; the only object at least that can giveroom to imagine a disagreement.Men there are who think the cause of truthbetrayed by exposing it to doubt, by making itthe object of inquiry. Let them say whetherthey think an inquiry of this calm and unimpassionedkind, could possibly end in thejustification of murder, robbery, theft, devastation,malicious mischief, perjury, or any ofthose crimes which are generally dreaded asmortal to the peace of society ? If not, theneither the actions in question are not of thesame malignant nature ; in which case there isno reason why they should be treated as if theywere, or if they are of the same malignant nature,the inquiry will show them to be so.Though it should be sentiment, and nothingelse but sentiment, that leads men to performcertain actions which we call virtuous, it mustbe something else than sentiment that wouldlead a person instructed in all the circumstancesof the case — that is, in the whole sum of its influenceon pains and pleasures, to approve of it.Disappointed of knowledge, men look forscreens to hide their ignorance.The moral sense is not pretended to be anyOF PLEASURE AND PAIN. 75thing more than a propensity in a man, first, todoa certain action — and secondly, to approveof it.But that propensity in its two shapes mayexist with respect to many actions, which thepartizans of the moral sense are as ready tocondemn as any one else.It is to be hoped that a time is arrivedin which the translation of vague generalitiesand of arbitrary assumptions into the simplelanguage of pains and pleasures, will graduallybanish a phraseology which, more than anyother, tends to cover all questions of vice andvirtue with impenetrable mists. Conduct, forexample, is called tinuatHral, and therefore it isreprobated, and this language is used very frequentlyby those who contend that all the naturaltendencies of mankind are towards profligacy ;but, if the meaning be thoroughly sifted, it willbe found, in many instances, that nothing is intendedmore than that the conduct is unusual oruncommon. But this of itself predicates neithervice nor virtue, neither merit nor demerit. Thesublimest acts of virtuous heroism draw theirlustre from their rarity — they may be called uncommon,unnatural — is that a ground for reprobatingthem ? Far from it.The word piiriti/, it is proper to add here, isemployed in this work solely in the mathematicsDEONTOLOGY.cal or arithmetical sense. This is necessary tobe stated, because rhetoric very frequently attachesa meaning to the word, as it does tomany others, which can only engender confusedor mischievous ideas.A pleasure is considered pure, in the degree inwhich it is unaccompanied by counterbalancingpains — a pain is pure, in the proportion inwhich it is unaccompanied by counterbalancingpleasures.In the amount of well-being, purity and impurityare what profit and loss are in the commercialbalance. Purity is profit, impurity loss.A pleasure, preponderate impure, correspondsto the case of a money account, when thebalance is on the side of loss. A pain, preponderateimpure, corresponds to an account,when the balance is on the side of profit.In medical practice, in domestic rule, in politicalgovernment, when, for its purpose of good,pain is produced, it is produced with the designand endeavour that it shall be as impure aspossible.The original idea of purity is the absence ofevery other substance from the substance towhich the attribute is meant to apply. Whateveris different or foreign brings with it impurity.Water, for instance, employed fordrink, or in the preparation of food, is liable toOF PLEASURE A N J) PAIN. 77be combined with a variety of substances, manyof which would render it less fit, and somemore fit for these purposes. Its purity willthen be in proportion to their absence. Flourwould be rendered impure by a mixture of coaldust, and coals would lose their purity by beingmingled with flour or hair powder. The qualityof unwholesomeness or offensiveness, whetherto the senses or the imagination, adds to the intensitywhich is ascribed to the impurity.78 DEONTOLOGY.CHAPTER V.OF WELL-BEING AND ILL-BEING.It is desirable, it is even necessary, that someword should be found to represent the balanceof a man's pains and pleasures, as spread overany considerable portion of his existence.Well-being will fitly denote the balance infavour of pleasure. Ill-being the balance, if infavour of pain.The word happiness is not always appropriate.It represents pleasure in too elevated a shape ;it seems associated with the idea of enjoymentin its superlative degree.Comparatively speaking, there are few whowould not admit that they had, in their progressthrough life, enjoyed a portion, more or less considerable,of well-being. Much fewer, perhapsnone, would admit the enjoyment of happiness.The quantity of well-being depends on generalsensibility, — its quality upon particular sensibility,the being more alive to pleasure andpain from some sources than from others.But by competent attention and observationevery man will be best acquainted with theIOF WELL-BEING AND ILL-BEING. 79character of his own sensibilities. By countenance,gesture, deportment, contemporaneousor subsequent conduct, he may give indicationsto others ; but no evidence will be so complete,no testimony so direct, as that of his own feelings: thence it follows that, with the benefit ofexperience, every man is a more competentjudge of what is instrumental to his own wellbeingthan any other man ; and hence it wouldbe absurd to prescribe the same line of conductto be invariably observed on the same occasions,without any reference to the particular sensibilitiesof the party concerned.Taking the whole of mankind together, onwhich side of the account does the balance lie ?Beyond dispute, it is on the side of well-being ;of well-being existence is in itself a conclusiveproof, for small is the quantity of pain at theexpense of which existence may be terminated.True it is, and melancholy as true, that thename of religion has been employed to introducean Almighty being, whose delight is in humanmisery. Men have been found, who, shutting,their eyes to all the evidence around them — theunbounded evidence of goodness and of power —have introduced final misery — hopeless, limitless,interminable misery, as the consummationof his awful dispensations. The dreadful dogmais not to be found in Christianity. It is a most80 DEONTOLOGY.vg^in, most pernicious, most groundless conceit.The Christian Scripture lies open to every eye.In no one part of it is intimation given of anysuch doom.The unfrequently of suicide is irresistible testimonyto the fact that life is, on the whole, ablessing. And though the popular and sympatheticsanction bear strongly upon the question,it cannot be said that suicide is forbidden byJesus Christ. His oven example, indeed shewsthat, at all events, a possible case of justificationmay exist ; for possessing, as he possessed, thepower of exempting himself from death, hespontaneously subjected himself to it.Maupertuis, however, tells us that the balanceof pains and pleasures is on the ill being side.Horace's Qui Lit, Alcecejias, or something like it,is the burthen of his strain. Man desires tobetter his condition ; to acquire, for the future,something not possessed by the present. Well !and what does this prove ? Why, that to thebalance already existing in favour of well-being,there exists in the breast of every man one elementmore of well-being, the pleasure of expectation,the pleasure of hope. But no, it maybesaid ; it is not for the increase of a balance onthe side of pleasure that a man looks forward,and labours for a change of condition ; it is forthe diminution of a balance on the side of pain.IOF AVEr.L-BF.lXC And ILF-BFIX(;. 81Among those whom Horace had in view, this, atany rate, could not have been the case. Foramong them suicide was not regarded withhorror, but with the highest praise and admiration.Sit Cato, dum visit, san vel C»3csare majorDum mortar, numquam major Outline fuit?'Martial, vi. 3'2.By an ill-considered expression, Locke, a manworth a hundred Maupertuis, has given countenanceto a most false, uncomfortable, and pernicioussentiment. He says that every actionhas its source in uneasiness. If this be true,uneasiness is the necessary accompaniment ofaction ; and a man, as often as he acts, and aslong as he acts, must be ill at ease. But whatis the feeling which Locke calls uneasiness? Itis anything but a painful no. It is the sense,the presentiment of a capacity for enjoying, atsome future time, a pleasure not then present.Pleasure may be springing from a thousandsources, while anticipation is looking to theopening of many more. The present may bebright with enjoyment, while the door of abrighter future is unlocked; and to the pleasuresof possession may be associated the pleasuresof hope.If Johnson were to be believed, every man isoccupied with the thoughts of dinner till dinnervol . 1. G82 DEONTOLOGY.comes. And according to Locke, every manwho is not at dinner is uneasy for the want ofit. Every moment not employed in eating mustbe a moment of uneasiness. Yet this is nottrue : it was not true even of Johnson himself.Beyond every thing else Johnson loved his dinner;but, thinking thus amorously of his dinner,what prevented him from sitting with his Titseyon his knee, with a nosegay under his nose,another Titsey at the harpsichord, enchantinghim with a song, and the work of a favouriteauthor in his right hand 1END OF ACTION. 83CHAPTER VI.END OF ACTION.If the balance of pleasure be really the intense,constant, and sole object of pursuit, — if it mustalways continue to be so, from the very constitutionof our natures, — if there is no occasion inwhich it ceases to be so, — for what object, mayit not be asked, for what end is this or any otherdiscourse on the subject of Ethics ? Why urgea man to pursue that which he is always occupiedin pursuing ?But the position is denied; for where, if theposition be true, where, cries an objector, whereis sympathy ? where is benevolence ? where isbeneficence? Answer, exactly where they were.To deny the existence of the social affectionswould be to deny the evidence of all experience.Scarcely in the most brutal savage would theybe found altogether wanting.But the pleasure I feel in bestowing pleasureon my friend, whose pleasure is it but mine ?The pain I feel at seeing my friend oppressedby pain, whose pain is it but mine ? And if I84 DEONTOLOGY.felt no pleasure, or felt no pain, where, wherewould be my sympathy ?Why, it is asked again, waste time in enforcingconduct which every man, on every occasion,adopts for himself, — namely, the pursuitof good ?Because, consideration will enable him morecorrectly to estimate what conduct will leavethe greatest results of good ; for though, underimmediate impressions, he might be disposed topursue a particular course for the purpose ofsecuring his well-being, a calmer, a more comprehensiveview might show him that the coursewould not, on the whole, be the best and wisest;because he would sometimes discover that thenearer good would be outweighed by remoter,but associated evil, or that a greater pleasuremight be obtained, in time to come, for a lesserpleasure abandoned now.Because, it might happen that the act whichpromises the present pleasure might prove prejudicialto others in the society to which youbelong, and they, having sustained an injury atyour hands, would, were it prompted by self-preservationalone, seek to avenge themselves,by the infliction of pain, equal, or greater inamount than the pleasure enjoyed.And again, the act under contemplation mightEND OF ACTION. 85possibly be productive of displeasure in thebreasts of the community at large, and the loss oftheir good opinion, consequent on the act, mightoutweigh in value the pleasure it produced.Yet it may be said, a man^s well-being oughtlot to be the object of his pursuit. This ought,like other oughts, is a mere covering for despotic,unsupported assertion, and only means that theobjector th'uihs a man's well-being ought not tooccupy his attention. The argument is justwhere it was ; it is all the stronger, if nothing canbe brought upon it but dogmatical assumption.The objection is at best only the declaration of anopinion; and a declaration, without a reason,leaves matters pretty much as it found them.Illuminated by the Deontological principle,the field of action will assume a new appearance.The parade of wisdom, the solemn moorings,the curious distinctions, the cobweb reasonings,the scornful dogmas of intolerance and ignorance,will vanish into nothing. Stripped of the mysteriesand perplexities with which casuists andchurchmen have involved the standard of duty,it will be found of daily use and daily comfort.Vague and declamatory generalities will losetheir power, and become, as they are, fit objectsof ridicule and lamentation: ridicule, consideredin themselves ; lamentation, when considered intheir consequences.86 DEONTOLOGY.The understanding and the will are alikeoperative on the ends of action. The will or theintention of every man is directed to the obtainmentof his well-being. Doxology is calledupon to enlighten the understanding, so that itmay guide the will in its pursuit of happiness,by furnishing the most efficient means. Thewill has always the end in view ; it is for theunderstanding to correct the aberrations of thewill, where the will employs other than thefittest instruments. The repetition of acts,whether positive or negative ; that is, acts ofcommission or abstention, having for their objectthe production of the greatest accessiblebalance of pleasure, and being judiciously directedto that end, constitutes habitual virtue.SANCTIONS. 87CHAPTER VII.Sanctions.Respicejincm. The end of action being defined,that end must be steadily kept in view,and no inquiry can be more important than asto the most efficient means of promoting thatend. Those means present themselves in theshape of the inducements which operate on conduct.They bring conduct and its consequencesinto the regions of hopes and fears — of hopeswhich present a balance of pleasure, of fearswhich anticipate a balance of pain. Theseinducements may be conveniently called sanctions.The strength of a temptation to a misdeed isin the ratio of the excess of the pleasure of themisdeed (as it stands in the idea of the persontempted) above the intensity of the pain whichis to follow, compounded with its apparentproximity and probability.Sanctions, as has been said, are inducementsto action. They suppose the existence of temptations.Temptations are the evil ; sanctionsthe remedy. But neither are sanctions nor88 DEONTOLOCiY.temptations any thing but pains and pleasures,acting singly in the case of temptations, actingas sanctions in groups.But in order that a sanction should exerciseits influence, it is not necessary that a manshould be conscious of the existence of the inducement.Balaam was stopped by the powerof an angel that was invisible to him.Cases there are where necessity is and mustbe admitted as an excuse for conduct ; caseswhich are thus taken out of the ordinary rules.This excuse, when thoroughly sifted, will befound to be a confession of the inefficiency ofpunishment to prevent such conduct. The inefficiencyof punishment has been seldom allegedby moralists or legislators as the reason whycertain actions cannot be controlled ; but it is theonly true and tenable ground; it it the real, butunperceived cause of the influence of necessity.Why, in such a case, did a man decide on agiven action ? He felt a repugnancy to doingotherwise ; he could not resist the despotism ofthe repugnancy ; he could not even explain itscause — a common case. What then ? No punishmentwas near enough and great enough torestrain him.Sanctions are changeable according to theirnature, or according to their sources. Accordingto their nature, they are either monitory bySANCTIONS. 89pain or loss of pleasure, or premonitory by pleasureor exemption from pain. They are divisibleinto the physical, the social, the moral, thepolitical, and the religious. From all thesesources proceed both penalties and recompenses,both pains and pleasures.1. The physical sanction concerns a man's personphysically and psychologically considered,as experienced in the pains and pleasures affectingthe body. It is derived from the physicalconstruction of man in general, and will bemodified by the peculiar sensibilities of theindividual. Generally speaking, the physicalsanction may be considered as that influencegrowing out of the ordinary course of things,which is brought to bear upon any action oractions, without reference to the will of others.It is that influence which is independent of motivesderived from sources foreign to the individual: it is the sanction which would exist, inall its force, if a man were isolated from theworld, if he had no communion with his fellowmen,and no belief in the superintendence ofProvidence. It represents those pains and pleasureswhich do not directly emanate from hissocial, political, or religious position ; though itis the ground-work of the power of all otherinducements, for it is only by their influence onman's physical organization, only by their power90 DEONTOLOGY.of producing suffering or enjoyment in the individual,that they can become motives to action.2. The social or sympathetic sanction is thatwhich grows out of a man's personal or domesticrelations ; it is a sort of mixture of the selfishwith the social regard. To some extent its judgmentis created by his own influences ; it is theapplication to himself of that domestic code ofwhich he has been one of the framers. If he beafather, his children will, in the ratio of theirrespect for his opinions and practice, recognizehis authority, and adopt his standard of rightand wrong. The domestic sanction may bemore or less efficient, more or less enlightenedthan the popular sanction : its operation is moredirect and immediate than the popular can be,in as far as a man's happiness, for the most part,depends more on those who are near him, habituallyor frequently, than upon those who areremote. The social and the popular sanctionact and re-act upon each other ; the popularsanction being, in fact, the great recipient ofall the social sanctions.3. The moral or popular sanction is thatwhich is commonly called public opinion ; it isthe received decision of society on conduct. Thepopular sanction may be divided into twobranches — the democratic and aristocratic — •awarding a very different portion of recompenseSANCTIONS. 91or punishment to acts of a similar character.A sanction, by every instance of its execution,constitutes and gives effect to a law ; and the lawsconstituted by the aristocratic branch are overa great portion of the field of conduct, in repugnanceto those constituted by the democratic.In misdeeds affecting ;;e;\9oyw, for example, thedemocratic sanction tolerates boxing, the tryingto hurt; not duelling, trying to kill : while thearistocratic tolerates and rewards trying to kill.Of misdeeds affecting properties, the democraticsanction gives preference to the debts due to atradesman over those due to a gamester ; thearistocratic sanction decides directly the reverse :the democratic sanction punishes swindling inall its shapes ; the aristocratic rewards it iu thecase and situation of a man of landed andentailed estate. In the democratic scale ofreprobation, the mischievous stands above theridiculous; in the aristocratic, the ridiculousabove the mischievous. The democratic refers,or is at least constantly tending, more and more,to refer every thing to the standard of utility,to the greatest-happiness principle ; the aristocratical,as much, as far, and as long as possible,to the standard of taste, — constituting itself thearbiter of taste.Among the pleasures and pains growing outof the moral or popular sanction, and exercising92 DEONTOLOGY.a vast influence on virtue and vice, and thenceon happiness and misery, are a group of factitiousentities, which demand attention. Reputation,honour, renown, fame, glory, and dignity,may serve as a sample of them. They have thisin common, that they are, though factitious, theobjects of possession. They are distinguishedfrom other objects of possession in this, thatpursuit of them, to any extent, is not deemedimproper. The love of money, every one admits,may be carried to excess, but not so the pursuitof these attractions.But in the mistakes made respecting them,in the eulogium poured on those who pursueand those who possess them, will be found oneof the most fruitful sources of improbity andmischief. The means a man has at his disposalhe will employ, not only to keep that which hepossesses, but to obtain that which he desires.These possessions are the instruments of influence,and that influence is liable to be baneful,according to its extent. The mischief is at itsminimum where confined to an individual ; itis at its maximum when it operates on anational or international field.Applied to private life, the principal mischiefof which any of these appellatives is likely tobe productive, is danger to life from duelling.The good proposed is the repression of offensiveSANCTIONS. 93deportment ; a good obtainable, much moreeffectually obtainable, by less expensive means;but there is this good to set against the balanceof evil.But applied to national and international concerns,they become incentives to misrule, in theshape of usurpation of power ; and to war, thatis, to ravage, rapine, and destruction, on thelargest scale. And the amount of evil willdepend on the amount of influence exercisedby him who puts these elements of misery intoaction.Suppose him to be a sovereign : his domainof action is national or international. If it isat the expense of his own subjects that he seeksthis honour, glory, fame, dignity, and so forth,the mischief to which the language in questionleads is, invasion of popular rights ; in case ofnon-resistance, oppression and misrule ; and incaseof resistance, civil war. If it is at theexpense of other nations that he seeks thesedistinctions, then comes foreign war, which,being interpreted, is murder, rape, devastation,on a vast scale, at the expense both of his ownsubjects and those of the foreign state.Though of this all-comprehensive mass ofwretchedness and profligacy a sovereign alonecannot be the actual perpetrator, yet, as aninstigator before the fact, every subject may94 DEONTOLOGY.operate iiifluentially, according to his position.An official cabinet counsellor, a member of apopular assembly, a member of an unofficialassociation, a writer in a public newspaper, eachin his different sphere.The quantity of these influences which asovereign may hold will be in proportion to thequantity of power he possesses ; the power whichhe and his subjects possess with reference toother nations — the power which he himself possesseswith reference to the nation to which hebelongs. Now the desire to possess these acquirementsbeing boundless, the efforts to obtainthem become boundless too. Hence foreignconquest, aggression, usurpation ; depredationat home, depredation abroad, and acts which, ifcommitted by unofficial hands, would bear thename, and be visited with the punishment ofcities, are unchecked in their misery-creatingcareer.That instances may be found in which powerwill not have been abused, but have been employedfor the public good, is most true: whereforexample, it has been used for the establishmentof wise laws at home, or the maintenanceand manifestation of the virtues of justiceabroad.But these cases are rare ; and rarer still arethe cases where glory, fame, and these otherSANCTIONS. 95brilliant possessions, have been sought or acquiredfrom such a beneficent source. Rarely,indeed, that honor and renown are spoken ofbut in connection with murderous or mischievousdeeds. The reputation acquired by benevolenceshrinks into absolute insignificance whencompared with that which abominable and atrociousenterprises have obtained for monarchs.What is to be done? What, in the melancholycase, where of these gorgeous things so little isto be had by innoxious means, so much byflagitious means ? What, but to present theportraits of vice and virtue in their contrastedhideousness and beauty ? What, but to paintin their true colors those malefactors, in comparisonof idiom a common incendiary is asmuch inferior in the scale of mischievousness,as a small quantity of mischief, in one shape, isinferior to the greatest quantity of mischief, inall shapes, capable of being perpetrated byforeign or domestic war.It may be said that these tinsel baubles are,in fact, all made subservient to interest — tonational interest. Not so ! for those who preachup their value disclaim the vulgar and the sordiddream of interest. What declaimer Mould evertalk about giving up renown to interest? ofsacrificing honor to prudence? Fling downthe substance to catch the shadow, cast awayDEONTOLOGY.the real, in order to possess the imaginative ;in this you have the clamour of patriotism andnationality.Not but that national interest might be moreundeviatingly and unexceptionably pursued,without danger to probity or prudence, thanprivate interest. By acquisition of territoryprivate interest may be increased — not so thepublic interest — not by conquest, not by colonization; the interest of the ruling few, undoubtedly,may be served, but not that of thesubject many.Strange it is, that the misery produced bythose influences which have been described,misery on so vast a scale, of such intensity andsuch duration, should be looked on, for the mostpart, with the composure of indifference or theexcitement of admiration; and yet more strange,that such composure and such admiration shouldsometimes flow from minds who would visitacts, or even thoughts which do no mischief,with unbridled abhorrence, popular punishment,or even penal visitation.The popular sanction assumes very variousnames. For instance, an author, describing thefortitude of the American Indians under torture,says—The constancy of the sufferers in this terriblescene shows the wonderful power of institutionsSANCTIONS. 97and a thirst of glory, which makes men imitateand exceed what philosophic, or even religion caneffect'*Philosophy is here nothing but the force ofthe popular sanction, applied in a peculiar manner.It must mean the desire of appearing aphilosopher, and thus acquiring or preservingthe respect attached to that character. It cannotmean the art of correctly calculating pains andpleasures, for that would not, on such an occasion,dictate exertions of heroism under apain known to be at once transient and unmitigated.The moral sanction owes its highest efficiencyto the progress of intelligence.In a state of barbarism, men are governed inevery thing by sudden impulse, and in nothingby reflection. The experience of preceding islost to the succeeding ages. The moral sanctionhas, then, just influence enough to givecredit to the virtue of courage, a virtue of primenecessity, that opens itself a passage to thehearts of men. The virtues of veracity andintegrity come afterwards. Last of all comesthat of toleration.Hence a universal rule may be deduced—that the more enlightened the body of a nation,European Settlements in America; vi, p. 200.VOL. I. H98 DEONTOLOGY.the stronger is the influence of the moral sanction.The case of the Romans is no exception.Virtue, it is said, characterized the infancy ofthat state ; depravity the decline. Yet was itmore enlightened at the latter of those periodsthan at the former.To this it may be answered, in the firstplace, that the body of the people could neverbe said to have been enlightened, even at thelast. Literature was copious, but not diffused.Works were many, but copies of them werefew.In the next place, the depravity which strikesso much in the history of the declension of theRoman state was not the depravity of privatelife, but of a few public men, corrupted by theabuse and evil adjustment of the political sanction.The influence of the moral sanction is nottraceable in the mutilated and imperfect portraitsof the times that are handed down to us.Examples enough have reached us to shewthat the little virtue there was in the earlyages of that state was more owing to theinfluence of the political sanction than the moral.The political sanction was so disposedas to produce a certain portion of public virtue,at the very time that private virtue was at aslow an ebb as can be conceived. Witness theSANCTIONS. 99poisoning mentioned by Livy. From that sameaccount, it appears that private depravity did notbecome an object of notice till it had arisen tosuch a height as to shake the very existence ofthe state.The popular sanction, when enlightened byDeontological principle, corrects the aberrationsof individual judgment, and takes the wrongdoerout of those regions where the interestsand passions of the sufferer make vengeance,not justice, the grounds of his award. Vengeancecannot be allowed to be the end ofpunishment; for if vengeance be the cud, theresentment of the person whose vengeance it is,must be the measure ; there is no other. Butthe resentment of any man against an act mischievousto society is sometimes greater, sometimesless, than in proportion to that mischievousness.It will sometimes be bestowed onacts not mischievous. It is different in differentmen ; it is different in the same man ; nor ineither case, otherwise than from the principleof utility, can any rules be laid down, or expedientsdevised to bring it to a level.At one time greater punishment will be inflictedthan is necessary for the determent ofthe offender ; so that a portion of happiness willbe destroyed in waste. At another time, notso much punishment will be inflicted as isnecessary for that purpose ; so that the punishesDEONTOLOGY.ment will be inflicted, and the mischief stillcontinue.Those who have the dispensing of the moralsanction are contented with less proofs than itis necessary for those to require who havethe dispensing of the political sanction. Theproofs which the nature of the act furnishesthey can more easily come at. For a constructionto put upon a single act, they call up thewhole series of actions in a man's life. Theyexamine all witnesses, competent and incompetent.It were to be wished that every man's namewere written upon his forehead as well asengraved upon his door. It were to be wishedthat no such thing as secrecy existed — thatevery man's house were made of glass. Therewould be the less reason to desire windows tohis breast. Actions are a tolerably adequateinterpretation of sentiments, when observationhas furnished us with the key.The more men live in public, the more amenablethey are to the moral sanction. The greaterdependence men are in to the public, that is,the more equality there is among them, theclearer the evidence comes out, the more it hasof certainty in its results. The liberty of thepress throws all men into the public presence.The liberty of the press is the greatest coadjutorof the moral sanction. Under suchSANCTIONS. 101influence, it were strange if men grew not everydaymore virtuous than on the former day.I am satisfied they do. I am satisfied they willcontinue so to do, till, if ever, their nature shallhave arrived at its perfection. Shall they stop?shall they turn back ? The rivers shall as soonmake a wall, or roll up the mountains to theirsource.There is but one thing, and that far out of thesphere of probability, that can arrest the tide ofimprovement. It is a sudden and universalover-ruling of these moral influences by physicalnecessity.A whole kingdom, the great globe itself, willbecome a gymnasium, in which every man exerciseshimself before the eyes of every other man.Every gesture, every turn of limb or feature, inthose whose motions have a visible influenceon the general happiness, will be noticed andmarked down.The constitution of the human mind beingopened by degrees, the labyrinth is explored, aclue is found out for it. That clue is the influenceof interest ; of interest, not in that partial andsordid sense in which it is the tyrant of sordidsouls, but in the enlarged and beneficent sensein which it is the common master of all spirits,and especially of the enlightened. It is put intothe hands of every man. The designs by which102 DEONTOLOGY.short-sighted iniquity would mask its projects,are every day laid open. There will be nomoral enigmas by and by.Who knows but even I, an instrument somean as I, may be found to have done somethingtowards a work so glorious, and this my prophecyitself, like so many others, be in a certaindegree the cause of its own completion ?4. The political, or legal sanction. It hastwo branches, the judicial and the administrative.The judicial acting almost exclusivelyby punishments, the administrative mostly byrewards. This sanction becomes law, and iscalled into operation upon all those acts whichlegislation makes penal, or those which legislationdeems worthy of public recompense. Inother words, the political sanction belongs tothose vices which, being deemed misdemeanorsor crimes, are taken cognizance of by the officialauthorities, as meet subjects for penal visitation,or to those virtues which are marked out forstate reward. It is the legislator, rather thanthe moralist, who is armed with the politicalsanction ; but it was necessary to mention it asone of the sources of action.Scandal is to the moral sanction what perjuryis to the political,5. The religious or superhuman sanction. Ithas two principal sources of influence, which.Sanctions. 103when they can be brought to bear upon humanaction, necessarily invest the sanction with highauthority and power. For, first, it supposes theDivine Being to be thoroughly cognizant of theexistence of every misdeed in question ; and,secondly, to have perfect knowledge of the exactquantity and quality of its malignity, from theknowledge of all the aggravating and extenuatingcircumstances. Thence all those chancesof escape from observation or from punishment,which diminish the efficiency of the other sanctions,are removed from this, which at oncebrings the offender into the presence of an all-seeing,all-knowing, all-weighing, and equitably-awardingjudge.To teachers of religion, however, it belongsto treat of the pains and pleasures which religionholds out for those acts of forbearance orof indulgence which it prescribes or forbids.It is for the Deontologist to inquire how farthey accomplish all the ends which moralityproposes, to endeavour to ascertain the causesof their inefficiency, when they are inefficient,and to bring his instruments to cultivate thatpart of the field of thought and action whichthey have left barren. And it is to be hopedthat, while thus labouring with the teachers ofreligion in the service of virtue and the pursuitof happiness, the Deontologist will be consistDEONTOLOGY.tered, not as a rival to be supplanted, but asacoadjutor to be loved. The beneficent influencesof the religious sanction cannot but bestrengthened by calling in every other sanctionto its aid. Its inefficiency has been often thesubject of lamentation, even among those whowould fain arm it with its greatest power. Tofriendly auxiliaries it cannot then be hostile.And if any religious opinions are unfriendlyto human happiness, surely that circumstancemust be taken as evidence of their erroneousness.The province of true religion can neverbe to seal up the fountains of felicity, or to openthose of misery.If a man is less happy than he might be, it isno matter whether he is made so by others'acts, or by his own opinions : a religion, therefore,would carry the same evidence of its falsehoodin its opposing that share of happinesswhich a man might otherwise acquire for himself,as by favouring or conniving at that shareof unhappiness which he may suffer at thehands of another.If there were no other ill effects attendant onsuperstition, or the misdirected religious sanction,this consideration alone would prove it tobe one of the bitterest rods mankind were everscourged with, that, by bestowing the denominationof offences on acts indifferent to theSANCTIONS. 105happiness of society, it creates new and artificialcrimes, it introduces among men fresh occasionsof division and disgust: thus adding to the buttoo numerous ones which must ever subsist. Itweakens the horror due to real crimes, byspending it upon normal ones. It confoundsmen's ideas of right and wrong ; they discoverthe emptiness of those denominations, as appliedto many subjects, and become disposed to considerthem alike indifferent, as applied to all.If it had not been for a slight tincture, atleast, of superstition yet remaining, there couldnot have appeared a work with the title ofPrivate Vices Public Benefits.'One might fill a book with the testimoniesgiven by divines, of the necessity of strengtheningthat sanction, the influence of which it istheir province to superintend, with sanctionsborrowed from other sources. Look at theexamples of Louis XI, Philip II, and MuleyIshmael, all three prodigies of devotion andmonsters of depravity. And, whatever mayhave been the case with the Moorish Emperor,the French and Spanish tyrants were devotedto a religion which, whatever duties it may prescribebesides, professes to prescribe all thosewhich are demanded by the established religionof our own country. Theirs, like ours, was a compoundof moral duties, useful to be observed ;106 DEONTOLOGY.of moral duties, useless ; of ceremonies to beperformed ; and of dogmas to be believed. Intheirs, indeed, the useless duties, the ceremonies,and the points of faith, bore a much largerproportion to the useful duties than in ours ;accordingly it is not for ours, nor, it may beconfidently hoped, ever will be, to produceexamples of a depravity so enormous.Every instruction which contributes tostrengthen the attachment to the three last ofthese classes of observances, contributes toweaken the attachment to the first of them.They are three branches in a lever, on the sameside of the fulcrum, contending against one onthe other side : the elevation of any of the threeis the depression of that one.To what is the inefficiency of the religioussanction to be attributed ? for if its power be asit is represented, it ought to be the most influentialof instruments, inasmuch as infinite isgreater than finite, and the pains and pleasuresit proposes are intense and permanent beyondall others ; and let it be said, once for ail, thatit is not intended here to supersede its authority,but merely to supply auxiliaries which may addto its beneficial influence. The enjoyments andsufferings of a future life being inaccessible toexperience, whether our own or that of others,no man having hitherto reported, for the informations.107nation of his fellows, what had happened tohim beyond the grave, and no man havinghitherto learned it for himself, those enjoymentsand sufferings represent nothing which our experiencehas shown to be either pleasurable orpainful. Being remote as to distance, uncertainand immediate as to their contingency onany particular action, undefined as to their character,and invisible in their operation, it is notto be wondered at that they so often lose theirpower in the presence of adjacent, certain,palpable influences. Events placed so far beyondthe limits of life and knowledge are not, itmust be admitted, susceptible of being broughtinto the mind with the vividness of that whichis propitious. As in receding from the loftiestand sublimest objects, however substantial,they gradually diminish, till they are lost in theincreasing distance ; so the tremendous hopesand fears with which it is the province of religionto agitate us, fail in their influence, andbecome obscured in the remoteness of eternity.The religious sanction would be greatlystrengthened by the belief in a particular Providence,a belief often asserted and insisted on,but which appears to operate little even uponthose who proclaim it. Did the sanction exist,were there the constant interference of theDivine Being to punish or reward, appropriately,acts of vice or virtue, it is clear that all humanrOfil DEOiVTOLOGY.legislation would be supererogatory and intrusive; pernicious on all occasions where notuseless ; useless on all occasions where notpernicious. The belief in a particular Providencewould make the religious sanction present, butno one has sufficient confidence in the belief todeliver society over to its solitary influences.Another main quality on which the effect of apunishment depends is its celerity. No manever thrusts his hand into the fire. Why?Because the suffering follows instantaneouslyupon the act.There are certain consequences which followalmost as certainly the acts calculated to producethem, as the pain of burning from thrusting thehand into the fire. Yet these acts are committed.Why ? Because the penal consequence isdistant.Delay gives room for obstacles to intervene.Apparent diminution oi certainty therefore followsnecessarily from abatement of celerity.And in the interval a man takes the chanceof death, which removes him from the penalvisitation.Pity, too, has more time to operate, to preventor mitigate the punishment. And pitydestroys a proportion of its effect.The religious sanction is eminently deficientin the article of celerity.Locke does not hesitate to allow the inefficacySANCTIONS. 109of the religious sanction. And he partly givesthe reasons of it. Men do not, in fact, giveheed to it, he says, so as to determine theirconduct by it : and it is their nature not to doso. And yet they ought, he says, and their notdoing so is folly. For did they but duly reflect,they would find that, in every instance of transgression,the punishment, after all abatements,must be greater, and that in any given proportion,than the profit of the crime. For the storesof divine justice being supposed infinite, Godcan, and it is to be supposed, will, inflict asmuch, in the amount of intensity and duration,as shall suffice to make up the deficiency,whatsoever it may be, in the other elements ofits momentum.He does not consider that it is the apparentvalue of a future pain, and not the real value,that constitutes the momentum of it in themind ; and that no addition in quantity canmake up for the diminution which uncertainty,distance, and delay produce. It is the belief,and not the reality of punishment, that operatesbeneficially ; and the strength of the politicalsanction consists in this — that the constant presenceof the reality induces the belief, and makesthat belief influential.From these and similar considerations, orrather, perhaps, from some obscure preconcep-110 DEONTOLOGY.tion of their bearings, and to clear themselvesfrom the embarrassment growing out of the undoubtedinefficacy of the religious sanction whenstanding alone, some divines (Dr Price, forexample) have supposed punishment to be dueto guilt, ie. past guilt, not as a means of preventingguilt, ie. future guilt of the same kind ;but, as it were, of congruity. This congruity,when it comes to be examined into, is no morethan a disposition in these divines to believe orto declare that such punishment ought to beconsequent upon such guilt. For this arrangement,in which neither wisdom nor benevolencecan have been consulted, they attempt not somuch as to assign any grounds. Why shouldthey ? The punishment will, and ought to ensue; not for any use there is for it, but becausethey say so. And the demonstration of theirproposition is to be found in their own infallibility.They are disposed, they cannot tell why,nor will they condescend to inquire why, thatis, to what end, or for what purpose ; but, however,as it happens, they are disposed to believeas much, and therefore it must be so. Thisstout ignorance, and resolute rejection of themeans of knowledge, namely, inquiry and argument,being better and surer, it seems, thanknowledge, is to supersede it and take its name.As to the party himself it may do very well.SANCTIONS. Illand answer his purposes, if he is pleased withit, and convinced by it. But what good can beexpected from mentioning it, or from the attemptto impose it upon others, is what maydeserve to be considered. If he, to whom it ismentioned, is already of that mind, he wantsnothing that it can do for him ; but if he is ofanother mind, it does nothing for him that hewants : it gives him not, nor so much as pretendsto give him, any reason for change.These considerations, be it remembered, arewholly apart from Revelation. It is assumed,without reference to any revealed authority, thatthere is a disposition in the Deity to producepain to no end, and for no result of good that isto be attained by it.It is even assumed that this is a fit mediumto prove his moral qualities ; and his moralqualities, so described, are to be the medium toprove a revelation.How mischievously these fallacies hang together! How fatal to the beneficial influences ofthe religious sanction to place it in contradiction,in opposition to all the undoubted motives toaction — to all the dictates of experience — to allthe influences of pain and pleasure ! And intowhat does such a theory resolve itself? Intothe mere assumptions— the theories — the dogmatismof the theorist.112 DEONTOLOGY.There is a class of ecclesiastics, whose end isanything rather than the improvement and exerciseof the reasoning faculty ; to overwhelmit, to fling it into the dust, is their constant taskand toil. They dare not encourage thought, orlend a helping hand to philosophy. They knowbetter : those that are penetrating and discreetamong them (and the dull follow the restby instinct), know there is a power betweenwhich and themselves there is a natural enmity,which, if exerted liberally and universally,cannot but be exerted to their discomfiture.They remember well, and make due applicationof the fable of the Man and Serpent.They know and see with horror and confusionhow apt sound science is to make men rebelliousto their doctrines. That expansion ofmind which the acquisition of it confers, thathabit of inquisitiveness to which the pursuit ofit gives birth, is mortal to those delusions bywhich the credit of their systems is supported.They know they have every thing to fear fromphilosophy, and thus it is that there is not atrack they would not invite men to in preferenceto that of moral science ; and of all tracks, thatbest answers their purpose for men to be engagedin, which, encircling the foot of themountain, and obscuring the approaches to thesummit, offers flowers to fascinate the eye ofSANCTIONS. 113the wanderer, and to keep him for ever lingeringround the base.That walk is the walk of Classic Literature :there grows the lotus which has fixed the footstepsof so many a young adventurer to thoseregions of unfruitful beauty, and made him drinkoblivion to every nobler distinction.If, after all, God be infinitely wise and good,what service can be rendered him so acceptableas to obey his laws, which can propose or intendnothing but that which is the great, thenecessary, the sole result of wisdom and goodness,namely, the production of happiness. Isnot the duty we owe to God necessarily involvedin the circle of duties we owe to the human raceourselves included ? And if benevolence bemore prominently an attribute than pride in thedivine nature, must not the duties we owe toour neighbours be, in his view, pre-eminent overthe services claimed by him ? And can anyservice claimed by him be more urgent thanthat which he claims on behalf of the wholefamily of man ?To prove that the Divine Being had prohibitedpleasure, would be to implicate, to deny, todisprove his benevolence. It would set up ourexperience in opposition to his benevolence.That such or such a thing is a cause of painor pleasure, is a matter of fact and experience :VOL. I. 1114 DEONTOLOGY.that the use of it has been prohibited by theDeity, is a matter of inference and conjecture.That the use of it is allowed by him who wasable to have prevented it if he had pleased, is amatter of fact and experience ; that it is prohibitedany otherwise than in virtue of its impurity,is a matter of inference and conjecture.Infinite are the points that a man must havebeen satisfied of, before he can justly be satisfiedthat any pleasure, not impure, can havebeen prohibited by that Deity, who has implantedin our bodily and intellectual framesuch a capacity and desire for pleasure.The proofs that such a prohibition has beenissued by the Supreme Being, can never rise tobe so strong as to equal the proofs of its beinginconsistent with his benevolence.The notions which commonly prevail as to afuture state, are neither consolatory to benevolence,nor encouraging to virtue.Because few are to enjoy happiness in comparisonof those who are to suffer misery, therefore,with respect to every man, the presumption,antecedently to any examination, of thechance a man may have of placing himself inthe former class, by means that are in his ownpower, is on the side of misery.Nor is the prospect mended by the considerationof the power he may have, by means de-sanctions.116pendent on his own will, to ensure himself to beof the number of the happy.Upon the predestinarian scheme, he has nosuch power — the matter is already determined,and was so before he was born : his chance dependsupon events he can know nothing of, andthat are out of the reach of his influence ; thechance, therefore, that he has for escapingmisery is simply in the ratio of the number ofthose who are to be happy, to that of those whoare to be miserable ; and suppose those numbersare as one to ten, it is ten to one in everyman's case against his being otherwise thanmiserable.Rejecting the predestinarian, and admittingthe commonly received theory of future punishment,whatever power any given man has ofavoiding future misery, the same has everyother man ; and yet more, many more, after all,are to be miserable than happy.Again, the means of escaping misery are representedas consisting of faith and good works:either of faith alone, or of good works alone, orof both together.As to faith, after all the sophisms and devicesthat have been employed to conceal the truthof the matter, there is no one but has everynow and then perceived, that the act of believingis not in his power ; that, in the same DEONTOLOGY.ner as he is unable to believe that to be blackwhich he sees to be white, so is he unable tobelieve any thing to be one way when he seesgreater evidence to believe it to be another.As to good works, to take them in the largestsense, they consist in evil actions avoided, andin good ones done.And what, after all, can determine what isgood and what evil, but the standard of utility ?It is not pretended that any assurance withrespect to the ratio, either in number or qualityof evil acts omitted, to evil acts done, or of goodacts done to good acts omitted, necessary toensure a man against future misery, can beobtained.A man with ten chances for ten thousand ayear, or any greater sum for ever, to one for aperpetual fit of the cholic or stone, could hardlybe easy, could hardly be any otherwise thanunder great anxiety ; but here are ten chancesperhaps a hundred, perhaps a thousand, — forthe cholic or the stone, to one for the ten thousanda year.Hence, it appears, that whatever sanctions ormotives to virtue the commonly adopted opinionsas to a future state afford, they are to be foundalone in such portions of these opinions, as areconsistent with the Deontological principle ; thatthe doctrines generally received are inconsistentSANCTIONS. 117with that principle; inconsistent with humanhappiness ; and therefore cannot be true.Nothing is farther from the intention and convictionof the writer than to deny the existenceof a scheme of future rewards and punishments,whose object shall be to maxims happiness, andto developed the benevolent attributes of theDivinity. It is only intended here to show insome particulars the inconsistency of some orthodoxopinions with the true principles ofmorality, and their incompatibility with the productionand progress of that felicity which it isthe object of morality to accomplish.The religious sanction is founded, and canonly be founded, on the moral attributes of God,and those moral attributes cannot oppose happiness.Justice is of use no farther tian as the handmaidof benevolence.Justice is one of those means for compassingthe ends that benevolence proposes.If God is just, it is because he is benevolent.If there is no benevolent Being that looks tous,we must look to ourselves ; we must procureour own happiness by ourselves, as far aswe can. What other resource is left to us ?If there is a Being that watches over us, butis not benevolent, he is not just: there is noguessing what will please him ; there is no118 DEONTOLOGY.guessing what will not please him ; there is noknowing how to please him : our only wisdomis to please ourselves.If there is a benevolent Being that watchesover us, that rewards and punishes in the exerciseof that benevolence, he, at least, cannot bedispleased at our procuring our happiness to theutmost ; for the disposition to contribute to it iswhat we mean by benevolence, when we meanany thing, and in the very proportion of ourlove and reverence will our conviction of hisbenevolence be.By a given instance, however, the operationof the different sanctions upon conduct may bebest traced.Timothy Thoughtless and Walter Wise arefellow prentices. Thoughtless gave into thevice of drunkenness ; Wise abstained from it.Mark the consequence.1. Physical sanction. For every debauch.Thoughtless was rewarded by sickness in thehead ; to recruit himself he lay in bed the nextmorning, and his whole frame became enervatedby relaxation ; and when he returned to hiswork, his work ceased to be a source of satisfactionto him.Walter Wise refused to accompany him to thedrinking table. His health had not been originallystrong, but it was invigorated by tempe-sanctions.11^ranee. Increasing strength of body gave increasingzest to every satisfaction he enjoyed :his rest at night was tranquil, his risings in themorning cheerful, his labor pleasurable.2. Social sanction. Timothy had a sister,deeply interested in his happiness. Shereproved him at first, then neglected, thenabandoned him. She had been to him asource of great pleasure — it was all sweptaway.Walter had a brother, who had shown indifferenceto him. That brother had watched overhis conduct, and began to show an interest inhis well-being — the interest increased from dayto day. At last he became a constant visitor,and a more than common friend, and did a thousandservices for his brother, which no otherman in the world would have done.3. Popular sanction. Timothy was memberof a club, which had money and reputation.He went thither one day in a state of inebriety ;he abused the secretary, and was expelled by anunanimous vote.The regular habits of Walter had excited theattention of his master. He said one day to hisbanker — The young man is fitted for a higherstation. The banker bore it in mind, and onthe first opportunity, took him into his service.120 Doxology.He rose from one distinction to another, andwas frequently consulted on business of thehighest importance by men of wealth and influence.4. Legal sanction. Timothy rushed out fromthe club whence he had been so ignominiouslyexpelled. He insulted a man in the streets,and walked penniless into the open country.Reckless of every thing, he robbed the firsttraveller he met ; he was apprehended, prosecuted,and sentenced to transportation.Walter had been an object of approbation tohis fellow-citizens. He was called, by theirgood opinion, to the magistracy. He reachedits highest honors, and even sat in judgment onhis fellow apprentice, whom time and miseryhad so changed, that he was not recognised byhim.5. Religious sanction. In prison, and in theship which conveyed Timothy to Botany Bay,his mind was alarmed and afflicted with theapprehension of future punishment — an angryand avenging Deity was constantly presentto his thoughts, and every day of his existencewas embittered by the dread of the DivineBeing.To Walter the contemplation of futurity waspeaceful and pleasurable. He dwelt with con-sanctions.121stand delight on the benign attributes of theDeity, and the conviction was ever present tohim that it must be well, that all ultimatelymust be well, to the virtuous. Great, indeed,was the balance of pleasure which he drewfrom his existence, and great was the sum ofhappiness to which he gave birth.122 DEON'IOLOGY.CHAPTER VIII.CAUSES OF IMMORALITY.The causes of immorality have been glanced atin our progress. They may be comprised underthe following heads. False principles in morals,misapplication of religion, preference of the self-regardingto the social interest, and lastly,preference of lesser present to greater distantpleasure.False principles in morals may be classedunder the two heads of asceticism and sentimentalism,and both demand the useless sacrificeof pleasure, the sacrifice of pleasure to nopurpose of greater pleasure. Asceticism proceedsfarther than sentimentalism, and inflictsuseless pain. Both avoid the putting forwardreasons, and act, as far as it is possible to act,upon the affections. Asceticism generally onthe antipathies, by fear and terror ; sentimentalismon the sympathies. They both woulddispense with the assistance of books of morality,and confirm men in the notion that badmorals are all that are fit for practice ; goodCAUSES OF Immortality. 123ones only for discourse and parade. They bothshun the application of the tests of morality,and exist, in their highest exercise, wheremorality is at its lowest point. Asceticism thenbecomes the immediate and close ally of misanthropy,and sentimentalism of helplessness.False morality can never be cultivated but atthe expense of true morality.Out of the ascetic principle — the principle ofantipathy — grows the wish to punish vindictively;to make punishment minister to dislike.Men punish because they hate, and theyimagine that the law itself is but the inflicterof the vengeance of the law. The more intensemen's hatred, the more severe would they fainmake the punishment with which they visit theobjects of their hatred. Crimes, they are told,they ought to hate. Crimes it is made a matterof merit in them to hate. Crimes it is amatter of merit, more, perhaps, of merit than ofnecessity, to punish. They are to hate them,they are to punish them. It is their hatingmakes them wish to punish. How, then, shouldthey punish, but as they hate ? The more theyare disposed to hate, the more they are disposedto punish. What wonder ? To ordinary apprehensionsno mischief from this is visible.Yet more, no mischief, in many cases, exists.124 DEONTOLOGY.Since, in many cases, it is true, that the causeof hatred and the demand for punishment —the cause which makes hatred rise, and thereason which makes punishment expedient —increase together.If the quantity of punishment, in any case, isgreater than it need be ; if of punishment forany act there be more than is needful, it iseither because there is too much of it where thecase wants some, or there is some of it wherethe case wants none. What harm in a man'ssuffering, who does an act I hate? What harmin the man's suffering whom I hate ? When aman suffers whom I hate, when confessedly heought to suffer, what matter whether it be alittle less or a little more ?Such is the reasoning of the multitude ofmen.How should they punish but as they hate?What other standard than their hatred shouldthey assume? It is the clearest standard, atleast at any given time when it is applied,though at different times its decisions are soapt to vary. What standard clearer? Toknow whether they hate an act, to know whichof two acts they hate most, what have they butto consult their feelings ?What standard should they take ? Even thisCAUSES OF IMMORALITY. 125or none. For to this hour, except in here andthere a solitary sentence, dropped, as it were,by accident, no other has been brought into use.Another, and here and there another, has beenindeed set up, but these have not themselvesbeen rectified by the grand standard of utility.They clash. Nobody has yet attempted tomark out to each its limits, and to arrange themunder harmonious heads.What marvel, then, that ignorance of theonly real standard of right and wrong shouldadminister to immorality ? What marvel thatmen, given over to their prejudices and passions,should eagerly make those prejudices and passionsthe rules of conduct ? And while antipathy,on the one side, deals out unmeritedpunishment, it is natural that sympathy should,on the other side, shield misconduct from deservedblame.This tendency to make your own antipathiesor predilections the standard of morals is easilyencouraged, by keeping out of the way thestandard which utility furnishes. Hence thosewho dread the light which its radiance throwsupon human actions, are fond of engagingtheir votaries in the chace of an inaccessible,wandering will-o'-the-wisp, which they callmotive —an entity buried in unapproachable126 ' DEONTOLOGY.darkness, and which, if it were approachableand producible, would be of no value whatever.The search after motive is one of the prominentcauses of men's bewilderment in the investigationof questions of morals. The search isgrounded on a vague notion that in the springof action, rather than the act itself, the realquantity and quality of vice and virtue mightbe found. But this is a pursuit in which everymoment employed is a moment wasted. Allmotives are abstractedly good ; no man has,ever had, can, or could have, a motive differentfrom the pursuit of pleasure or the shunning ofpain. The motive which produces no act, ismerely speculative and immaterial, offeringno topic either of praise or blame. But bemotives what they may, and they alwaysmust be the same, that is, pleasure-seekingand pain-avoiding, it is not on them thatthe moralist is called to deliver his award.He has to do with conduct — with conduct,when its consequences invade the regions ofsuffering and enjoyment. He is but a despoticintruder elsewhere.Next to the misapplication of false principlesto morality, the misapplication of religion takesits place among the causes of immorality, andCAUSES OF IMMORALITY. 127its misapplication will be traced wherever itssanctions are applied to the diminution of thebalance of pleasure or the production or increaseof the balance of pain. And there can be nostronger test of the truth or falsehood of anyreligion than its conduciveness or repugnancy tothe greatest human happiness. To understandreligion is to understand the will of God. Godis a being among whose attributes is benevolence; benevolence not imperfect, not limited,but infinite benevolence. And how can he bebenevolent, but in proportion to the quantityof happiness which it is his wish to see enjoyedby those who are subject to his power ? Andif that happiness be not an empty name, ofwhat can it be composed but of pleasures ? Bethepleasure what it may, to demand its abandonment,without the substitution of a greaterpleasure, or to supersede it by a more thanequivalent pain, cannot be an act of benevolence.To speak of a being as benevolent, andto represent him as producing, or intending toproduce, a balance of misery, is a contradictionin terms. And by the use of no phraseologycan the character of things be altered. Neitheractions nor persons change their nature, becausetheir nature is falsely designated by words.If a stab be called a kiss, it does not thereforebecome an act of kindness.128 DEONTOLOGY.To draw a distinction between the attributesof God and the attributes of man, to say thatGod's benevolence, though different from man'sbenevolence, is still benevolent, is mere mocking.Except as applied to human conductand to human feelings, how did the wordbenevolence acquire its meaning ? Be it whatit may, an effect is still the same ; it is stillitself, whatsoever be its author or its cause.To ascribe to God, under the name of benevolence,that which, ascribed to man, would notbe benevolence, is, on the part of him whomterror or prejudice has not blinded, an act offraud : under the name of a fish it is to sell aserpent. By being called a silk-worm, woulda scorpion become harmless ?And what is true of any one attribute cannotbut be true of any other. Any other than asman is just, can any other being be just?And so of knowledge, and veracity, and power.From what but from the observation of humanconduct or human feelings, can the idea of justice— the idea for which the word justice hasbeen found — from what can it have beenderived ?That portion of the field of thought whichreligion, as unconnected with ethics, occupies,it is no part of our present purpose to explore.Ethics, not religion, is the subject of this work.Causes OF IMMORALITY. 129Religious discussion would be here superfluousand irrelevant.The prevalence of the self-regarding over thesocial interest, as a cause of immorality, itbelongs, in a great measure, to the ruling powersto remove. Wise legislation would be directedto their identification, to the production of anaccordance between the popular and the politicalsanction. This accordance is strengthenedby every law that is good ; weakened by everylaw that is bad. A legal penalty, for example,attached to an act in which a man's interestis associated with the public interest, as whereprohibition is attached to the circulation of thatwhich is an instrument of enjoyment or an objectof virtuous desire, not only produces immorality,not only offers a premium on immorality,but destroys the power of the political sanction,by disappointing it from the popular interest.Topics like this, however, belong rather to publicthan to private Doxology, and it is only tothe latter that this volume has reference.It may, however, be not amiss to advert to thefact, that out of the clashing of the popular interestswith those sinister interests which are toooften protected by legislation, misery and immoralityfrequently grow to a frightfully baneful extent.The fiscal regulations of many countries —VOL. I. K130 DEONTOLOGY.monopolies established by law — frequently presentcases in which the violator of the letter otthe statute can scarcely be considered other thanthe benefactor of the public. Cases occur inwhich the popular sanction is outraged by thepolitical ; and the popular sanction, in consequence,takes acts under its protection whichare held up by the political sanction as offencesand crimes fit to be visited by penalties moreor less severe. The triumph over despotism,where the many have been engaged againstthe one or the few, is the triumph of thepopular over the political sanction. Every stepin the way of social improvement, which ismade by the subject against the government, isa similar victory. Good government is, in aword, the harmony established between legislationand enlightened opinion. But the subjectis too vast for discussion in all its bearings onthis occasion.The last cause of immorality which remainsto be mentioned, is the preference of the presentlesser good to the distant greater good ; theavoidance of the present lesser evil when agreater distant evil will be the consequence.This is the peculiar topic of our present attention: and the source of the error may be tracedto erroneous education, intellectual and moral.CAUSES OF IMMORALITY. 131Vice may be defined to be a miscalculationof chances : a mistake in estimating the valueof pleasures and pains. It is false moral arithmetic; and there is the consolation of knowingthat, by the application of a right standard,there are few moral questions which may notbe resolved, with an accuracy and a certaintynot far removed from mathematical demonstration.132 DEONTOLOGY.CHAPTER IX.ANALYSIS OF CONFUSED PHRASEOLOGY, BY THEDEONTOLOGICAL TEST.There are some terms, employed not unfrequentlyby the legislator and the moralist,which appear to require a few sentences ofexplanation. As long as they are made subservientto the Deontological rule, the principalmischief which results from their useis this — that more perfect and convenient expressionsmight be found ; so that words arewasted, and a round-about way is taken in thepursuit of truth. Some of these terms have,however, obtained such complete possessionof the field of ordinary expression, that theattempt to displace them would be almosthopeless. In fact, the general imperfection oflanguage is one of the great impediments to thethe progress of philosophy. Correct ideas findgreat difficulty in discovering appropriate terms.Language lags behind science, and too frequentlyrefuses its aid to knowledge. Theinnovations of philosophy upon long-receivedexpressions are slow and difficult. Philology isANALYSIS OF Confused P IJ UASEOLOG V. 133apt to refuse the contributions of the othersciences. It prides itself on its poverty. Andthis is the more to be regretted, inasmuch as alllanguages had their birth in a period when moraland intellectual cultivation could only be in theirinfancy. A time will come, it is earnestly tobe hoped, when morality, like chemistry, willcreate its own fit nomenclature.Nothing is more fatal than the misuse, orrather the abuse of language. Qualities themost opposed frequently shroud themselvesunder the same phraseology. If there were alanguage peculiar to innocence, it would onlybe so for one moment, the next it would beusurped by guilt.Principle is a term in frequent use, to expressmoral qualities. A man of principle — a man ofno principle — a man of bad principle. Aetatisthe meaning of the phrase ? What is theground of the estimation in which the man isheld, who obtains the benefit of a reputation foracting on principle ? It is that he is supposedto have laid down for himself a certain rule ofconduct, and acts constantly and steadily inconformityto it. This were indeed well, if hisrule of conduct were a good rule ; if its endand object were the general well-being: butsupposing his rule of conduct to be a bad rule,that it has not for its object the general DEONTOLOGY.being, surely he is entitled to no approbation.A man is said to act habitually on principle,who unswervingly pursues his own course,notwithstanding all solicitations to the contrary.These solicitations are temptations, administeredin the shape of pleasures to be immediatelyenjoyed, and pains to be immediately avoided ;and, undoubtedly, he will have learnt to masterthese solicitations in proportion as he hasproved himself able to forego these pleasuresand to suffer these pains. But if his resistancebe such that the sum of happiness is diminishedby his conduct, if his rules are not in conformitywith the demands of utility, his principle,or in other words, his pertinacity, will be uselessor pernicious, to the extent in which hefails to give adherence to the Deontologicallaw. It is by contrast with him who iscalled a man of no principle that a man ofprinciple obtains approbation. A man of noprinciple is a man who, without regard toconsequences, allows the solicitations of presentpleasure, or the apprehension of present pain,to direct his conduct; while a man of badprinciple is one who has laid down for himself arule, that the welfare of others shall on nooccasion form a part of his consideration. ; as,for instance, when he determines to do mischiefto every man whose opinion on any par-analysisOV CONFUSED PHIlASEOLOCi Y. 135titular subject differs from his own. In sucha case, those who do not join him in the observanceof his rule, will concur in the propriety ofaffixing on him the title of a bad-principled man.It is possible, however, for the man of bad principleto be less pernicious than the man of noprinciple ; the one will, on all occasions, makehis line of conduct subservient to his immediateends ; he has no principle to prevent his doingso : the other may have some good principle,operating at times to correct or counteract thebad principle. Independently of which, thebad principle may be sometimes inert fromwant of excitement or opportunity of exercise ;while the mind of the man of no principle beingopen to every impression of present influence,will in most cases be seduced by temptation.Right is, for the most part, a recognitionby law of something claimed by one or moreindividuals. It is that to the enforcement ofwhich the legal powers lend their sanction. Itenters little into the Deontological field, wherethe business consists chiefly in the proper distributionof obligations. Doxology endeavorsto give to obligation the efficiency of action,and where different obligations clash, it determineswhich should preponderate. It is truethat the legal sanction has obligation attachedto it, obligation in the most perfect form, obli-136 DEONTOLOGY.nation co-existent with right ; but it will alsosometimes appear that the obligation producedby the legal sanction is superseded by theDeontological, as where, for example, the infractionof a law may be attended with greater goodthan its observance.The demand of rights sometimes takes themost extensively-baneful range of all the sourcesof action. The right of empire, for instance,has been made the ground-work of unboundedprofligacy and consequent misery ; the plea forrapine and murder on the largest scale. Itmay be a concupiscence of the most atrociousand horrible character, and has been put forwardby men like the Prince de Condé, as anexcuse and a sanction for every species ofiniquity.Left to itself, wandering about without theDeontological chain to bring it back to its fitabode, it is one of the most pernicious of pretenders.In the political field despotism, withallits horrors, takes its stand upon it. In thereligious field, persecution; in the popular,injustice; in the domestic, parental, marital, orother tyranny.Subservient to utility, there is no objectioneither to the word or the thing ; that which isuseful is right : a right is that which grows outof the application of the greatest happinessANALYSIS OF CONFUSED Phraseology. 137principle. Such a right cannot be shaken by-argument; but no such right can be assumedin any given case. Weigh pains, weigh pleasures; and as the balance stands, will standthe question of right and wrong.Conscience is a thing of fictitious existence,supposed to occupy a seat in the mind. A conscientiousperson is one who, having made tohimself a rule of conduct, steadily abides by it.In the common use of the phrase, it is impliedthat his rule of conduct is the correct one.But only in so far as his rule of conduct is consistentwith the principles of utility can hisconscientiousness be deemed virtuous. Wheneverhis conscientiousness takes a directionopposed to the general well-being, it is perniciousin the very proportion of its influence.Good and evil conscience are sometimes usedto represent the tribunal before which a mantries the merits of his own actions in his ownmind, and the recompense or punishment whichhe attaches to those actions. A good conscienceis the favorable opinion which a manentertains of his own conduct ; an evil conscienceis the unfavorable decision of a man onhis own conduct. But the value of the judgmentgiven must wholly depend on its beingsubservient to, or rather on its being an applicationof the greatest happiness principle.DEONTOLOGY.CHAPTER X.VIRTUE DEFINED.Virtue is the head of a large family. The virtuesare the members of it. The scene offeredto the imagination is that of a parent followedby numerous offspring. Latin being the sourcewhence the word is derived, and the word beingof the feminine gender, the image presented isthat of a mother, surrounded by her daughters.An appellation gives an idea of existence, butvirtue is a fictitious entity,* growing out of theWhat, it will be perhaps said, deny the existence ofvirtue ? Virtue an empty name — no such thing as virtue !Horrible ! What an opinion must such a man have of humannature! What good, what useful information can be expectedfrom him ? What, of any sort, but the most pernicious? If virtue is an imaginary thing, so also must vice be ;and thus virtue and vice will be on a level — alike creatures ofthe imagination, alike objects of indifference ! It is thus,sometimes, that a novel form of expression is met, vituperatedand dismissed ; but no clear idea can possess the mind,until a separation has taken place between that which is realand that which is fictitious. The fictitious may be an instrumentwhich the unsatisfactory state of language compels usto employ, for the purposes of introducing realities. Virtuousdeeds, virtuous propensities are existent things, andVIRTUE DEFINED. 139imperfection of language — of language createdlong before the phenomena of mind were studiedor understood.Virtue not having a superior genus is not susceptibleof what is commonly meant by a definition,which is a reference to some genericappellation embracing it. By the medium ofits conjugates it is capable of being expounded ;and when the words, a virtuous act, a virtuoushabit, or a virtuous disposition, are used, atolerably determinate conception is conveyedby them to the mind.When a man says of an act that it is virtuous,he merely conveys an opinion that itmerits his approbation, and thereon comes theinquiry, what is the ground of that opinion ?On looking closely into the matter, it will befound that the ground, in different places, isvery different, so that it would not be very easyto give a general answer. If the answers becorrect, they will be different, and to collectthem all, intricate and all-comprehensive asthey are, boundless must be the researches inthe field of geography and history. And thusit is, that when it is demanded why an act isvirtuous, or what constitutes the virtue of anfor all practical purposes the result is the same. Two personsmay employ a very different phraseology, though theirmeaning may be identical.140 DEONTOLOGY.act, the only response to so important an inquirywill be, when thoroughly sifted — It is virtuousbecause I think it to be so, and its virtueconsists in its having my favourable opinion.A new ground is put forward here. Theground of approbation will be the tendency ofan act to increase happiness ; the ground of reprobationthe tendency of an act to diminishhappiness.The attempt is here made to developed thisprinciple to its fullest extent. Wherever thereis a particle of happiness, however small, withoutany counterbalancing evil, there will beground for approval, though not necessarily evidenceof virtue. Virtue is the effort, the conquestof a difficulty, leaving, as its results, abalance of happiness. There may be, there ismuch good in the world, which no virtue hasbeen concerned in producing. But there is novirtue where there is no balance of happiness.Conduciveness to happiness being then thetest of virtue, and all happiness being composedof our own happiness and that of others, theproduction of our own happiness is prudence,the production of the happiness of others iseffective benevolence. The tree of virtue isthus divided into two great stems, out of whichgrow all the other branches of virtue.Since the time of Aristotle, four virtues, Pru-VIRTUE DEFINED. 141(Icncc, Fortitude, Temperance, and Justice, havetaken the names of the cardinal virtues; — cardsbeing the Latin for a hinge, and these becamethe cardinal virtues, because on them, as doorson hinges, all other virtues were said to turn.But do they turn on these four hinge-like virtues? By no means. The list is excessive ;but does it not embrace the whole ? By nomeans. For in Aristotle's catalogue the virtueof benevolence — effective benevolence— is forgotten,and there is nothing in its stead butjustice, which is but a portion of benevolence indisguise. The list consists of three virtues,which regard the actor only ; while, for all therest of mankind, there is a virtue, which is avery small part of a virtue indeed.It will, however, be seen, that it is onlywith reference to pains and pleasures that anyclear conception attaches to the words virtue orvice. Familiarly as their different titles soundto the ear, any part of the meaning which cannotbe brought under the influence of their relationto happiness and unhappiness, will andmust continue unsettled and confused.Only, in so far, then, as it produces happinessor misery can an act be properly calledvirtuous or vicious. Virtue and vice are butuseless qualities unless estimated by their influenceson the creation of pleasure and pain.142 DEONTOLOGY.They are fictitious entities, spoken of as real,for the purposes of discourse, and withoutfictions of this character, on subjects such asthese, discussions could hardly be carried on.The application of the principle of Doxologywill alone enable us to discover whether deceptiveimpressions are conveyed by the employmentof the terms, and it will be found on aclose examination, that virtue and vice are, ashas been stated, but representatives of twoqualities, namely, prudence and effective benevolence,and their contraries, with the differentmodifications springing out of them, and whichregard ourselves primarily, and next, all besidesourselves.If the effect of virtue were to prevent ordestroy more pleasure than it produced, or toproduce more pain than it prevented, its moreappropriate name would be wickedness andfolly : wickedness, as it affected others ; folly,as respected him who practised it. And if theinfluence of vice were to promote pleasure andto diminish pain, vice would be entitled to thenames of beneficence and wisdom.Virtue is the preference given to a greatergood in comparison with a less ; but it is calledupon for its exercise when the lesser good ismagnified by its adjacent, and the greatergood diminished by its remoteness. In the self-virtueDEFINED. 143harding part of the field of conduct, it is thesacrifice of a present inclination to a distantpersonal recompense. In the social part, it isthe sacrifice of a man's own pleasure to the obtaininga greater sum of pleasure for the benefitof others. The sacrifice is either positive ornegative — positive when it is the abandonmentof pleasure, negative when it is the subjectionto pain.The terms sacrifice or self-denial, are appropriatewhere virtue consists in the abstinencefrom enjoyment ; but they are less properlyemployed where the good sacrificed is of thenegative kind, and the virtue is found in self-subjectionto suffering. But it will be obviousthat though the idea of virtue may be sometimesincluded in the idea of sacrifice, or self-denial,yet these are by no means synonymous withvirtue, nor are they necessarily included in theidea of virtue. To the character of virtue, inagreat number of cases, no doubt, the qualityof courage is indispensable ; but courage, in sofaras it consists in exposure to pain — to bodilypain, for example, unaccompanied by danger tolife, cannot be fitly called sacrifice — so self-denialcannot be said to have place in cases where aman abandons nothing which he might haveobtained.Virtue has not only to struggle with indivi-144 DEONTOLOGY.dual inclination, it has sometimes to struggleagainst the general inclination of the humanspecies, and it is when it triumphs over boththat it exists in its highest degree of perfection.In proportion as a man has acquired a commandover his desires, resistance to their impulsebecomes less and less difficult, till, atlength, in some constitutions, all difficulty-vanishes.In early life, for example, a manmay have acquired a taste for wine, or for aparticular species of food. Finding it disagreewith his constitution, little by little, the uneasinessattendant on the gratification of his appetitebecome so frequent, so constantly presentto his recollection, that the anticipation of thefuture certain pain gains strength enough tooverpower the impression of the present pleasure.The idea of the greater distant sufferinghas extinguished that of the lesser contemporaneousenjoyment. And it is thus that by thepower of association things, which had beenoriginally objects of desire, become objects ofaversion; and, on the other hand, things whichhad been originally objects of aversion, such asmedicines, for instance, become objects of desire.In the case above referred to, the pleasurenot being in possession could not, ofcourse, be sacrificed — it was non-existent ; norwas there self-denial in the case, for as the de-virtueDEFINED. 145sire which had originally been calling for itsgratification was no longer in existence, thereremained no demand to which denial could beopposed. When things are in this situation, thevirtue, so far from being annihilated, has arrivedat the pinnacle of its highest excellence, andshines forth in its brightest lustre. Defectiveindeed would that definition of virtue be, whichexcluded from its pale the very perfection ofvirtue.Effort, undoubtedly, is needful to virtue, andthe seat of that effort, in the case of prudence, isprincipally in the understanding ; in the case ofeffective benevolence, mainly in the will andthe affections.I meet an adversary in the road. He aims ablow at me with a stick. I spring aside andescape the stroke. Here is usefulness — self-preservation; but here is no room for prudence.I hear that an adversary is laying wait for meata certain spot. I avoid the path that leadsto it, and repair to my place of destination bya more circuitous or expensive road. Here isusefulness by self-preservation ; but here, too,there has been exercise of the understanding:.and room, at least, for prudence.And so, when the seat of the effort has beenthe will. I purchase at the baker's shop a loaffor my own dinner ; there is double usefulness —VOL. 1. L146 DEONTOLOGY.-^usefulness to myself by the preservation of life ;to the baker by his profit on the loaf.I am accosted by a famished beggar. Hehas more need of the loaf than I. I give ithim, and lose my dinner. Here, too, is usefulness; but here, also, is virtue : for, to subjectmyself to pain, as here, — to pain in the shape ofhunger, — requires an effort, and that effort Ihave made.But, though the test of virtue be usefulness,or, in other v^ords, the production of happinessvirtue being, as above, that which is beneficial,and vice that which is pernicious to thecommunity, —-there is no identity between virtueand usefulness, for there are many beneficialactions which do not partake of the nature ofvirtue. Virtue demands effort. Of all theactions of man, those which preserve the individual,and those which preserve the species,are undoubtedly the most beneficial to the community.But there is no virtue in these. Asregards effort — though effort is needful to virtue,and to the production of virtue, it is notneedful that the time of the effort should be thevery moment when the virtue is practised. Allthat is necessary is, that the virtuous act shouldbe of that character for the production of which,in the conduct of most men, an effort is required.For the habit, whose formation re-VIRTUE DEFINED. 147quire an effort, acts at last without requiringsuch an impulse. Take, for instance, the confininganger within the limits prescribed by prudenceand benevolence. If there could be novirtue without contemporaneous effort, thenwould virtue, arrived at its consummation, ceaseto be virtue.It is curious enough that in the Aristotelianschool an exclusion is put upon virtue when itis exercised in the highest degree — where anythingremains of inclination to be subdued,however perfect the subjugation may be, thenthe title of virtue is refused, and to the decidedlysuperior claim, the inferior title of sefni-virtue, or half virtue, is awarded.These half-virtues are called by the authorof the Oxford Compendium, * only rudiments,'and evidence of ' good dispositions* towardsa habit of virtue;' but ' entire virtues,' he says,they are by no means to be denominated.*He will, however, have them subject to ' mediocrity'or moderation {j/iediocritas]) as thedominant virtue, after all.According to him, virtue consists in doing,without the cost of any sacrifice, what is right• Compendium, p. 69.f The allusion here is to another Aristotelian tenet, that,in every case, virtue consists — that every species of virtueconsists — in mediocrity.148 DEONTOLOGY.to be done, and for every whole virtue thereis a half-virtue. And, with a limitation, forwhich it is not very easy to discover the reason,the half-virtues are paired off with the wholevirtues.The half-virtues, he avows, have as manyclasses as the whole ones, but they must begrouped under certain genera.And so he goes on to arrange his half virtuesunder two heads — continentia et tolerant, continenceand tolerance, — corresponding, he says,with the concupiscence and irascible appetites ;continence being taken in hand by concupiscence,and tolerance by irascibility. Now thedifference between the whole and the half virtuesbeing constituted only by the presence orabsence of reluctance, there seems no reasonwhy the same division should not apply to everypart of the field of virtue. But the farther heproceeds the deeper is the darkness gatheredround him, and the imperfection of his classificationbecomes palpable. Does he mean bytolerant, the subjection of one's self to bodilypain ? Truly does he, if he is to be believed.In fact he says so, in so many words.*But this tolerance, he continues, is a virtusimperfecta (an imperfect virtue) whose valuePage 70.VIRTUE DEFINED. 149certainly he hesitates to put too prominentlyforward, and whose influence, he fears, may beinterfered with through imbecility of mind.*Tolerance, by which he means the power ofsuffering — and not the virtue of candid andbenevolent judgment — will, after all, be foundto have been too much honored by the Oxonian'seulogy. It is not a half-virtue. It is no virtueat all. It is the physical disposition to resistthe influences of pain, which nature has givento some men and denied to others, withoutadding to or subtracting from the virtues ofthose who have it, or those who have it not.The irascible appetite is that which seeks tovisit with its ill-will the object of its anger —the appetite seeking its gratification by the productionof pain in the breast of him who is thesubject of its visitation. But the seat of thepain produced by anger is really the heart of theangry person. Does this make him virtuous,which it ought to do, according to the Aristoteliandefinition ?Yet, according to the view of the Oxfordteacher of morality, this subject, which he hasleft involved in such midnight obscurity, is importantin the very highest degree. On it dependsthe dreadful difference between salvationand damnation. Yet these very qualities — thisPaste 71.150 DEONTOLOGY.continence and tolerance, which Aristotle dismisseswith the light character of imperfectvirtues — are, in a theological point of view (sosays the Oxonian moralist), not only among themost perfect, but among the most arduousvirtues. According to Aristotle's morality, halfis no more than half; a half-virtue is but ahalf-virtue. According to Oxford theology,half is equal to, if not greater than the whole.But in this, mystery is made out of every thing,and out of nothing ; and the more mystery themore merit.It would, indeed, have been well, if to theAristotelian appetites, the appetite for mysteryhad been added by the Oxonian ; an appetitewhich may be described as being always in theforest of so-called religion, hunting for absurdityand nonsense, and feeding upon its alimentwith a relish directly proportioned to its grossness.Before the title of virtue is demanded for anaction, its conduciveness to happiness must beproved. According to aristotle and his Oxforddisciple, virtue consists in mediocrity — so inLatin, at least ; for it may be thought thatmoderation is the more fit translation of mediocrity; but, at all events, it is medioci^itas. Andhere let it be remarked, by the way, that ifmorality had been intended for use — if it hadbeen thought good enough for the business ofVIRTUE DEFINED. 151life, a living language, and not a dead one,would have been employed for teaching it : thelanguage of the many, not the language of thefew. Now what is the value of a definition ?That we may know the thing defined. Of adescription ? Clearly that we may recognizethe thing described. And let us see whetherthe end is accomplished here.The virtue is named, it is stuck between twoqualities of the same character, which are notvirtues; in one of which the qualities of thevirtues are deficient, in the other they are excessive: here is your designation of virtue, hereis the example, running through the wholestring of virtues. The only thing, then, needful,is to show what, on each occasion, is theexact quantity of the quality out of which virtueis made, to produce it ready for use, correctlyweighed out, neither too much nor too little ;for if you get it not in the exact quantity, getwhat you may, you will not get virtue.But for this all-important object you willfind no help from our moralist. There are, hetells you, three doses of the moral medicine :there is the proper dose, the excessive dose,and the deficient dose. In the proper dosethere is health and safety ; in the others periland perdition. Has he not noted down thesanatory quantity? Not he! Are there no152 DEONTOLOGY.figures, no means of estimate in his prescription?Nothing like them.If a physician treat of diseases, he does notsatisfy himself with scribbling down their names,but thinks it useful, finds it necessary, indeed,to record their symptoms. Not so our moralist.His virtues are names, without symptoms : hetalks of virtue ; but how virtue is to be separatedfrom that which is not virtue, forms noportion of his care.Even common phraseology, the accustomeduse of the terms of right and wrong, justiceand injustice, have, in their habitual employment,a more decided bearing upon the welfareof society than is given to the virtues by theethical Oxonian. All men have a sort of notionthat government and legislation, and religionand morality, have, or ought to have, a beneficialinfluence upon the public happiness. Onwhat other ground, indeed, can they be recommended? But on that ground the Oxfordmoralist makes no stand.But the Oxford Compendium offers a seriesof definitions for virtue, out of which a manmay take which he pleases.1 . * Virtue is an elective habit, consisting inmediocrity (or in a medium) in regard to ourselves,and as a prudent man would prescribe it.'Let who can make sense of this. If it haveVIRTUE DEFINED. 153any meaning, the meaning is, that there are twovirtues, mediocrity and prudence, and that thesetwo are one.2. * Virtue consists in the conformity of ouractions to the divine weill.'Good. But the difficulty is to know thedivine will on every occasion. The phraseologyof the Bible is general, not particular ; sometimes,too, the meaning may be doubtful, andsubject to dispute. And what is the divine will,as taught in the Bible ? What is it, whatcan it be but to produce happiness ? Whatother motive, what other end has it proposed toobedience? The divine will is benignant, benevolent,beneficent. What do these terms implybut happiness-intending, happiness-producing ?So that, if the Oxford moralist has any meaning— if the words are not used for the merepurposes of delusion — his meaning must be ourmeaning. And, in that case, he might haveavoided all ambiguity of expression.3. ' Virtue consists in the conformity of ouractions to right reason.'Right reason ? That very reason which theauthorities of Oxford so often declare to be atvariance with the divine will. Human reason,that is the standard, is it not? Whose rightreason ? Mine, or the man's who differs fromme ? Mine, of course ; for I cannot hold any154 DEONTOLOGY.man's reason to be right which I hold to bewrong. And I hold his to be wrong, becauseI differ from him. Mine, or the Oxford man's ?Mine. The question is settled. And now letme dogmatize like the rest.4. ' Virtue consists ' — the divine will and rightreason consist — ' in mediocrity.'Here, at last, we have a standard by whichto measure the divine will and right reason too,and virtue, as the child of both. And now,reader, all doubts and difficulties being removed,your moral principle is put into your hand,that with it you may work your wonders. Sosays Aristotle, so says Oxford.But what says utility ? What are the reallyvaluable virtues, what the subservient virtueswhich grow out of them ? Taking for thestandard and the test of virtue its conducivenessto well-being, it is believed, as has beensaid above, that all the modifications of virtuemay be arranged under the two heads of prudenceand beneficence. Beyond these there isno intrinsically valuable virtue. To one or otherof these every useful moral quality will befound to belong. These, then, may be calledthe primary virtues. Take away prudence, takeaway benevolence, from the tree of morals, youstrip it of all its flowers and fruits, of itsstrength, its beauty, and its use. You have aVIRTUE DEFINED. 155worthless, unproductive trunk, smitten withbarrenness, the mere cumbered of the ground.The value of the whole tribe of ancillary orsecondary virtues depends altogether on theirsubserviency to these two primary virtues.Hence it follows — 1. That if the primary virtueswere not useful, neither could the secondaryvirtues be so. 2. That their utility must consistin advancing the same ends which it isthe object of the primary virtues to advance.3. The tendency of the primary virtues is invariablytowards usefulness, in the case of someperson or other on whom they are exercised,whether useful or not to human society on thewhole. 4. The usefulness of the secondaryvirtues is to be measured by their tendency toproduce those effects which it is the tendencyof the primary virtues to produce. 5. Theirusefulness must be measured by the degree inwhich they contribute to advance those ends,which are the ends of the primary virtues.Occasion will be found to bring the whole of thesecondary virtues under review, and to testtheir value by the principles which have beenhere developed.The modes in which the various virtues maybe brought into operation — by discourse, bywriting, or by deportment — belong to the practicalbranch of the subject.156 DEONTOLOGY.CHAPTER XI.Self-interest, OR SELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE.Nature, artless and untutored nature, engagesman in the pursuit of immediate pleasure, andin the avoidance of immediate pain. Whatreason can effect is to prevent the sacrifice ofa greater distant pleasure, or the visitation ofa greater distant pain in exchange for thosewhich are present ; in other words, to preventa miscalculation in the amount of happiness.In this, too, consists the whole of virtue, whichis but the sacrifice of a smaller present satisfaction,in the shape of a temptation, to a satisfactionof greater magnitude, but more remote,which is, in fact, a recompense. What canbe done for morality, in the field of self-interest,is to show how much a man's own happinessdepends upon himself, how much on the effectshis conduct produces in the breasts of thosewith whom he is connected by the ties ofmutual sympathy; how much the interest whichothers feel in his happiness, and how much thedesire to promote it depend on his own doings.Suppose a man wedded to intoxication. HeSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 157will be taught to consider and weigh the amountof pleasure and pain growing out of his conduct.He will view, on one side, the intensity andthe duration of the pleasurable excitement.This will be the account on the side of profit.Per contra, he will be led to estimate —1. Sickness and other effects prejudicial tohealth. 2, Future contingent pains, growingout of probable debility and disease. 3. Theloss of time and the loss of money, and thesein proportion to the value of time and moneyin his individual case. 4. The pain producedin the minds of those who are dear to him ;as, for instance, a parent, a wife, a child.5. The disrepute attached to the practice ; theloss of reputation in the eyes of others. 0. Therisk of legal punishment, and the disgraceattaching to it ; as when the public exhibitionof that temporary insanity, produced by intoxication,is visited by the laws. 7. The riskof punishments attached to crimes which a manis liable to commit while gratifying the propensityto inebriety. 8. The misery producedby apprehension of punishment in a future stateof being.All these will probably lead him to discoverthat he purchases the pleasures of intoxicationat too great a cost. He will see that morality,which is virtue, and happiness, which is DEONTOLOGY.interest, counsel him to avoid excess. He hasthe same motive to subdue his intemperatepropensities that a man has, who, in the pursuitof wealth, can choose between gainingmuch and gaining little. Doxology asks noultimate sacrifice ; her lessons propose a balanceof enjoyment to the man with whom she reasons.He is in search of pleasure ; she encourageshim in the search, she allows it to bewise, honorable, and virtuous ; but she entreatshim not to err by an erroneous arithmetic ; sherepresents a futurity, a probably adjacent futurity,with its pleasures and pains. She askswhether the enjoyment which is taken to-daywill not have to be repaid tomorrow, or theday after, with usurious and intolerable interest.She implores that the same prudent calculationwhich every wise man applies to his dailyconcerns, may be applied to the most importantof all concerns, those of felicity and misery.Doxology professes no scorn for that veryselfishness to which vice itself appeals. Shesurrenders every point which cannot be provedto be beneficial to the individual. She consentseven to set aside the code of the lawgiver andthe dogmas of the divine. She takes for grantedthat these cannot be unfriendly to her influences,that neither legislation nor religion are hostileto morality ; and she insists that morality shallSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 159not be opposed to happiness. Make out to heracase against human felicity, and she is smittenwith silence and with helplessness. Sheacknowledges that even the drunkard is proposingto himself a proper end ; but she is ableto show him that his end will not be accomplishedby drunkenness. She assumes nothingbut that which no man will deny — namely,that all men wish to be happy. She has nopurpose to answer by despotic dogmatizing.Her mission is to invite to a sober reckoning ofgood and evil. She has no interest in this orthat course of action, in one result or another,but in so far as there is to be something ofhappiness abstracted from the whole. All thatshe proposes is to put a bridle upon precipitancy,to prevent rashness from taking irrevocablesteps, and entering upon foolish bargains.She has no quarrel with any species ofpleasure which does not associate itself witha more than counterbalancing portion of pain.In a word, she ministers to selfishness, and, likea wise and active steward, makes the most ofevery man's rent-roll of felicity.But she is not blind nor thoughtless. Sheknows that the present will soon be the past,and that the opinions of this hour will be modifiedby the experience of the next. Hence shedesires that the important element of that which160 DEONTOLOGY.is to be may not be left out of the calculation ofthat which is. The teaching is — Weigh everything,weigh every thing well that belongs tothe bargain. Make the most of what is givenyou to enjoy now ; but if suffering is behind,if enjoyments greater than those you are graspingare to be surrendered, as the paymentfor them, where is your prudence ? If, for thepurchase of the enjoyment you covet, you inflictpain upon others greater than your enjoyment,where is your benevolence ? And if, from theinfliction of that pain upon others, they retaliateon you with interest, or abstract from yourenjoyments a greater sum than that of whichyou deprived them, where, again, is your prudence?In fact, the self-esteem which takes not intoaccount any thing future, has as little in itof prudence as of benevolence. It is truly thekilling the goose for the golden egg. * Myself,'myself,' is but the cry of insensibility tohappiness or unhappiness from external sources ;and insensibility to the pressure of evil is aclear advantage to its possessor, provided thatinsensibility brings with it no reaction fromothers.Potion's self-esteem lessened his sense ofhis own misfortune. There was no benevolence,no courtesy in his representing himself as anSELF-regarding PRUDENCE. IGlobject of greater admiration to his fellow-suffererthan his fellow-sufferer was to himself. Thiswas mere arrogance.Vitellius's self-esteem led him to demandrespect, because he had possessed the highestportion of prosperity. If that consoled him, somuch the better for him, and nothing the worsefor others.But self regarding prudence is not only avirtue — it is a virtue on which the very existenceof the race depends. If I thought moreabout you than I thought about myself, I shouldbe the blind leading the blind, and we shouldfall into the ditch together. It is as impossiblethat your pleasures should be better to methan my own, as that jour eye-sight should bebetter to me than my own. My happiness andmy unhappiness are as much a part of me asany of my Cities or organs, and I might aswell profess to feel your tooth-ache more keenlythan you do, as to be more interested in yourwell-being than in my own well-being.There are, however, many who so exaggeratethe selfish principle as to think that, by swellingtheir notions of themselves, they are stillserving their race.But how ? Does a man's pride or vanitymake others happier? If so, there is doublegain. We have got hold of a pleasure, and soVOL. I. i\I162 DEONTOLOGY.have others. Does it not affect others, eitherfor better or worse ? Still there is a gain, forman has a pleasure in his own glorification. Doeshis pride or his vanity bring annoyance to thebosoms of others ? There is something throwninto the other scale ; the calculation must bemade ; all the annoyances suffered by all thosewho are annoyed, must be added together,and weighed against the pleasures of the man'spride or vanity. It will be, perhaps, foundthat the annoyances caused to others are proportionedto the intensity of his own self-gratification.It is clear that, in such a case, thebalance will be increased in proportion.The sun of Doxology irradiates the adjacentregions of prudence and benevolence. By itlight is substituted to darkness, order to chaos.It solves all intricate problems, and all perplexingdifficulties vanish before it. By it alonecan be traced out the affinities, — from it alonecan be deduced the relations between the severalclasses of moral qualities ; through it alonecan the limits between virtue and vice be discovered.All anomalies may be reduced by it, andby it alone, to harmony and regularity. By it,and by it alone, a variety of distinctions, whichhave stood in an unintelligible or insulated shape,may be brought into connection or contrast.It is the spear of Ithuriel, by which evil andSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 163good may be detected, and made to presentthemselves in their own true characters.There has been among moralists a vehementdisposition to shut out the influence of the self-regardingprinciple from the mind. Why thisreluctance to admit, as a motive, that which isand must be the strongest of all motives — aman's regard for himself? Why is not self-loveto be brought into the field ? It is from a sortof bashfulness — a disposition to consider thatprinciple to which all the actions and passionsof men owe their birth, as the part Jwnteusc ofour nature.But with the recognition of the principle,that an enlightened regard to self-interestis the best guarantee for good conduct,the knowledge and the practice of moralityhave undoubtedly made considerable progress,and delightful it is to trace the slow but visiblemarch of virtue. It will lose nothing of itsstability, nothing of its power, dien it isdiscovered to be founded on interest. Thatinterest some men will not see, and others willturn away with scorn from the contemplationof it. Declaimers would ask whether, in anage like this, which they call degenerate, a manwould sacrifice his life for the benefit of hiscountry. Yes!There is many and many a man, who, upon164 DEONTOLOGY.such calls as have formerly met with the likeobedience, would, for his country, surrenderhis existence with pleasure. Does it followthat, in this or in any thing else, he would actwithout an interest ? No such thing. Nothinglike it : it is not in man's nature.And precisely the same argument holds goodin man's aberrations from duty. They are themiscalculations of interest.There is no man doth a wrong for the wrong'ssake ; but thereby to purchase himself profit orpleasure.' This grand truism was not hiddenfrom Lord Bacon. His was a mind to be struckwith the beauty of truth wherever it met him ;but his was not an age when to pursue it to theutmost was either practicable or safe.Yet he could not fail to draw the deduction,that if vices were upon the whole account profitable,the virtuous man would be the sinner.The sacrifice of interests presents itself abstractedly,as something grand and virtuous,because it is taken for granted that the pleasureone man flings away must necessarily begathered up by another. And supposing nopleasure were lost in the transfer, and no pleasuregained, it is clear that the whole sumof happiness would continue just as it was,notwithstanding a million shifting from onepossessor to another. But in the commerce ofSELF-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 165happiness, as in that of wealth, the prominentquestion is, how to make circulation assist production.Hence, it is no more fit to call disinterestednessa virtue in moral economy, than tocall expenditure a merit in political economy.Disinterestedness may exist among the rashand the reckless ; but a man disinterested onreflection is happily seldom to be found. Showme the man who throws away more of theelements of felicity than he creates, and I willshow you a fool and a prodigal. Show me theman who deprives himself of more good thanhe communicates to another, and 1 will showyou a man ignorant of the elementary arithmeticof morality.Out of self-regarding prudence, as a primaryvirtue, grow temperance and continence, assecondary virtues. The breach of them bringsthe actor into the regions of pain ; the habitualbreach of them leaves a result of unhappiness,upon which the eye of prudence cannot turnwithout discerning the balance of suffering thatis left behind.166 DEONTOLOGY.CHAPTER XII.PRUDENCE AS RESPECTS OTHERS, OR EXTRA-regardingPRUDENCE.Though it belongs to Government to giveincrease and extension to the connection whichexists between prudence and effective benevolencewherever the political sanction will apply,it is the duty of the public teacher of moralityto point out their accordance, and to give to thataccordance all the action and effect of which itis susceptible through his influence.It is to public opinion, or in other words, tothe popular or moral sanction, that we mustmainly look for the action of the social on theself-regarding feelings. Of the tribunal of publicopinion every individual of the community maybea member ; every one who gives to hisestimate of the conduct of others any expressionby words or deeds is an acting member, andevery man who takes upon himself to write is aleading member ; his influence will be proportionedto the approbation he receives from hisreaders, and the strength of the impression heconveys to their minds ; and again, on theEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 167number and influence of such readers. Totheir concurrence and co-operation he mustturn for the measures of his own success.A man is prompted by ill-will to aim a blowat another. His ill-will may be restrained by theapprehension that the blow will be returned bythe person at whom it is aimed, or by a thirdparty who is a looker-on ; or, secondly, he may berestrained by the apprehension of legal punishment.In one case the physical, in the other thepolitical sanction is operative ; and there isin neither any demand for the application of theDeontological principle. But where these fail,where they provide no adequate remedy, comethe popular and the social sanctions, to fill upthat portion of the field of action which isunoccupied by other motives. These twosanctions are intimately and closely allied, forthe social relations stretch naturally and necessarilyinto the whole frame of society. Bysome social link, more or less efficient, almostevery man is bound to the great body of thepublic. The circle widens, the intimacystrengthens as society becomes more and moreintelligent. The interest in a family extendsto a tribe, from a tribe to a province,from a province to a nation, from a nation tomankind. And as political and Deontologicalscience become better understood, the dependsDEONTOLOGY.once of every man upon the good opinion ofall besides will be increased, and the moralsanction grow stronger and stronger. Itsstrength too will be greatly heightened by amore correct appreciation of its own power, sothat a period may be anticipated in which thepublic mind will not err in its estimate of duty,and when the moral will supersede a portion ofthe political sanction.But to be a little more particular. The influenceof an act upon others whose happiness isaffected by it, may be fitly considered withreference to the particular case. It is assumed,that a man by a blow inflicts corporal injury uponanother. He who gives the blow has, in the firstplace, to apprehend retaliation in the shapeof the same or similar personal injury. Thisapprehension is the physical sanction. Thepolitical or legal sanction, the risk of the interferenceof the magistrate, may, and probablywill apply here, though that interference canin fact be safely grounded on no other principlethan that on which Doxology itself rests,namely, the greatest happiness principle. Butwhether or not the political or the physicalsanction are called into exertion, the moralsanction will, at all events, be put into operation.For, as experience and observation have taughtthat such deeds of violence are the sources ofEXTRA-regarding PRUDENCE. 169suffering, disapprobation will have place, dependingfor its amount on the degree of sufferinginflicted. Nor can the sympathetic and socialsanction be without its effect ; for though inthe rude states of society that sanction may beso weak as to produce no restraint, and thoughin every state of society it is susceptible of greatvariation, as between individual and individual,yet in a period of civilization like that to whichthese thoughts are addressed, the social sanctionbecomes highly operative, and it will be operativein cases where the more general moral sanctionmay sometimes fail of its effect. He whowould show indifference to the happiness ofthose with whom he is wholly unconnected,might be less disposed to show indifference tothat of his friends or family, on whom he moreimmediately depends for his own happiness.As far as it exists, though spread over a narrowerfield, the sympathetic sanction mustbe stronger than the moral. For as fewpersons can contemplate altogether withoutuneasiness the sufferings of a fellow creature,especially if presented in a particular mannerto their perception or imagination, still less canthey witness with indifference those of a friend.The sense of sympathy is universal. Perhapsthere never existed a human being who hadreached full age without the experience of170 DEONTOLOGY.pleasure at another's pleasure, of uneasiness atat another's pain. It may be narrowed to adomestic circle, and that circle may be as it wereat war with mankind. Community of interest,similarity of opinion, are sources whence itsprings. This sympathy then will operate as arestraint against the giving pain. It will alwaysoperate except where some stronger counter-motiveacts in a contrary direction. And allthese sanctions act with accumulating power ;for as the mind of individual man, if looked atfrom generation to generation, will be foundincreasing in strength and steadiness, in theknowledge of, and the command over its severalfaculties, and in the amount of observation andexperience which it accumulates for its own useand guidance, so it may reasonably be expected,that the several sanctions which areassociated with the universal mind will obtainmore and more of their fit development ; and sowith the species. There is a period in whichthe self-regarding principle is the only one invery active operation ; it occupies the wholesphere of mind, scarcely going beyond the merephysical sanction ; so that conduct is little morethan a grasping at immediate enjoyment, withoutany calculation of remote happiness or unhappiness.This is the mere sensual state, incloseassociation with which come the irascibleEXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 171or dissocial affections (as they are called by-aristotle),which, though so distinct in character,operate towards the same end. The sensual affectionsare checked by the operation of the irascibleexcited in those among whom the sensualseek their gratification ; by the fear of retaliationand retribution as the natural consequences ofresentment. It has been remarked that, as inthe individual, so in society at large the affectionof sympathy is in its weakest state during theearliest period of existence. As age and experienceadvance it receives additional force andefficiency. It extends its influence for themost part with the extension of existence,beginning with the small immediate relationswhere the ties of consanguinity, affinity, domesticcontract, or friendly intercourse, are strongest,and advancing with experience and mentalculture into a widening field of action. Itslinks become multifarious, and capable ofgreat extension and increase. They spreadinto divers circles, domestic, social, professional,civic, provincial, national, ultra-national, universal; some independant of and others connectedwith each other. And in so much and so far asthe sympathetic affections can be called intoaction, their tendencies must be to increase thehappiness of him who exercises them ; while ifthese happiness-producing tendencies lead to172 DEONTOLOGY.no consequences of a contrary effect, or to noconsequences of equal amount, the result is aclear accession to the general stock of happiness.And thus even the self-regarding affection,employed as a source of selfish enjoyment,brings into action a great mass of public happiness.The very contagion of the self-regardingprinciple is beneficent. A man witnessingthe services rendered by his neighbour, to hisneighbour's neighbour, contracts and catches,as it were, a propensity to requite the friendlinesswith his own friendliness, to bestowupon the author of benefits, benefits like thosehe has bestowed. The cheapest mode ofrequital, and considering its extreme facility notthe least efficacious, is on all occasions to give totothe benevolent affections an outward expression,to bring into conversation as frequentlyas practicable the language of goodwill. Topraise the virtuous doings of another man is todispense a positive recompense to virtue, and atthe same time to direct the popular sanction tothe encouragement of similar acts, and thusdoes the principle of self produce the socialaffection, and the social in its turn the popular;and all combine together to increase the generalgood.But the sympathies excited in favor of anindividual, are they dependent on the influenceEXTRA-RtGAIlDlNG PRUDENCE. 173of his actions upon the general good ? Is a manjudged of by the conduciveness of his conductto the public happiness ? Alas, not always, forsympathy to a great extent, approbation to avast amount, have frequently been excited, notby acts productive of good, but by acts productiveof evil ; not by conduct favourable to humanhappiness, but detrimental and destructive tohappiness in the highest degree: — by victoryand conquest for example, by depredation,devastation and slaughter on the widest scale,or by the acquisition or possession of power;power in unbounded quantity, however obtained,however exercised.And even with respect to acts whose consequenceshave been in some respects beneficial tothe community, it may have happened that thebenefit was neither pure nor preponderant. Nowas the tendency of sympathy is always to producea repetition of the act which it approves, themoral sanction may be misdirected to thecreation of acts pernicious on the whole to thewell-being of society. An act which in itsearliest and most obvious effects is beneficial,may, when the whole of its effects are seentogether, and calmly calculated, be upon thebalance pernicious. So an act, whose instantand apparent consequence is pernicious, mayupon the balance be beneficial. In both cases174 DEONTOLOGY.it is clear that the sympathy which should lead'to the production of the one act, and theantipathy which would prevent the productionof the other, would be alike injurious to thepublic happiness, and thence at variance withthe sound principles of morality. To detectthe fallacies which lie hid under the surface, toprevent the aberrations of sympathy and antipathy,to bring to view and to call into activitythose springs of action whose operation leadsto an undoubted balance of happiness, is theimportant part of moral science.The Deontologist, it must always be remembered,has no coercive power, and it may perhapsbe somewhat too hastily inferred that all hisoccupation will end in the putting together anumber of sentences, inoperative in their influenceon human conduct.But it is presumed that three favorableconsequence, at least, may result from hislabors. Where he cannot create a motive hemay point out its existence. He may bring toview, and show the bearing upon humanfelicity, of those springs of action which form apart of every man's mind, however hidden fromobservation, or inert in operation. He maypoint out consequences of action and forbearancewhich had not presented themselves to theactor.EXTRA-REGARDING PRUDENCE. 175Again, he may give more efficiency to thepopular moral sanction ; he may proclaim itsordinances ; and if he is unable to do this, he maytake upon himself the initiative of its laws, andpropose for public consideration appropriatetopics to aid its recognition. Motions, at least,in favor of the public veal may emanate fromhim with the chance of approving themselves tothe minds of those to whom they are addressed.And lastly, he may influence those in whosehands are the powers of legislation, or theexecutive powers of the state, to give to thepopular sanction the stronger influence of thepolitical, wherever it is applicable to the productionof that end, which cannot be too oftenbrought to view — the maximization of the publichappiness.Intimately connected with the dictates ofprudence are those of beneficence. To a greatextent, the prudential considerations prescribebenevolent action. The self-regarding calculationcannot leave out of view the happiness ofothers.176 DEONTOLOGY.CHAPTER XIII.EFFECTIVE BENEVOLENCE.Effective benevolence has been already introducedto notice, as consisting of two branches,the positive, or pleasure-conferring branch ; thenegative, or that which abstains from pain-givingto others. The word benevolence impliesthe disposition to do the acts of beneficence.The field of benevolence, therefore, isco-extensive with that of beneficence ; notthat either of them has necessarily the other forits companion ; there may be benevolence, withoutthe power of bringing its impulses intoaction, and there may be beneficence, withoutthe slightest portion of good-will.The good produced by effective benevolenceis small in proportion to that produced by thepersonal motives. The sympathetic affectionsare not, cannot be, as strong as the self-regardingaffections. The wealth transferred, themeans of subsistence circulated, the abundanceproduced for the sake of others, are trifling, whenweighed against the amount of that which isset in motion for our own sakes. That whichEFFECTIVE Benevolence — NEGATIVE. 177is given without equivalent is little indeed ascontrasted with that which is paid for or barteredin the way of commerce. The voluntarycontributions to government, for the publicbenefit, bear a small proportion to the sumswhich are levied by compulsory requisitions.In the eye of the sentimentalist, benevolence,whether followed or not by beneficence, is aptto engross the greatest portion of his favor,and his efforts are directed to obtain for it thegreatest portion of public applause. But benevolenceis a useless tree, unless it bears thefruits of beneficence; and feelings, by whatevernames they are called, are wholly valueless,unless in so far as they are the prompters ofbeneficent actions. Benevolence standing aloneis but the shadow of virtue ; it is only whenit becomes efficient that it partakes of the substanceof virtue.To a great extent, it must be added, thedictates of prudence prescribe the laws of effectivebenevolence, and occupy, in mutual harmony,the same part of the field of duty. Aman who injures himself more than he benefitsothers by no means serves the cause of virtue,for he diminishes the amount of happiness.Benevolence, or sympathy, may be a cause offruitless pain, where it cannot exert itself inacts of beneficence. Tt is no part of the re-VOL. I. N178 DEONTOLOGY.requirements of virtue that a man should exposehimself to witness pains, on whose removal ordiminution he can exercise not any the slightestinfluence. No good is done to yourself, andnone to others, by throwing yourself in the wayof suffering, unmitigated in itself, or of whichyou are certain that it cannot be mitigated byyou.Efficient benevolence is action ; it supposesthe existence of good which is susceptible ofincrease, or of evil susceptible of being lessenedor removed. The life painted by the poets ofElysium, where every man is sufficient to himself,must be dull and dreary indeed. It mustbe intolerable — it must be pure selfishness,disassociated from benevolence. Take the elementsof pleasure away, and of what is leftbehind you may make happiness, when you canmake a palace out of smoke and moonshine.With a man's elevation in society, the influenceof his vices and virtues in society extends.The powers of beneficence and maleficence increasetogether. The amours of Henry theFourth produced an incalculable mass of misery.He made war upon Spain for the purpose ofgetting hold of the wife of another. He sacrificed,every now and then, a portion of hisarmy, for the sake of having his pleasure withhis belle Gabrielle. Let those who wdl, giveIEFFECTIVE BENEVOLENCE NEGATIVE. 179their sympathy, their approbation, to such anuisance as this monarch was ; but why shouldwe? If he had lost an arm or a leg whilepursuing his pleasures, great would have beenthe clamour, unbounded the expression of interestand sympathy. His partizans lost theirlives by thousands, and what cared he ?To the power of situation the power of intellectmay be added, to give sanction to goodor evil. Charles the Twelfth would have beenmore mischievous, had he not been mad. Hisobstinacy, in doing mischief by wholesale, wasjust as bad as Henry the Fourth's amours. Forselfish enjoyments in one shape, Henry sacrificedhis thousands ; for selfish enjoymentsin another shape, Charles did the like. Whenthe laws of morality are understood, when thepopular sanctions become properly enlightened,the misery-spreading freaks of monarchs will beno longer practised on mankind.As in the political field of action many ofthe claims of prudence are under the controlof the legislator, so many of the claims ofeffective benevolence scarcely belong to theempire of the Deontologist private. It may notbe out of place, however, to remark, thatnothing but the light of utility will convey thepatriot safely through the mazes of politics.Here, as elsewhere, the dogmatism about right180 DEONTOLOGY.and rights has often led men astray, confused theirhonest purposes, and nullified theirbenevolently-intended heroism. Opposition, revolt, may, ormay not be a public virtue. To allow of resistance,on the score of a greater general utility tobe obtained by resistance than by submission,is to put a buckler in the hands of liberty. Toenjoin resistance, on the score of some imaginaryinjunction of the law of nature or revelation, isto place a torch in the hands of fanaticism.When effective benevolence is brought intothe realms of Doxology, when the greatestgood, the universal happiness, is made thecentral point round which all action revolves,the golden era of moral science will commence.When its presence becomes universal, its influenceomnipresent, the demand for punishmentwill be superseded, to a great extent, by thepowers of reward. No pleasure will be unnecessarilywasted ; no pain unnecessarily inflicted.Hitherto a feeble ray of universal benevolencehas thrown an uncertain glimmer over the fieldof human action. Sometimes it has been absorbedin unfruitful meditation ; at others it hasexhaled in periodical discourse, clouded too oftin mystery, or dispersed by the storms of selfishpassions.The negative branch of effective benevolenceis the abstinence from action, where that absti-EFFECTIVE BENEVOLENCE — NEGATIVE. 18.1hence either removes a pain or creates a pleasurein the minds or persons of others. Thisbranch of virtue presupposes the power ofinflicting suffering or of conferring enjoyment;and its operation is to arrest the consequenceof that disposition which, if allowed to act,would increase the sum of misery or lessen thesum of happiness.Its object is to arrest the word or the deedwhich would inflict evil on another, and, ifpossible, to check the thought which wouldcreate or excite the evil-inflicting or evil-intendingword or deed. In order to give it efficiency,it will be well to trace up to their origin themotives which are unfriendly to this class ofvirtues. And they will be found to have theirsource —1. In the interest of self, which may onsome occasions be indeed in hostility with thebenevolent sympathies, and on such occasionsthe benevolent sympathies must succumb.There is no help for it ; they are the weaker.Happily such cases are rare, for misery is seldominflicted without a reaction on the part ofthe sufferer. A man cannot hate another withoutexciting some portion of hate in return.He cannot visit another with unfriendlinesswithout curtailing the friendly affections of thatother towards him. There is no voice, whether182 DEONTOLOGY.of malevolence or benevolence, without an echo ;no act, whether of good or evil, without avibration. And this brings the benevolence offorbearance into the domains of self-regardingprudence, to which, after all, benevolence mustmake its final appeal.2. The love of ease, heedlessness, is anothercause of the absence of the essential principle.There are men who will not take the troubleof avoiding to give pain to others. They haveno particular desire to intrude an annoyance,but will not bestir themselves to preventthat annoyance. Their laziness is, in a word,stronger than their benevolence. They wouldrather sleep on their pillows than rouse themselvesto exertion. They give precipitateopinions to avoid the labors of investigation.They do hasty deeds, as if for the very purpose ofcompromising themselves. They do not chooseto ask themselves whether they ought to doubt;still less are they willing to apply the oldaphorism — ' If you doubt, abstain.' Their loveof ease is flattered by a prompt decision — bygetting rid of a question, the discussion orexamination of which would have been a demandon their attention. They fancy they have relievedthemselves of an embarrassment by aperemptory verdict.3. The interests of pride and vanity oftenEFFECTIVE BENEVOLENCE — NEGATIVE. 183check the dictates of essential benevolence.These may be called the interests of the trumpet,in whose sounds are drowned the voice ofphilanthropy.Pride and vanity dictate dogmatism. Theyassume superiority, and that superiority isalways seeking to break out into speech. Insome act of another they find cause for reprehension.Regardless of consequences, theyreprehend.Benevolence would ask whether the reprehensionwas likely to do good either to thereprehended or the reprehended ; but pride andvanity are too proud and vain to seek or to takeadvice from morality.Sometimes they intrude inappropriate or ill-timedadvice. There benevolence might havetaught them to refrain. It might be a waste ofwords on their part, producing on the mindof the advised person an impression of uncompensatedpain ; pain far greater than the pleasurewhich the pride or the vanity felt on givingtheir lecture.There are other occasions where pride andvanity volunteer information, neither desirednor welcomed. The information may look likea reproach to him whom it pretends to instruct;it often assumes the garb of assumption and184 DEONTOLOGY.of dogmatism. What wonder it should berebelled against !In all these cases, and there are many moresuch, effective benevolence puts in its veto.4. The interests of ill-will or antipathy.These take many forms, and require to bedoubly bridled, for they are pernicious to bothparties, and leave on every side a balance ofevil. And they are the more pernicious, becausethey do not always exhibit the malevolenceof their origin.They are sometimes moved by the rival positionof another. There is a clashing of interests,producing coldness, dislike, or hatred. Hencea desire to inflict pain upon a rival.Ill-will may have grown out of injuries doneby another. He may have interfered with yourlove of ease ; he may have wounded your prideor your vanity ; he may have wronged yourfriend ; he may have misrepresented your politicalor religious opinions. These are no reasonsthat you should do him mischief. Moralityrequires, your own interest requires, that youshould forbear from doing him mischief. Castup the results — the pains of ill-will, the pleasuresof revenge, and then the reaction ofrevenge upon yourself, and possibly upon others.You will find the balance against you, asEFFECTIVE BENEVOLENCE NEGATIVE. 185concerns your own account — the self-regardingaccount ; and as respects the object of yourill-will, it is an account of suffering withoutdeduction.Besides, you are giving evidence not only ofimmorality, but of weakness. You have nopower over the mind of him who is obnoxious toyou : so you exhibit, at the same time, a wantof self-control and a malignity of intention, —proofs of mental weakness and moral defects.In difference of taste, ill-will may find anothermotive for acts which benevolence wouldcheck. Such differences have often been madethe plea for words of hatred and deeds of hatred.And into no part of the field of action hasmalevolence rushed with greater malignity.Here, especially, is there a demand for theavoidance of pain-giving. The demand is,indeed, everywhere where the pain-giving isuseless or baneful, and it is eminently so here.In fine, effective benevolence, in its negativerequirements, exacts that, on all and everyoccasion, the infliction of evil shall be abstainedfrom, except where its infliction shuts out agreater evil, or brings with it a more than counterbalancinggood.Its action being the avoidance of annoyanceto others, it is important, for the correct andcomplete estimate of its operation, that all the186 DEONTOLOGY.sources of annoyance should be studied. Inorder to provide the remedy, the cause must beknown. And this is the more necessary, asthere are multitudinous evils, of whose existence,or at all events of their pain-giving consequences,men seem to be too little aware.Consult the various classes of pain and pleasure; consult their modifications ; look to theannoyances of which the bodily senses aresusceptible, those, of course, which it does notbelong to penal legislation to visit — the painsof privation, the pleasures of good reputation ;in a word, the whole store-house of satisfactionand of suffering. Take into account the generalsusceptibilities of men, and, as far as can beascertained, the peculiar susceptibilities of theindividual.Secondary virtues, growing out of this branchof Doxology, are the virtues of good-breeding,which correspond pretty nearly to that classwhich the French call * la petite morale.' Good-breedingis that deportment, on occasions ofinferior, and when separately taken, of trivialimportance, by which those acts are abstainedfrom which give annoyance to others. Whereonsimilar occasions, the acts are done whichgive pleasure to others, they belong to thepositive or active, not the negative or essentialbranch. But it is to the latter that most of theDefective BENEVOLENCE — NEGATIVE. 187laws of good-breeding must be referred, andhere the demand for its exercise is constant,and the field of its action wide. The mostordinary and indispensable personal prudenceoperates as a bridle upon rudeness and illmanners. The disposition to contribute, in allunforbidden shapes, to the gratification of others,and to refrain from all that can annoy them, istrue politeness.188 DEONTOLOGY.CHAPTER XIV.EFFECTIVE BENEVOLENCE POSITIVE.The negative branch of effective benevolencecomprises, as we have seen, those acts, or ratherthat absence of action, by which the givingpain to others is avoided ; the positive branchconsists of those acts by which pleasure is communicated.This branch is far less extensivethan the other, inasmuch as the powers possessed(by the majority of the community atleast) to communicate happiness to others, arefar less extensive than the powers of causingmisery to others. Nearly every man has overnearly every other man around him the powerof inflicting injury in various forms. There aremany pains which a man can cause another tosuffer which have no corresponding pleasuresthat he can offer to that other to enjoy. Wehave no sense which may not be offended at thewill of another, but those senses are not equallysubject to him who seeks to gratify them againstor without our will. Any man may strike, orwound another, but it is not the privilege ofevery man to be able to add to another's happierBENEVOLENCE — POSITIVE. Isness. The limitation of this power is the necessaryconsequence of the fact, that man is, toa very great extent, the creator and the guardianof his 0W71 happiness. That portion for whichhe depends on others is small — that for whichhe depends only on himself is great ; and inthis power over his own happiness, that happinessgreatly consists. Who would judge ofpains and pleasures as accurately as he whoexperiences them ? Who, if it were possible,would put the dominion of his enjoyments andsufferings into another's hands ? To whosenever-ceasing watchfulness — to whose self-devotedsympathies — to whose omniscient wisdom,would any man give over, for a single day,all the sources of pains and pleasures withinand without him ? One moment of forgetfulness,one moment of malevolence, one momentof ignorance, and the fabric of felicity might beshattered. Happy, indeed, is it for man thathe is the master of his own well-being, andthat, with few and rare exceptions, he has nobodyto thank but himself if he fail to obtain it.But this positive effective benevolence — whatdoes it demand but deprivation ? In as far asit is called into action, is it not impoverishment !Does it not take away more than it substitutesin return ? Not so ; for then it gets into theregions of imprudence ; and prudence is man's190 DEONTOLOGY.primary virtue. Nothing is gained to happinessif prudence loses more than benevolence wins.There is, however, a large portion of benevolencewhich may be called into activity withoutany sacrifice at all. Men there have been, andare, who deem all services done to others assomething lost to themselves ; — a narrow and abaneful sentiment ; for it is the lot of every oneto have the power of conferring favors at no costat all, or at so small a cost as not to be worth acalculation. To make a favor of that whichshould be a spontaneous, or at all events a willingcontribution to the happiness of another, is,in common parlance, to give evidence of a low-tonedspirit of philanthropy, while, on the otherhand, no beneficence looks so bright in thepopular eyes, none is, in fact, so praiseworthyas that which avoids the parade of its sacrifices.And the popular sanction is here in accordancewith the Deontological principle.Benevolence and beneficence are maximizedwhen, at the least expence to himself, a manproduces the greatest quantity of happiness toothers. To lose sight of his own happinesswould not be virtue, but folly. His own happinessforms, or ought to form, as large a portionof the whole mass of happiness spreadamong the community, as does the happiness ofany other individual.EFFECTIVE BENEVOLENCE — POSITIVE. 191Now, suppose any man to confer upon othersa smaller portion of happiness than he himselfsacrificed — that is, suppose him, in order togive a certain amount of pleasure to another, togive up a greater amount of pleasure of hisown, this would not be virtue — it would befolly. It would not be effective benevolence, itwould be miscalculation ; by it the whole amountof happiness would clearly be diminished.This, indeed, is a course of action whichcould not intentionally have place. No saneperson wastes, or desires to waste, happiness,still less his own happiness.Every man's necessary impulse is towardsthe economy of happiness. If he made a sacrificeof his own happiness to the happiness ofothers, it could by possibility be in no other interestthan that of economy ; for unless in someshape or other he derived more pleasure fromthe sacrifice than he expected to derive in abstainingfrom making the sacrifice, he wouldnot, he could not make it. Suppose other pleasuresequal — that is, the pleasures sacrificedand the pleasures conferred — suppose nothingis lost in the transfer, then come the pleasuresof sympathy, pleasures which form as large aportion of a man's happiness as any merelyself-regarding pleasure. They turn the scale ;and of their magnitude the man who seeks192 DEONTOLOGY.them is the most competent, not to say the only-judge.His miscalculation does not alter the question.The province of Doxology is to teachhim a proper arithmetic, is to lay before him afit estimate of pain and pleasure — a budget ofreceipt and disbursement, out of every operationof v^^hich he is to draw a balance of good.And here, be it remarked by the way, thatthe Deontological teacher, whether engaged indiscourse or in writing, is himself an exampleof the application of the principle of positiveeffective benevolence. Let his exertions be encouragedby the thought, that he is perhapsproducing more happiness at less expense thancould be produced by any other means. At acost of a few well-timed words is he not expandingthe domains of happiness ? Are notthe truths, which he circulates at the waste ofa little breath, or at the trouble of recordingthem on the permanent tablets of the press, arethey not likely to extend the dominions offelicity into regions bounded only by that portionof infirmity which must hang about thedestinies of mortal man ? It is a positive actof effective benevolence to sow seeds of usefulfruits, or beautiful flowers, where none wereever sown before ; but how much more efficientlybenevolent is he who sows those seedsEFFECTIVE BENEVOLENCE POSITIVE. 193out of which happiness directly springs — happinessprolific, multiform, permanent.Nor let it be forgotten that, in proportion tothe poverty of the receiver, will be the value ofthe gift conferred. The greater the want, thegreater the boon will be. Now certain it isthat erroneous standards of action have producedmuch moral poverty, much misery in theworld — poverty and misery which the intelligentmoralist is called upon to remove. Whathigher mission than his ? What nobler pursuit?Rendering services of incalculable value toothers, he establishes a claim — a claim whichwill be felt to be irresistible — of other servicesto be rendered to himself in return. He exercisespower, in itself a source of pleasure, — thatpower, of all power the most delightful, thepower of beneficence. He exercises it towardsall, without distinction or exception.In this there is no sacrifice, no sacrifice ofself-regarding interest ; and by these and similarmeans every man may advance the progress,and accelerate the triumphs of happiness.Every man has more or less of time on hishands. On many hands how heavily it hangs !Would they improve it, would they enjoy it ?Let them engage it in beneficence !The field of beneficence is the whole world,those parts of it more particularly in which aVOL. I. o194 DEONTOLOGY.man exercises his peculiar influence —-whetherpersonal, domestic, or social. The occasionsit may find for its exercise are somewhat dependenton these influences. Towards inferiorsand equals the occasions are permanent, towardssuperiors transitory. In the practical part ofthese volumes, these relations will come particularlyunder review.Analysis or VIRTUES And VICES. 19tCHAPTER XV.ANALYSIS OF Virtues AND VICES.The ground has now been cleared, and thefoundation laid for the moral edifice. Whatremains to be done is, to sweep away thesurrounding rubbish, or to take from the ruinssuch portions as will assist the builder in theerection of the temple of virtue. Whereverprudence presents itself, wherever effectivebenevolence presents itself, they will be rescuedfrom the huge heaps which have hitherto encumberedthe ground of ethics. Where neitherof these is discoverable, let who will turn theimpostor virtue to account. No acceptancewill it find here.And so as to vice. No quarrel have we withany action that neither injures the actor himself,nor any body else; in a word, that takes nothingaway from happiness; still less with any action,which, be it called by what name it may, leavesa balance of enjoyment on the whole.Virtues and vices are voluntary habits. Ifthey are not voluntary, the words of the moralistmight as well be flung to the winds. To the196 Doxology.two branches of virtue, prudence and benevolence,correspond two branches of vices ; — ■Imprudence, the vice in a man which is primarilyhurtful to himself, — Improbity, the vice whichis hurtful primarily to others.It matters little in what order the self-calledvirtues or vices present themselves. There isno marshalling them ; they are susceptible of noarrangement ; they are a disorderly body, whosemembers are frequently in hostility with oneanother. Most of them consist of a portion ofgood, a portion of evil, and a portion of matterindifferent, Most of them are characterised bythat vagueness which is a convenient instrumentfor the poetical, but dangerous or useless to thepractical moralist.The three commonly called cardinal virtues,however, naturally present themselves first tothe mind.To what action does the praise of fortitude commonlyattach ? To that by which a man voluntarilyexposes himself to a danger he might haveavoided, — to danger, to bodily pain, to death.In proportion to the magnitude of the dangerto the intensity and duration of the pain, orthe probability of death, is he considered topossess the virtue of fortitude.Is it desirable for the ultimate good of societythat he should so expose himself? In this isFORTITUDE. 197the measure of all merit. Will he advance hisown well-being or the well-being of others ? Ifthe two interests, his own and that of othersare incompatible, to which is it desirable thepreference should be given ? This may bedifficult, but too difficult to know, yet this issomething to be known, and if it can be knownit is well worth knowing.The thing to be purchased is benefit to a manhimself or to others. The danger to which he isexposed is the price he would pay for the benefit.Is the benefit worth the cost ? This is thequestion, the only question deserving an inquiryor a thought. Whether his exposing himselfto the supposed danger is an act of fortitude ornot, is a query not worth the words expendedin the proposing it.And the question is not merely useless, it ispositively pernicious ; for such questions onlythrow men's ideas into confusion, entangle theirminds in irrelevant discussions, and lead themaway from the proper, the only proper topic ofinquiry, namely, the union between interestsand duties.Now, — suppose an act injurious to those interests,and that this act is understood to merit theappellation of fortitude. What is the practicalconsequence ? That fortitude, being a virtue, theinjurious act is that which ought to be done.198 DEONTOLOGY.And suppose the line of conduct most conduciveto the general happiness, not to deserve theappellation of fortitude ? What then ? Why iffortitude be a virtue, the act which most promotesthe general happiness must be an act offolly or of vice.Wonderful is the absurdity, dense the blindness,palpable the self-contradiction of theOxford Instructor on the subject of Fortitude.According to him, on what does it depend?On the magnitude of the pain which a mancontinues to endure ? No such thing. On themagnitude of the danger, that is, the eventualsuffering to which he voluntarily exposes himself?No, not that. Upon what then ? Uponthe nature of the occasion on which the sufferingis endured or the danger incurred. If the occasionis approved by the Instructor, there shall befortitude ; if the occasion have the ill-fortune notto have his sanction, no fortitude shall there be.In battle or otherwise, a man risks, or evenloses his life. Was he a brave man ? Was hisact an act of fortitude? Go and ask theInstructor, and he will not tell you till he knowson which side he fought. Inform me, he willsay, of the occasion of his death. If I approveof the occasion, then it is an act of fortitude ;if not, not.The Instructor makes four special and un-fortitude.199doubted exceptions, — self-slayers, duellists,robbers, and men who devote themselves todanger or death in defence of their liberty.These are not men of fortitude ; their doingsdeserve not any of its praise.A man who puts an end to his own existence,cannot be a man of fortitude. Would youknow why ? Because suicide is unlawful.A man who slays another, or is slain byanother in a duel, cannot be a man of fortitude.Why ? Because he ought not to havefought.A man dies defending his own liberty ; hemust be a coward; justice was not on his side.A robber plays the hero. Is he a courageousman ? Not he ; for what business had he to beon the highway ?But if consistency were looked for, if in orthodoxor fashionable faith, nonsense were an impedimentto the reception of that faith, one mightsuggest that it would be well to apply the principleto practice. Among the whole tribe of conquerors,where would the man of fortitude befound ? Your Alexanders, your Caesar, yourGhenghis Khans, your Napoleons, what werethey all ? Any thing but men of fortitude.When the protection afforded to absurdity issuch that no one dares open his mouth againstit, — its march is bold and imposing. You may200 DEONTOLOGY.grant or deny, at your pleasure, the praiseof fortitude to those who voluntarily thrustthemselves upon danger or death ; they shallbe called brave men, or cowards according toyour bidding.Temperance has for its object the pleasuresof sense. Though commonly used to expressabstinence from the enjoyments of one or twoof the senses, there seems no sufficient reasonfor such a limitation to the term. The questionof virtue must be decided by the influenceof the enjoyments of sense on ourselves andothers.Intemperance, when mischievous to a manhimself, is a breach of prudence ; when mischievousto others, it is a breach of benevolence.Preponderant enjoyment, or preponderantsuffering, is the only standard by whichthe moral merits of fruition can be estimated.Abstinence, which leaves no balance of pleasure,partakes not of the character of virtue ;enjoyment, which leaves no balance of pain,cannot justly be stigmatised with the reproachof vice.There exists in the world a great unwillingnessto allow a man to be the curator of hisown pleasures ; there is a vehement dispositionto decide on what, in the breast of another man,may be allowed to be a pleasure, and what not.Temperance. 201The words impropriety, unlawfulness, and suchlike,are flung at particular actions, in order toexcite odium, as if they were evidence of depravity; such words being, in fact, only a partand portion of that phraseology, by which aman seeks to shelter his own dogmatism fromthe analysis which the doctrines of utility wouldapply to it.Prudence and effective benevolence, it cannotbe too often repeated, being the only two intrinsicallyuseful virtues, all other virtues mustderive their value from them, and be subservientto them.Is justice, then, a subservient and inferiorvirtue ? And if so, to which is it subordinate ?Before the art of logic was understood, andespecially before the business of arrangement,in any thing like correctness or completeness,was accomplished, ideas respecting virtue, andnames designating those ideas, were introduced.The relations between virtue and virtue werevague and obscure ; the descriptions of themconfused — the points of coincidence and of differenceindeterminate or undetermined. Logicallyspeaking, they were disparate ; mathematicallyspeaking, they were incommensurable.Of the virtues, the Aristotelian introducedthe definitions and classification we have seen.Of these virtues several have been divided into202 DEONTOLOGY.species. But, on examination, it will be foundthat under the same generic names virtues areclassed which have no assignable relation toeach other ; and some, in which the characterof the genus under which they are arranged isnot discoverable. The modifications put forwardunder the head of one virtue, not unfrequentlybelong to another, and on a glance at the whole,the appearance is one of strange entanglementand perplexity. Though the Linnaeus of NaturalHistory has appeared in the world, andrestored its chaos into order and harmony, theLinnaeus of Ethics is yet to come.Justice, under the system of utility, is amodification of benevolence ; it belongs to thepresent work wherever the political sanction, orthe power of the law does not apply ; it belongsto it wherever the sanction of moral obligationis enforced by penal visitation.The inadequacy and imperfection of the politicalor legal sanction is experienced in a considerablepart of the field of morality, and ademand will be created for the dictates of themoral sanction, as guided by utility, in the followingcases : —Where the legal sanction is silent, or, in otherwords, makes no provision for the case in point.Where the legal sanction is inconsistent with,or opposed to the greatest happiness principle.JUSTICE. 203Where the dictates of the legal sanction areconfused, or unintelligible.Where they are impracticable.In all these cases, the dictates of justice willbe the dictates of benevolence, and the dictatesof benevolence the dictates of utility.It would assist clearness of conception, if theword probity could take place of the term justice,with which it is pretty completely synonymous; at least, if there be a difference, it israther grammatical than ethical ; for though aman says with propriety, I will do you justice,he cannot say, I will do you probity, thoughevery act of injustice done would be an act ofimprobity, and, conversely, every act of improbityan act of injustice.The word justice is clogged with other significations,which render it less efficient as anethical term. It may, for example, be employedas a substitute for the term judicature. He bywhom the powers of judicature are administered,is said to administer justice. But onsuch an occasion it is never said that he administersprobity, nor does the association of probitynecessarily attach to the phrase.Hence a great evil, and a source of error ; forif, m the exercise of his office, he be most trulyand manifestly chargeable with improbity, notthe less will the language be employed that he204 DEONTOLOGY.administers justice. The improbity will still beclothed in the garb of justice. Himself and hisfriends will say he administers justice, and itwill be a matter of great difficulty and perplexityfor those who think ill of him to impugn thephraseology. Yet by no one Avill he be said toadminister probity, scarcely by any one will itbe said that he exercises probity. This is oneof the thousand cases in which vague and undefinedexpressions become places of shelter forinsincerity and immorality.The pleasures and pains of amity are those ofthe popular or moral action, in miniature ; — inthe one case their source is a determinate individual,in the other an indefinite multitude.When is it desirable that the pleasures ofamity should be reaped ? Whenever they maybereaped without the production of preponderantevil, — without violation of the laws of self-regardingprudence. To what length may theirpursuit be carried ? To exactly the lengthwhich is consistent with the cardinal virtues ofprudence and benevolence, and it will be foundthat between these and the pleasures and painsof amity there is rarely any competition.To obtain the favor — the amity of another, theobvious course is to do him services — these serviceslimited only by the considerations of benevolenceand prudence. The limits which etfec-AMITY. 205live benevolence applies to the exercise of amity-arethe same as apply to the pursuit of wealth.If the services derived from him whose amityyou court be the conferring on you a portion ofwealth, — the pursuit of wealth is the pursuit ofamity : and in precisely so far as the pursuit ofwealth, with the enjoyments and exemptions derivablefrom it, is repugnant to benevolence, soisthe pursuit of amity.The pleasures derivable from this pursuit havethis distinctive and interesting character: — thatprudence and benevolence are almost equallyconcerned in their production.For however selfish the desire may be, — howeverunrelieved by the social sympathy, theeffects of it arc not the less purely beneficial tothe parties concerned. The interest of him whocourts the amity of another, may be served ornot served as may happen — the person courtedhas his interest served to an extent nearlyequal to that he would have obtained forhimself if he had himself sought the pleasureconferred. And though it is not sympathy, —not benevolence that has produced the pleasure,yet it is not the less produced — and thus thegood, though not arising from a primary virtue,is as valuable as if it arose from it. The solevalue of benevolence itself consists in its tendencyand aptitude to produce beneficence.20G Doxology.and no evil can grow from the excess of thefriendly affections, except when they interferewith the primary virtues.Proportioned to the value of the services whicha man is deemed able and willing to confer onothers, will be the number of competitors inthose services. In this, as in every other case,competition may produce jealousy, and eachcompetitor who is believed to have obtained agreater share than another, may be to that otheran object of envy. This envy will endeavorto produce reaction of ill-will on the person whois the object of envy, and one of its immediateeffects, will be to lower the envied receiver offavors, in the eyes of him who confers them.Nevertheless, there exists a tribunal, thatwhich deals out the decisions of good repute,or general esteem, before which this contentionfor benefits is always carried on ; and everyman is a member of this tribunal who chooses totake a part in its awards. Before this tribunalevery man who seeks to detract from the meritsof another man acts the part of an informer ;and his conduct is usually attributed to a sinisterand disreputable motive. Be his motiveswhat they may, dishonorable or phlogisticphrases will probably attach to his conduct, andthus the popular sanction be brought to bearupon the self-regarding impulse.Amity. 207Servility is one of the terms most commonlyemployed on these occasions. Its synonymes andquasi-synonymes are very numerous, and the impressionit conveys is of an exceedingly vagueand indeterminate character.So much the worse ; no precise idea beingattached to it, the accusation becomes the moreimpressive. If closely looked to, it will befound to mean the habit of rendering to a superior,services which, according to the receivednotions of propriety, ought not to be rendered.As a rule of conduct, the so often repeated principleof balancing pleasures and pains will applyhere, as every where.To render to every man every possible service,where neither prudence nor benevolencehas aught to object, is the obvious dictate andduty of beneficence ; and in the case before us,the dictates of benevolence are in their full forcewithout any counteracting or diminishing forceon the side of prudence.But here, as on most other occasions, are twosets of antagonizing forces, the impelling and therestraining ; the only limits to the proper influenceof the compelling force being that whichis exercised by the restraining power.The virtue of beneficence, though its objectsembrace all mankind, can be exercised to a verylimited extent, and as applied to any single indiesDEONTOLOGY.vidual yet narrower is its sphere of action. Andthis is well ; for if every man were disposed tosacrifice his own enjoyments to the enjoymentsof others, it is obvious the whole sum of enjoymentwould be diminished — nay destroyed. Theresult would not be the general happiness, butthe general misery. Prudence therefore setsits limits to benevolence, and those limits do not,on ordinary occasions, embrace a large space.In the case before us, prudence so far fromprohibiting, prescribes the obligation of renderingservices to the superior — services in the utmostquantity that can be rendered under asufficient assurance that the value of the servicesreceived in return will not be less than thatof the suffering, self-denial, or sacrifice incurred,in order to obtain them. Prudencemakes a sort of commercial bargain — the sort ofbargain on which all commerce is founded.The expenditure is expected to bring backsomething more than its cost. No outlay isdetrimental that returns an equivalent — no expencefails to be beneficial, which brings backan equivalent and something more.Here then is prudence acting in two directionsprescribing expenditure, in as far as it promisesa beneficial return, inhibiting expenditurewhere the beneficial return cannot be reasonablyanticipated. But here, as elsewhere, no law ofAMITY. 209benevolence must be violated while prudenceseeks the beneficial return in question.And how are the dictates of self regardingprudence to be ascertained ? by what are theydetermined ? By the balance of an account embracingthe different heads under which pleasuresand pains are capable of being arranged.Prudence on all occasions supposes and requiresthe sacrifice of pleasures and exemptions on theone hand, to pleasures and exemptions on theother. Between the rival amounts the decisionmust lie, and the decision of wisdom must bewith the larger of the two.In the present case the rivalry is between thepleasures of amity and the pains of the popularsanction. There are certain services rendered bywhich a man exposes himself to the loss of reputation,even services which are by no meansinconsistent with the primary virtues. Fashionmakes multitudinous exceptions which it wouldbe difficult to get confirmed by any correct viewsof the demands of prudence and benevolence.In different stages of civilization these exceptionshave undergone many modifications. The higherthe scale of rank, — the greater the distance betweenthe most elevated and the least elevatedspheres, — the less has fashion introduced ofrestraint. In proportion as equality takes possessionof society is the latitude allowed to suchWot 1. p210 DEONTOLOGY.services diminished, and the restrictions uponthem increased. Going back into the field oftime, we shall find that deportment, and especiallyin language, was in use, of a character soobsequious, that it would not now be toleratedat all — that habits of submission and expressionsof humiliation were then deemed proper — prudent— and even demanded by good breeding,which now would be placed to the account ofservility, meanness, and even baseness, anddraw down on him who should venture to usethem a full measure of popular contempt. Goforth into the field of space ; visit any Mahometan— any oriental nation. In these countries,under their governments, the distance betweenthe highest and the lowest degree is almost infinite,and between the different degrees enormous.Thus no measure of obsequiousness is out ofplace — none is checked by opinion. To thosein the lower ranks self-abasement is self-preservation,and the most prostrate servility is demandedby prudence.Bending, or as the phrase is, cringing or fawningto his superior, the same man is stiff", andeven insolent to his inferior. It is an every daycase and a very natural one ; for the suffering towhich he subjects himself in the one case, heseeks to counterbalance by enjoyments of thesame character in the other. But by thus grasAND VANITY. 211trying his pride he provokes enmity, and throughenmity ill offices, and through ill offices sufferingin all imaginable shapes. Is he on the wholea gainer by this indulgence ? That will dependpartly on his idiosyncratic taste, and partly uponaccident.Pride and vanity are dispositions of mind notnecessarily or even ordinarily manifested by singleacts. So intimate is the relation betweenpride and vanity, that to uncover them togetheris likely to facilitate correct ideas of both. Bothare the desire of esteem, taking somewhat differentdirections, and employing different meansof gratification. To the proud man and the vainman the esteem of those on whom they believetheir well-being to depend, is the commonobject of pursuit.And in both cases the important question is, —This pride, this vanity, — is it of the nature ofvirtue, or of vice ? If of virtue, of what virtue ?if of vice, of what vice ?In the proud man, the desire of esteem isaccompanied with contempt, or disesteem forthose whose esteem he desires to obtain. Inthe vain man this is not the case.The value of the esteem being less in theeyes of the proud than of the vain man, agreater portion of that esteem is required togive the proud man equal gratification with that212 DEONTOLOGY.which the vain man would receive from a lesserportion. And thus the state of the proud man'smind is generally that of dissatisfaction — a dissatisfactionwhich may be read even in hiscountenance.Melancholy and malevolence, one or both, arethence the usual companions of pride, sometimesacting as causes, sometimes as effects of pride,sometimes in both characters. Hilarity, on thecontrary, is the common accompaniment ofvanity — hilarity and oftentimes benevolence.From a small manifestation of esteem, vanity receivesa great gratification ; and the smaller themanifestation the more easily obtained ; hencethe more frequently, and the more frequently,the more frequent are the causes of exhilaration.Pride is naturally conjoined with taciturnity ;vanity with talkativeness. The proud man sitsstill and waits for those demonstrations of esteemwhich he desires to obtain. Their value to himdepends on their being spontaneous. He willnot call, or at least will not appear to call forthem ; he will rather tarry for their arrival, andthus must possess the faculty of self-commandto enable him to do so. Esteem is the food hehungers for, and his meal must be a full one —but he is able to fast.Not so the vain man. His appetite is stillPRIDE AND VAMTV. 213keener than that of the proud man. No quantityof its food will definitely satiate it, thougha small quantity will gratify, and for a time willsatisfy it. He therefore goes from door to doorand at every door craves those supplies forwhich he has a perpetually self-renewing hunger.Taken by itself, pick is scarcely ever usedbut in a bad sense, as descriptive of vice ; withan adjunct it may be used in a good sense,and become a virtue. Witness honest, becoming,dignified pride. But even here a feelingattaches to it, that such phraseology is notstrictly proper, and a sense of something figurativeor rhetorical hangs about it.But as for the adjective jorowf/, when appliedto a man, the idea it conveys is unfavorable.When proud is employed to denote the cast ofa man's mind, intimation is given that that partof his mind is vicious.A proud day, a proud situation, may be used;and thus, indirectly, you may connect a manwith an event, and disconnect him from the ideaof vicious pride.Vanity is still worse dealt with. It can hardlybe ascribed to a man without making him theobject of contempt and derision, and a fit objecttoo. It would scarcely be possible to speak,certainly it would not be possible to speakwith propriety, of honest, becoming, dignified214 DEONTOLOGY.vanity. A proud day you may have, and thinkwe[ of such a day ; but you could not do so,were you to call it a vain day.But for practical purposes, the great objectis to distinguish what there is of virtue andwhat of vice in these qualities of pride andvanity. If there be virtue, it is prudence, benevolence,or beneficence. If there be vice, itbelongs either to imprudence or maleficence.And thus, and for the first time, perhaps, shallwe find clear ideas attaching to appellationswhich are, every day in the year, in the mouthof every body.Were the principles of morality thoroughlyunderstood and obeyed ; in other words, werethe popular sanction in every respect that which,for the interests of mankind, it is desirable itshould become, any portion remaining of pridewould not be in the nature of vice. But as itis, where public opinion has not utility for itsfoundation, pride must frequently be classifiedamong vices.The quantity of virtue or of vice growing outof pride and vanity, seems to depend in somemanner on the station occupied in the scaleof society by the proud or vain man. In thestation of the ruling few, pride is more likely todispose the mind to vice than to virtue ; but notso vanity.Pride, when it runs into vice, is the charadeAND VANITY. 216theistic vice of the ruling orders, they being,from their situation, less dependent than othermen on spontaneous services ; to a man soelevated, spontaneous services from others becomecomparatively objects of indifference, andhe is consequently indisposed to obtain thoseservices at the cost of any services rendered byhimself, even the inexpensive services of urbanity.Pride, therefore, in such elevated situations,draws men away from benevolence and beneficence,and presents these virtues as rivals tothe self-regarding interest.Vanity suggests another course. Its ever-cravingappetite demands continued services,the services which manifest esteem. And hereits tendency is towards benevolence. Thus actsseemingly benevolent, acts bearing upon themthe impress of social sympathy, whether reflectiveor sentimental, may have their source inthe self-regarding affection of vanity. Theacts being produced, the object is gained tohuman happiness. Will not vanity, then, answerthe purposes of utility, by producing thegood which utility proposes as its end ? No !not unless opinion, not unless the popularsanction be, on all points, in accordance withthe teachings of utility.But the display of vanity, on whatever titlesto esteem it be founded, produces competition.216 DEONTOLOGY.increasing with the increase of that esteem ofwhich display is made, and this competitionproduces uneasiness. Vanity in one breast callsinto existence, and thence into action, theemotions, the affections, the passions of envyand jealousy, in many breasts.In elevated life, the higher a man's stationthe less likely is it to awaken envy or jealousyon the part of the subject many ; for envy andjealousy can hardly exist except where competitionexists, and the greater the distancebetween rank and rank, the less room is thereforcompetition.At the same time, the higher a man's stationthe wider is the field in which he can exercisehis beneficence ; and in so far as, by acts ofbeneficence, his vanity seeks its gratification,the esteem which he obtains serves to counterbalance,if not to outweigh, the pains and dangerswhich are produced by the envy andjealousy of others, whether as acting upon him,or upon those in whose minds the envy andjealousy have place.The effect will be different among the subjectmany ; for as the power of beneficence is less,the envy and jealousy will be greater. Herethe assumption of superiority, under the influenceof vanity, will be more offensive, andthe best wrestler on the green' may excitePRIDE And VANITY. 217feelings of envy and jealousy in the breasts ofall the other wrestlers, while he can producepio counterbalancing pleasure. Pain he mayclearly awaken ; but what sensible addition tohappiness can he make to the happiness of anyindividual not comprised within his own domesticcircle ?The vain man exaggerates to himself thevalue of the services of others, and is occupiedin undue exertions to obtain them. The proudman diminishes, to his own mind, the valueof the services of others, and measures his rightto claim them by the inverse ratio of his needof them, — of the esteem in which he holdsthem. Activity is the companion of vanity ;immobility of pride. Every addition to theaffection of vanity adds something to the powerof sympathy towards others. Every additionto the affection of pride excludes a portion ofsympathy towards others.Yet the denial of the good offices sought willawaken the hostility both of the proud and thevain man. The proud man's hostility will bemore open, undisguised, and conspicuous. Hegives you to understand that he cares notwhether your dispositions towards him befriendly or adverse. His importance is such,that, from respect or fear, others are engaged torender him the services, or more services, than218 DEONTOLOGY.you can offer him : but the vain man appearsto exercise no despotism over you in order toobtain your good-will ; the greater his vanity,the greater his desire, the more strenuous hisefforts to secure it.Pride is thus accompanied with a sense ofindependence ; vanity, not. The proud man ispersuaded that he shall receive from others asmuch respect as he stands in need of; he thereforewill not take the trouble of courting them,that is, of employing exertion in order to administerto their gratification. He will not, himself,put forward the titles he believes himselfto possess to their esteem. He assumes thatthey are obvious, and will be recognized asamatter of course. In as far as he succeeds,his pride conveys to the minds of others a senseof his own importance ; he causes them tothink that, in some way or other, their comfortdepends upon his favor, which favor, he wouldhave them believe, is difficult to gain. Hence,on their part, there exists towards him a sortof fear — the fear of not being able to gain it.Now this fear is necessarily attended withsuffering. Of this suffering he has himself aperception, yet will not do what depends uponhim to remove or to lessen it. By mixingcondescension with his pride, he might lessenit. By laying aside his pride, and dealing withPRIDE AND VANITY. 219them on a footing of equality, he might removeit altogether.On the whole, then, vanity is more nearlyallied to benevolence ; pride to self-regard andmalevolence.The vain man, feeling himself comparativelyill-assured of the esteem he desires, is proportionablyanxious to do his best to obtain it ;he endeavors to display those qualities whichare likely to win it ; and seeking to gather thegood-will of others, he must sow the seedswhich produce it. And the object of the displayhe makes will usually be, in some degreeat least, effected. He will excite some admiration; admiration brings surprise, surpriseawakens curiosity, in whose gratification thereis pleasure.There are two causes, however, by whichthis effect is liable, not only to be counteractedand diminished, but even to be reversed. First,when the superiority displayed is such as toproduce humiliation, or a painful sense of inferiority,in the breasts of those before whomthe display is made ; and, secondly, this effectwill be heightened if the endowment displayedbe one in which any particular competitionexists between the persons exhibiting it, andhim before whom it is exhibited.When this is the case, both prudence and220 DEONTOLOGY.benevolence concur in recommending that theexhibition should be abstained from ; prudence,because the passions of envy and jealousy weillawaken ill-will towards himself; ill-will, tendingto ill offices or to the abstinence fromfriendly offices ; and benevolence, because theexhibition will produce pain in the breast ofanother.Associated with the subject of pride are manyterms, the value and bearing of which canonly be determined by the application of thegreat principles so constantly brought forwardin this volume. Meanness has for its oppositenot so much pride as a compound appellation —elevation of mind — high-mindedness. But thereis, and must be, much of indistinctness in thesequalities. Pride, separately taken, is ratherdyslogistic ; high-mindedness, eulogistic. Soagain, humility is supposed to be creditable ;meanness discreditable. And the obscurity ismuch increased by the sense which has beengiven to these terms by writers on religion.Independence of mind is another term susceptibleof very different interpretations. The rule,the test, the standard, must be the conducivenessof these qualities, in every particular case,to happiness, the happiness of the individualand of the rest of mankind. Every thing elseis a mere fruitless question about words, of noENVY AND JEALOUSY. 221practical, no real importance ; a question asto phrases whose meanings are perpetuallyliable to change and perpetually changing; andwhose discussion, unless with a reference tosome rule of right and wrong, is mere waste oftime and labor.For the purpose of exposition, then, as wellas for the purposes of instruction, the soleeffective mode is to ascertain the association ofmoral terms with the terms of pain and pleasure.Apply any other test to vanity, applyany other test to pride, and it will be seen,that to their import and their value this is theonly key. And what is true here is true inevery other part of the moral region.Envy and jealousy are neither virtues norvices.They are pains.Envy is pain emanating from the contemplationof pleasure possessed by another, especiallywhen that pleasure is derived from a sourcewhence the envious person desired to derive it ;if the desire was accompanied with the expectationthat it would have been so derived, thepain becomes stronger still ; and strongest ofall when he supposes that the possession of thepleasure by another has led to his exclusionfrom it.222 DEONTOLOGY.Jealousy is pain — the pain of apprehensionderived from the same or a similar cause.Prudence and benevolence are equally concernedin suppressing both envy and jealousy :prudence, for the purpose of ridding ourselvesof the pains they cause us ; benevolence, inasmuchas envy and jealousy are associated withthe desire to rid ourselves of the pains theycreate, by evil deeds to others. Envy andjealousy are very closely allied to, and veryinstrumental in creating maleficent dispositions,and thence maleficent actions. The disposition,without the action, is indeed not a vice ; it isan infirmity ; but infirmity is a soil in whichvice is very easily planted, and in which itvery luxuriantly grows.Hume's virtues. 223CHAPTER XVI.HUME S VIRTUES.But, in order to discover how vague are theideas of virtue, and how unsatisfactory thedefinitions, even emanating from minds of highintellectual capacity, where the standard ofvirtue has either not been discovered or notemployed, it will be well worth while, even atthe expense of some repetition, to go over theground, accompanied by Mr Hume's list ofvirtues ; and, upon a close examination, we shalllearn how easily a scene of confusion, entanglement,and perplexity, may be reduced toorder, harmony, and beauty, by the instrumentswhich, in the shape of prudence and benevolence,utility has put into our hands. Andthis course seems the more desirable, becauseit is not long since the Edinburgh Reviewers,in calling attention to Hume's classification ofthe virtues, seemed to consider that he haddone every thing which it was necessary to do,in order to introduce a perfect moral system.There is a fundamental objection to his classificationof the virtues into useful and agreeable224 Doxology.qualities. Useful is here altogether ambiguous;it may mean conducive to pleasure — it maymean conducive to any other end. Usefulnesshas no value, but in so far as it is pleasure-producingor pain-preventing, leading, on thewhole, to a balance of happiness, calculatednot only out of the pleasure which is adjacent,but of that which is remote ; not only out ofpresent, but of future pleasure. Strange indeedis it that moralists are so afraid of the wordpleasure ; the thing itself — the enjoyment, thehappiness — they do indeed profess to pursue ;but called by its own name — its proper, itsessential name — they run away from it, theyrefuse to grasp it; any nonsense, any confusion,rather than the name of pleasure.It may be said that Hume does not employthe word virtue as the genus generalissimo,and that thence his discernment is not implicatedby the fact that some of his virtues have,in reality, no virtue in them.But if virtue do not mean something that isuseful, or productive of that which is useful forthe increase of well-being, what does it mean ?What is its value ?In the very constitution of virtue, it must beadmitted there is evil — some suffering, someself-denial, some sacrifice of good, and consequentuneasiness — but as the practice of virtue11 umbo's virtues. 225grows into a habit, the uneasiness becomesless and less, and at last may vanish altogether.Virtue is a moral quality, in contradistinctionto an intellectual quality : it belongs to thewill — to the affections — not to the understanding,except in as far as the understanding actsupon the volition. And this premised, a correctestimate of Hume's desirable qualities may bemuch assisted by distinguishing and groupingthem under the following heads : —First. Qualities not belonging to the will, butto the understanding, such as discretion, order,quickness of conception.Second. Qualities of the will, the qualitybeing neither a virtue nor a vice exclusively,but either a virtue or a vice, or neutral, accordingto the object towards which it is directed,as sociability, secrecy, constancy, mercy, generosity.Third. Qualities which are always virtues,and consequently belonging to one of the twoclasses, prudence or benevolence.Fourthly. Qualities which are always virtuesmodifications of, or subordinate to the twoprimary classes — such as honesty, justice.Now it is really only in the third and fourthclasses that the virtues, the undoubted virtues,are to be found. Qualities there are, in thefirst and second class, which, when associatedVOL. T. Q226 DEONTOLOGY.with prudence and benevolence, may be highlyimportant auxiliaries. That tact, for example,which has the gift of following actions to theirconsequences, and which is sometimes calledthe virtue of discretion, how invaluable maynot its co-operation be in the moral field ? Sothe alliance of a sociable spirit with prudenceand benevolence, naturally gives to each of theman attraction which must add to their beneficialinfluences ; but, at the same time, who failsto see that the quality called discretion dependsmuch on mental organization, — that no effortswill introduce into an inferior mind a quantityof it equal to that which directs a superiormind ? While, again, the quality which is calledsociability, far from being a co-adductor of virtue,may be, and frequently is, the companion ofvice — aye, and sometimes the very instrumentby which vice accomplishes her most fataltriumphs.Though Hume has brought forward his virtuesin a strangely disassociated and disjointedstate, it will be, perhaps, most convenient totake them in the disorder in which he leavesthem. No classification of them will makewhat is not virtue, virtue ; and such virtue as isreally in them will be found marshalled underthe appropriate heads to which the virtuebelongs.musk's virtues. 227Soc'iahU'iti/. It is a disposition to seek thesociety of others. It is good or bad, virtuous orvicious, according to the purpose and the conductof the social man. It has only so muchof virtue in it as it has of benevolence, andif it be combined with benevolence, it becomesfriendliness — friendliness, which stands inHume's list as a distinct virtue. A dispositionto avoid maleficence is generally a concomitantpart of the social character, and thus far it isin accordance with the laws of negative effectivebenevolence. But sociability may be accompanied,and is so not unfrequently, particularlywhere exercised towards persons of differentconditions, with tyranny or maleficence ; oftenit has wit for one of its instruments, wit of apain-giving or pleasure-destroying character.Sociability may be used for the purposes ofinsolence, of which many examples are to befound in the writings of Cicero.* It may allyitself with scorn, as it did in the case of Burke ;so that a man, hunting over the field of sociabilityfor morality or happiness, may find neither.Sociability then, standing alone, says nothingfor good or evil. It may represent self-regard' I was not thirteen,' said Mr Bentham, on one occasion,to the writer, ' when the abominations of Ciceroshocked nichesDEONTOLOGY.in an offensive shape, and become an instrumentof self-eulogium for evil-producing qualities.It may be the associate of fraud andrapine, and lend the fascinations of its presenceto every project of folly and vice and crime.Good-nature. It is nearly allied with sociability,but is, with reference to virtue and vice,completely ambiguous. So much of it as isnatural, or part of the distinctive individualcharacter, cannot be deemed a virtue. Thatportion of it which is acquired, which is theresult of reflection, supposing it can be distinguishedand separated from the rest, may bevirtuous. Associated with benevolence, it is,like sociability, nearly synonymous with friendliness.It has in it a greater mixture than sociabilityof the natural with the moral character.If wholly constitutional, it is no more a virtuethan beauty or strength is a virtue ; it addsagreeableness to social intercourse, whetherconduct be virtuous or not. That part of good-naturewhich, independently of physical tendencies,has become effective benevolence, that,and that alone, is virtue ; but it is not thegood nature that is the virtue, it is the effectivebenevolence. So, again, good-nature may lenditself to the service of imprudence or improbity.The disposition to please another has not unfrequentlybeen the cause of misconduct. EvenHume's virtues. 229in common parlance, a man is sometimes saidto have been led astray by his good-nature.It may be the weakness upon which temptationacts ; and the pleasure of gratifying the personwho appeals to it may close the eyes to theconsequences of every consequent evil.Humauitij. It is effective benevolence, or adisposition towards effective benevolence, specificallydirected to a particular case of suffering.Its object is the removal of some positiveand weighty evil. It is very like good-natureunder excitement. It implies the exercise ofnot inconsiderable power of relief on the partof the humane man, and, for the most part, supposesthat, but for the exercise of his humanity,the relieved object will be subjected to greaterevils than those humanity seeks to remove.But to this there are some exceptions ; the humanityof a king would lead him to pardon atthe expense of penal justice ; the consequence ofwhich would be good on a small scale, and evilon a large one : the balance being a greatpublic loss ; and the exercise of humanity notavirtue, but a vice. It may therefore be, ormay not be, praiseworthy. Its title to thename of virtue can only be judged of when thepains it removes are weighed against the painsit creates. It is apt to commit errors underpresent impulses. Where, for example, the230 DEONTOLOGY.discipline or punishment attending imprudenceis likely to correct that imprudence, and humanitysteps in to ward off that punishment, sothat the imprudence will be repeated in consequenceof being unvisited by punishment,the humanity, far from being a virtue, is reallya vice. And such cases are of frequent occurrence.Many of our institutions, called humaneand charitable, whose object is to screen misconductfrom its penalties, do, in fact, onlyminister to human misery. Indiscriminate almsgivingmay, in the same way, be a premiumto idleness and profligacy. It is perniciouswherever it weakens the moral sanction to suchan extent as to produce, by the deteriorationof character, a quantity of future pain, greaterthan that which it immediately removes. Thelesson to be taught humanity, in order to makeit virtuous, is that of calculation. Its dispositionis always to remove a pain, and to forgetthe salutary influence of that pain upon thetime to come. It is only, therefore, as connectedwith prudence and benevolence thathumanity is entitled to approval.Mercy. It is humanity ; but it supposes theobject of it to be more directly dependent onhim who exercises it. The party served ishere in the hands of the party serving; theirmutual position more contrasted by the help-hume'svirtues. 231Icssness of the one party and the power of theother. To form a right judgment of the casesin which mercy may be exercised with a viewto the greatest happiness principle, dependson the intellectual part of man ; the dispositionto its exercise, on his moral part. Attachedto it are ideas of power, associated with vagueconceptions of tyranny. These grow out of thedistance between the dispenser and the recipientof mercy. In the political field, the lawwhich has been laid down in the case of humanityapplies here. The mercy — the favor tothe individual — must be weighed against theevil done to the community. The demandmade upon mercy is usually greater than thatmade upon humanity. Its value, in the estimateof virtue, must be calculated by its effects.The portion of it which has virtue in it belongsto effective benevolence.Gratitude is effective benevolence, in actordisposition, in consideration of services receivedby the grateful person, or some personconnected with him by the ties of sympathy.Its efficiency is not a necessary consequenceof its existence ; it may be a state of mindremaining inoperative for want of occasion. Itgrows in the mind of the grateful person, outof benefits conferred on him. But it is notnecessarily virtuous ; for virtue, doing a small232 DEONTOLOGY.quantity of good, may be accompanied by vice,doing a large quantity of mischief. A man hasconferred on me a service. He is in prison foraflagitious crime. To rescue him would begratitude, but it v^^ould not be virtue.Gratitude is a subject of great laudation.Every body is fond of gratitude, because everybodywho does a favor likes to receive favorsin return. Yet effective benevolence may bemore efficient where no gratitude has place.Gratitude is a most popular virtue ; it is fedby self-regard : and ingratitude is representedas a very hideous vice. All men are interestedin endeavoring to obtain repayment for benefitslent. And the public-opinion tribunal hasaffixed a special stigma upon him who, uponoccasion, does not make the return of serviceshe has received. He who does a benefit issupported by the concurrence of society inanticipating the fruits of gratitude, or a benefitin exchange. And every man has greater expectationof good services from an acquaintancethan from a stranger. A refusal of servicesfrom an acquaintance, and especially from oneyou have obliged, produces more annoyancethan the refusal of services by a person unknownto you.In fine, gratitude, in so far as it is under theguidance of utility, may be ranked among theHume's virtues. 233virtues, but it may be so counterbalanced byevil as to belong to the regions of vice.Opposed to gratitude is ingratitude, of whichresentment is one of the forms. Gratitude producesgood deeds, and resentment evil deeds.Resentment may be used in an ami-lateralsense ; a man may resent a kindness as wellas an unkindness. Resentment in action ismaleficence.It was the sign of a certain degree of advancementin morality, to think of making ingratitudea crime : but it was the sign of an era but littleadvanced in wisdom, not to see that it wasimpracticable to designate it as a crime on alloccasions.How long and intricate an account must itnot often be necessary to take between twopersons who have lived much together, beforeit can be known, in point of good offices, whichof them is the debtor ?The fortunes, the necessities of each must beknown. The most generous, the most worthy,would stand always the worst chance. Themost crafty, the least sincere, would be sure,to gain the cause. What he gave he wouldgive before witnesses ; what he received hewould receive in secret : there would soon beno such thing as either generosity on the onehand, or gratitude on the other.234 DEONTOLOGY.Friendliness is effective benevolence on a smallscale. Like good-nature, it is a disposition toconfer benefits ; but the disposition is principallydirected towards those with whom the friendlyperson has had intercourse. It is ready to actwhenever the opportunity may present itself.It imports somewhat more than a dispositionto acts of kindness, and is accompanied bysympathy in a state of considerable activity.The notion of friendliness involves with it thatof sympathy, at least in the common relationsof life. In some of the higher walks, particularlythe political, though the language offriendship is used, the sentiment is hardly supposedto exist. Its connection with effectivebenevolence is, as has been stated, intimate ;it is also sometimes produced by the affections. To the two branches ofmorality, all in it that constitutes virtue mustbe referred. Its good and its evil may beconsiderably modified by the application ofright principles to its operation, which, in fact,is the only reason for its admission into thefield of inquiry. Morals are not made forapplication to that which is unchangeable, butto that which may be modified or changed by amore correct view of things.Aristotle has made friendship a sort of cousinto the virtues. It is a state or condition of lifeHume's virtues. 235constituted by a certain sort of relation analogousto mortality, morality, paternity, maternity,finality. It is a species of marriage,without sexual communion for its bond, or progenyfor its consequence, and is thence not forlife or for a specific term.Generosity, where a virtue, is effective benevolence,— friendliness on a larger scale ; it isfriendliness not bounded by the circle of acquaintance,but extending to persons in general.Friendliness implies a preference. Generosityis diffusive.Generosity, without the guidance of prudenceor benevolence, is vice and folly. He whogives away all that he has to another, whowants it less than himself, and thus confers lesspleasure than he sacrifices, does a very generous,but a very foolish act. So he who lavishesmoney, or money's worth, for a pernicious purpose,however generous the expenditure, isdoing a vicious deed.The benevolence must be judged of by thesacrifice made. A small sum of money, forexample, given by a poor man, would be evidenceof generosity ; while the giving a considerablesum would scarcely be so from a manextremely opulent. The generosity of the pooris generally visible in personal services, in thededication of their time, in the exposure of their236 DEONTOLOGY.persons, in the risks they run. That of themore privileged classes in a mixture of personaland pecuniary services. As the value of moneybecomes less, and the station of the generousperson is higher, money becomes more andmore the instrument of generosity. At everystage, however, the same tests apply.Beneficence, it has been already remarked,is not necessarily a virtue. To render services,to do good to others, is not always a virtuousact. Every man who spends money is beneficent,a doer of good ; but there is no virtue indoing so. To discharge the common functionsof nature is beneficent ; to eat and drink, tosleep, to dress, anything by which good is done.Where beneficence differs from effective benevolence,though it may be a good, it is not avirtue. The distinction has been so frequentlydrawn in the course of this work, that it isneedless to repeat it here.Justice is effective benevolence, wherever itdeserves the credit of virtue. It is the renderingof services where they are expected, on adequategrounds. It is the doing good wheredisappointment would attach to its not beingdone, and the public-opinion tribunal sanctionsthe expectation that it will be done.In civil matters and in penal matters justiceis a very different thing. In the social field.Hume's virtues. 237justice is that which secures a man from thedisappointment which would deprive him ofobjects to which he has a right, recognized bysociety. It is the application of the principle. If it is not this, itis what any person chooses to call justice. Thelaw, * Do unto another as you would he shoulddo unto you,' does not apply here, nor wouldit serve as a definition of justice, because no onewould willingly inflict punishment on himself,and the infliction of punishment is often necessaryto establish the claims of justice.Justice in penal matters is the applicationof penal remedies. The best justice is thebest application of remedies against the evils ofmaleficence. It has only to do with acts, andnot with dispositions. The dispositions belongto the moral, the acts to the political field.In the class consisting of eleven qualitiesuseful to ourselves, there is a jumble of qualitiesalmost identical, though called differentnames. It would be difficult to distinguish inwhat respect, as to virtue, discrete and cautiondiffer from prudence honesty and fidelity fromjustice; how economy and frugality are to bedisassociated from prudence ; why industry andassiduity are disunited ? But a few words uponeach may serve to remove some of the mistswhich are gathered round the temple of morality.238 DEONTOLOGY.Discretion is the right judgment formed forthe purpose of action, in cases of more or lessdifficulty. It is the quality of mind whichmakes for itself a correct estimate of probableresults. It is the forethought which marks outthe most appropriate line of proceeding in agiven course. It is intellectual aptitude directedto conduct. But this is no more a virtue thanthe power of solving an arithmetical problemis a virtue, or than the possession of animalstrength is a virtue. It is cleverness, derivedeither from birth or from education.Industry is an ambiguous word; supposinglabor applied to purposes not illaudable, itincludes activity with a view to profit. It maybean instrument in the hands of other virtues ;it is no virtue of itself. In another language,if not in our own, the word is sometimes employedin an unfavorable sense, chevalier industriameaning a swindler or cheat, the expressionimplying that diligence is used in furtheringthe purposes of fraud.Frugality imports action positive or negative.It is prudence employed in the pecuniary field ;self-regarding prudence, for the most part. Itis the check which prevents from being wastedor needlessly diminished, those pleasures whichare purchaseable by wealth. It is adjacent,as Hume remarks, to two vices — to prodigality,humf/s virtues. 239which is imprudence ; to avarice, which is opposedto effective benevolence.Honesty is subordinate to justice. It is sometimesan ambiguous phrase. Montaigne saysevery body ought to be honest in talking of hisown virtues. He forgets that such talk willbe likely to wound the self-love of another.A man may to himself prefer himself, but suchself-preference is not very likely to be recognizedby a second person.Fidelity is also subordinate to justice. It isthe manifestation of an active faculty, and impliesthe observance of a contract, specific orunderstood.Truth is not a human quality — is not a virtue.Veracity is a far more convenient word ; andveracity is a virtue which occupies a very inappropriateplace in the public mind, and thebreaches of which are in consequence protected,to a great extent, by the popular sanction.Thucydides says, that in his time one herowould ask another, ' Are you a robber?' Thedays are come in which a man might askanother, * Are you an advocate 1 ' — an advocatebeing one whose power is in his tongue, and whosells that power to the first comer — to the rightside or the wrong side, as may be ; to advocatejustice or to defeat justice. The old days weredays of force ; the present are days of fraud.240 DEONTOLOGY.The powers of the body had once the mastery,now those of the mind. It was physical forcethat then ruled, — it is now mental fraud.Lying has to a great extent introduced itselfinto the daily forms of society ; useless always,and frequently pernicious. It may not on everyoccasion do harm to others, but it invariablydoes harm to the liar himself. It will inevitablylower him in the opinion of others, unless, asin the case of some of the professions, he isspecially endowed with the privilege of lying.The Spaniard who says, ' Esta casa es de V.'This house is your's,' when you quit him after avisit, tells a lie to no purpose whatever. TheFrenchman who says, *Je suis enchant ' — 'jesuisdesole' — *I am enchanted' — *I am desolated,'— though he preserves all the while his tranquility,lies to no purpose whatever. The Englishmanwho says * Not at home,' though he isat home, lies to no purpose whatever. Inthe terms of politeness, so called, mendacityoccupies a leading place.The confusion of ideas between truth andveracity has often created great ambiguities ofexpression. Bristol was misled by it. He wrotea book on La Verite, which verity marched himabout as if it had been a will-otherwise he wasrunning after. Sometimes it was a knowledgeof things, sometimes it was veracity, correctnessHume's virtues. 241of statement — the truth ; sometimes it was thelove of truth, in resistance to religious tyranny;by which he meant that knowledge which is theresult of evidence, as opposed to those declarationsof belief which do not grow out of evidence,but out of authority. He sometimesused it to represent the substantial fact of thereal existence of certain objects. In fact, truthin the abstract, and with the vague associationswhich attach to it, is a very strange entity, andslippery as an eel.Veracity is the disposition of a man to give toothers the exact impression of his own mind;it is the avoidance of misrepresentation, and thatgrowing out of attention, intense in proportionto the importance of the representation itself.Veracity being wholly subordinate to prudenceand benevolence, is its exercise a virtuein a case where neither would be violated by itsinfraction, or would such infraction be a vice?No ! but to find such cases would be no easytask. Veracity is not indeed of any value butwith a reference to the circumstances thatsurround it. In the case of lying, it may be seenhow insufficient the often employed religioussanction is for restraining childhood from vice.A child has it said to him, 'If you tell a lie youwill go to hell;' he tells a lie, the menaced pu-vol.T. 11242 DEONTOLOGY.punishment does not fall upon him, and the menacesoon ceases to have any influence. If the childbelieve, his next thoughts may naturally be —I may as well tell a hundred lies, it will notmake the matter worse.'Sincerity has a wider import than veracity.It is a breach of sincerity not to state a fact ;it is no breach of veracity. There is much lessscruple in not stating things than in statingthings falsely ; it is the contrast between whatis negative and what is positive. To state whatis annoying to another when no purpose isanswered of corresponding pleasure, chance ofpleasure, or exemption from pain, is the contraryof virtuous. Where there is a solemndemand for truth, the cases are few where itshould not be disclosed.The importance of veracity must also be consideredwith a reference to the number of personsinterested in it. He who deceives twocommits a greater crime than he who deceivesone. Falsehoods are susceptible of a classificationwhich will serve to point out the extent oftheir mischievousness and consequent immorality.Malicious falsehoods are flagitious ; theyshould be avoided for the sake of others. Interestedfalsehoods are mean ; a man should avoidthem for his own sake. So falsehoods to exciteHUMF.Vs VIRTU FS. 243astonishment arc to a certain extent interestedfalsehoods, which for his own sake a manshould avoid.Falsehoods of humanity, falsehoods to avoidhurting the self-love of others or exposing thepersons or property of others to injury ; as whereforinstance, an assassin is in pursuit of hisintended victim, and is misled by a falsehoodtold him as to the direction taken by the personhe is pursuing ; these may be innocent andbenevolent, as long as they do not give causeto suspect a general indifference to veracity. Iflavishly employed this will infallibly be theresult ; thence the demand of prudence that theiremployment should be most rare, as in fact thedemand for them is rare.Falsehoods of necessity ; such as are andmust be used to madmen ; falsehoods of self-defence,against lawless violence, come underthe same conditions.Equivocation differs from falsehood, and ispreferable to it, inasmuch as it gives the chancethat if the equivocator cannot immediately discoverterms sufficiently ambiguous for equivocation,he will tell the truth.An equivocation is a falsehood in ideas, notin words.A lie is a falsehood both in ideas and words.The having recourse rather to equivocation244 DEONTOLOGY.than to a lie direct, shows a certain regard totruth ; for though an equivocation might be preferredto truth, truth may be preferred to a lie.Truth may be had from a person who dealsin equivocations ; for he may be taken on asudden, before he has time to put together anequivocation.If a man is known only for an equivocator, itis also known that there is a method of dealingwith him. It is to press him with distinctionsupon the terms of his answers, till you get himto terms not susceptible of ambiguity. You bythis means force him at last to take his chancebetween simple truth and downright falsehood.An equivocator gives evidence of a dispositionto keep upon terms with truth.Perjury is lying in the case where the religioussanction is put prominently forward as theguarantee for truth and the check upon falsehood.The force of the religious sanction dependswholly upon the state of the mind of the individualto whom it is applied. It will addnothing to the power of eliciting truth in caseswhere the popular sanction is in full activity. Inthe cases of oaths and vows the sanction is thesame. The profanation of a vow diminishes theforce of the sanction as applied to promises offuture conduct ; it therefore diminishes the forceHume's virtues. 245of the same sanction as applied to relations ofpast conduct or past events.There are cases where a vow, though an undertakingfor future conduct, may be violated in theact of taking it. Such is that of a vow takento believe a proposition, of the truth of whichthe person vowing has no conviction at thetime.The guilty of this profanation are those whoinsist on this sacrifice of principles to prejudices,on pretence of securing a tranquillity of mindwhich would be far better compassed by thatliberty which takes away the motives to debate.As a means of this tranquillity their own voiceis in favour of these forced professions ; the voiceof experience in every country where this libertyis perfect, and of every country in which it hasbeen admitted at all, as far as it has beenadmitted, is against them.Among the Romans, while the undertakingwas confined to respect things at once usefuland practicable, such as obedience to the orderof a general, the force of this sanction wasstupendous.Veracity and mendacity are less immediatelyconnected than the other virtues with pleasureand pain. Hence the difficulty of assigning totheir modifications the character that belongsto them. Sincerity and insincerity, ingenuouslyDEONTOLOGY.ness and disingenuousness, are more or lesspernicious, more or less virtuous or vicious, asthe particular case may exhibit them. Silenceitself may have all the mischief and culpabilityof mendacity, where, for instance, the conveyanceof information is a matter of duty, whereprudence or benevolence require that the informationshould be given. Veracity, in somecases, demands fortitude for an ally, and fortitudebecomes a virtue when the alliance is tofurther the ends of sound morality.Caution is near akin to discretion, but hasmore timidity in it, and is applied to subjectsfrom whence greater danger may arise. It isprudence wherever there is virtue in it.Enterprize is activity, combined with comparativefearlessness with reference to evil results; it is one of the forms of activity, andmay be considered a species of intellectualcourage, either facing danger (i. e. probableevil) or turning aside from it. This may beeither the result of the will, or of the non-applicationof the will to the subject. Attentionis the application of the will, when the willisacted on with a considerable degree of force.Assiduity is a continued enterprize, appliedfor a considerable length of time to the samesubject, without any long interruption.Economy is frugality combined with goodHume's virtues. 247management, which is an intellectual attribute ;it is sometimes used without reference to economy,and implies a self-denial which is notnecessary to economy. Temptations to dissipationsurround every man ; and here, as onother parts of the field, the continued practiceof self-denial is a habit of virtue.Follow a list of qualities, fourteen in number,of which Hume says nobody can for a momentrefuse them the tribute of praise and approbation.Of these temperance, sobriety, and patienceare but emanations from self-regardingprudence. Constancy, perseverance, forethought,and considerateness, when virtues, are modificationsof prudence, but are not necessarily virtues,— nay, they may be vices. Secrecy, whena virtue, belongs to prudence or effective benevolence; while order, insinuation, address, presenceof mind, quickness of conception, and facility ofexpression, are, for the most part, intellectualattributes, and in no wise entitled to be classifiedeither as virtues or vices, except in asfar as they are regulated by the will.Sobriety is temperance applied to any thingproducing intoxication.Patience may refer either to sensation or toaction; it is the non-indication of sufferingto the actual suffering, and the moreDEONTOLOGY.patient a man is, the less is his suffering increasedby duration.Constancy has many meanings ; constancy,in a bad cause, would be vice, as, in a goodcause, it is virtue : it is perseverance in a cause,whether right or wrong ; it is perseverance,in spite of temptation. It is vicious, virtuous,or neuter. A man constantly eats, drinks, andsleeps ; but his eating, drinking, and sleepingare not acts of vice nor virtue.Perseverance rather imports continuity ofaction : like constancy, it may, or may not, bevirtue. It calls attention into exercise.Forethought is imagination applied to futurecontingent events : it is necessary to the properexercise of self-regarding prudence. Its valuedepends on the remoteness and complexityof the objects towards which it is directed.Considerateness is the bringing together allthe ideas that bear on a subject with referenceto the end in view ; the end constituting themerit or demerit of the quality.Secrecy is a negative quality. It is negativeeffective benevolence, applied to the case wherethe disclosure of facts would be prejudicial toothers ; it is self-regarding prudence when thedisclosure would be prejudicial to the individualhimself When a secret is committed to you.Hume's virtues. 249and the divulging it would do no harm to yourselfor others, the divulging it is a breach ofcontract.Order is a modification of method ; it is theputting things one after another, so that someparticular end is answered by the arrangement.Order is an abstract word, which you cannotdo without any more than you can do withoutthe word time: it is the placing things in a line;it is a compound non-entity, growing out of ourideas of space and time.Insinuation is the faculty of recommendingoneself to another by action or discourse, accompaniedby a desire that the faculty shouldnot be detected. It is the art of ingratiating —the making oneself an object of sympathy, witha concealment of the purpose.Address is an instrument of insinuation ; itis insinuation in a wider field of thought andaction.Presence of mind is a power over one's ownmind ; it is the faculty of readily bringing intoview all the several considerations necessary tocorrect decision : it is that which takes promptmeasures for the prevention of evil.Quickness of conception should have precededpresence of mind.' It is a simple idea ; it isimplied in the idea of presence of mind.250 DEONTOLOGY.Facility of expression can be no virtue; itis quickness of conception giving language toits thought.The qualities agreeable to ourselves are,according to Hume, cheerfulness, dignity ormagnanimity, courage and tranquillity.Cheerfulness, in so far as it is a naturaldisposition, is not a virtue : in so far as it isacquired, it is prudence. It is the being pleased,and the giving expression to the sense of pleasure.It is, to a very great extent, an endowmentof a particular constitutional temperament.Virtue is something which can be excited byeffort ; it is something which obeys our commands: but a disposition to sadness, or a dispositionto gladness, does not obey our commands.By study we may diminish the oneand increase the other, and by so doing we giveevidence of, and exercise to, self-regardingprudence. By far the larger portion of cheerfulnessis inherent, though enjoyment acts upon it,and tends greatly to its increase. * The habitof doing good,' as benevolence has been called,is the best instructor how to make instrumentsof cheerfulness. Every being who is the recipientof benevolence may be a source of futurepleasure, and of exemption from future pain.Dignity, when a virtue, is extra-regardingII U mil's Virtues. 251prudence ; it may be exhibited in behavior,or it may be the exhibition alone of the instrumentsof dignity.Courage may be a virtue or may be a vice.To a great extent it is a natural quality : itdoes not always imply self-denial, nor alwaysexhibit benevolence. It may be, perhaps, moreproperly said that courage is neither a virtuenor a vice, but an instrument of either, itscharacter depending wholly on its application.For a man to value himself on his courage,without any reference to the occasions on whichit is exercised, is to value himself on a qualitypossessed in a far higher degree by a dog,especially if the dog is mad.Tj-amjuiUity is insensibility to external causesof suffering, and particularly of remote suffering.Every man desires to keep in view objects thatare agreeable, and out of view objects that arcdisagreeable.The qualities which Hume introduces, asagreeable to others, are j^oliteiiess, wit, decencyand cleanness.Politeness is more of a negative than a positivequality. It is the avoidance of actionsor behavior which may be disagreeable to theperson with whom you have to do. Its positivebranch is the doing whatever it may be agreeableto others that you should do. In all252 DEONTOLOGY,cases where the laws of prudence and benevolenceare not opposed to the usages of society,self-interest demands attention to them. Thehighest order of politeness is the applicationof the rules which are recognized in high life.But here there is mingled with it so muchmendacity, and that of a useless, even whennot prominently pernicious character, that theanalysis of politeness must be thoroughly madebefore its character can be determined. Iteasily degenerates into self-esteem, and insteadof an instrument of pleasure, becomes one ofannoyance. Many men intend to communicateenjoyment, — for example, by stories, by excessiveattentions, and other efforts, which are thecause of weariness to those whom they reallydesire to gratify. Fashion is the competitionfor admiration, and its vices begin where annoyancesare caused to others for the purposesof selfishness. In some cases, as in the courtswhere etiquette is carried farthest, the sacrificeof the many to the one, of the comforts of themany to the pride of the one, is striking.Under the Bourbons at the Tuileries, etiquetterequired that, until the King sat down to cards,every body must stand, however weary. Thiswas politeness, this was etiquette, but it wasabsurdity and folly.Wit is a very ambiguous virtue. Locke sayshume's virtues. 253that wit consists in discovering resemblances ;judgment, in discovering differences. Wit conferspower, and is thence an object of desire :it is the power of giving pleasure to some, butoften at the expense of pain to others. If thesubject of malevolent wit is present, his painis immediate ; if absent, he sutlers from losinga portion of the good opinion of others, and thequantity of his suffering cannot be traced.One of the merits of wit is that it should beunexpected. There is a species of it whichmay be produced from a dictionary by the merejuxta-position of words. Quolibet cum quodlibetmay be applied to its production.Wit has no existence except where the analogyelicited is brought to view ; it may be bycontrast, but the analogy or the contrast shouldbe suddenly produced.Decency is a term vague and unsatisfactory.It means, as generally used, the avoidance ofbringing forward what is disagreeable to others.This is a negative virtue. When it comes in apositive shape, it is frequently only an ecclesiasticalvirtue, employing wealth for the purposesof delusion. Decency is to cover thethrone with crimson, to carve the pulpit, toprovide lawn sleeves ; it is to do that whichit is agreeable to the ruling few to have done.Delicacy is one of the branches of decency, but254 DEONTOLOGY.more commonly referring to the avoidance ofphysical annoyances. It is not an unusualthing for men to take merit to themselves forbeing disgusted with that which does not disgustpeople in general, and to imagine that thisaffected sensibility is a mark of their belongingto the aristocratic classes. Decorum is anotherof the forms of decency ; it refers, for the mostpart, to the avoidance of matters of small moment,the non-avoidance of which would exposeus to the contempt of others.Cleanliness acts through the medium of theimagination ; it is a negative virtue. It is theavoidance of practices by which disease, orthe apprehension of disease, is produced. Theneglect of salutary attentions to the person is immediatelyassociated with the idea of disease.Dirt, for example, left on the body, calls upthe thought of unhealthiness. It is a sort ofdislocation of matter in small particles ; andattention to cleanliness is demanded by prudence,in as far as inattention to it is injuriousto ourselves ; by benevolence, in as far as inattentionto it is offensive to others. The impressionof its absence may be produced wherethe intrusive substances are not in themselvesdisagreeable. Gold-dust sticking to a man'sface would give nearly the same impression of awant of cleanliness as any other substance, justhuinie's virtues. 255as the finest white powder on a scuttle of coalswould give a notion of impurity.And Hume concludes his list by the introductionof two virtues, classified as good qualitiesin society. They are chastity and allegiance.Chaditif is the refraining from sensualenjoyments where indulgence is improper,where their gratification would be productive ofmore pain to others than of pleasure to himwho indulges in them. Modesty is not necessarilya branch of chastity. There may beconstant unchastity without immodesty. Grosslanguage — language in the highest degree immodest,may be unaccompanied with an unchasteact ; and acts of unchastity may be indulged inwithout the utterance of an immodest word.Allegiance is vagueness itself, unless the specialsubject be shewn, and then it is effectivebenevolence on the largest scale, provided theobject of allegiance is conformable to the greatesthappiness principle. All depends on the characterof that government for which allegianceis claimed. Allegiance may be an obviousvirtue, it may be a very pernicious crime. Agood government is that in which the influenceis placed in the hands of those who are interestedin the exercise of benevolent power.Allegiance is a term employed instead of obedience.Obedience is good when the governessDEONTOLOGY.nient is good, — bad when the government is bad.Opposition to institutions friendly to humanhappiness is vice proportioned to the amountof their excellence. Opposition to institutionsunfriendly to human happiness is virtue proportionedto the amount of their mischief. Sofar,at least, is the teaching of effective benevolence; but if the sacrifice made to overthrow,bad governments exceeds the chances of goodto be produced by their overthrow, then virtuedemands abstention. No case can be conceivedin which virtue will allow the dictates of self-regardinginterest to attempt the overthrow ofgood institutions ; for the amount of evil withwhich others would be visited must completelyabsorb the amount of good which theindividual could obtain for himself.The examples given by Hume are, for themost part, mere assumptions that he, the moralist,is to decide on all the cases that comebefore him. He occupies a pulpit whence hedeals out his moral dogmas, and speaks asif he were the representative of higher virtuesthan the man to whom he is speaking. Whenhe gives no examples, it is mere idle trumpeting,tanta rara and fiddle-de-dee. He drawsno intelligible distinctions between pleasure,passion, and pain : he makes distinctions wherethere are no differences, and dreams of settlingmoral points by phrases, such as * It is becomingwhich arc the mere sic volo despotism ofan instructor. Pleasure and pain are the onlyclues for unravelling the mysteries of morality.Fly where you will, fumble about as youplease, no other master key shall you find, toopen all the doors which lead into the templeof truth.*How does it happen that so many vaguewords, with vague ideas, or no ideas at allattached to them, have so long kept possessionof the field ? It is because we imagine wethoroughly comprehend the terms which arcfamiliar to us.What we are continually talking of, merelyfrom our having been continually talking of it,we imagine we understand. So close an unionhas habit cemented between words and things,that we take one for the other, and whenwe have words in our ears we imagine we havethoughts in our minds. When an unusual♦ The services of Hume, in many parts of the field ofmoral and mental philosophy, were immense. lie first drewa clear distinction between impressions and ideas, a distinction,without which it is hardly possible to obtain any clearnotions on many topics of leading importance. The distinctionis obvious when pointed out : — I see a man — it is aperception : I close my eyes, but imagine myself to sec hintstill — it is an idea.VOL. I. S258 Doxology.word presents itself, we challenge it ; we examineourselves, to see whether we have anidea annexed to it ; but when a word that wearefamiliar with comes across us, we let itpass on, under favor of old recognition. Thelong acquaintance we have had with it makesus take for granted we have investigated allits meaning ; we deal by it, in consequence,as the Custom-house officers in certain countries,who, having once set their seal upon apacket, so long as they see, or think they seetheir seal upon it, reasonably enough supposethemselves dispensed with from visiting andexamining the contents of it anew.False. Virtues. 259CHAPTER XVII.FALSE VIRTUES.There are other qualities which have been putforward by different writers on morality asvirtues, and as entitled to the praise and therecompense of virtue. In most cases they areof ambiguous character, and as they presentcertain points of contact with prudence andbenevolence, they obtain the character of virtue,not so much on account of their essentialattributes as of their accidental association withqualities really virtuous. The very defect ofcharacter may in this way be made to presentan aspect of virtue : and the affections may beso engaged with one side of a question, as tointerfere with a right judgment of its moralmerit. A mother steals a loaf to satisfy thehunger of a starving child. How easy it wouldbe to excite the sympathies in favor of hermaternal tenderness, so as to bury all considerationof her dishonesty in the depth ofthose sympathies. And, in truth, nothing butan enlarged and expansive estimate, such aswould take the case out of the regions of DEONTOLOGY.liberality into the wider regions of publicgood, could ever lead to the formation of a rightjudgment in such matters.Contempt for Riches. Socrates' contempt forriches was mere affectation and pride, just asmeritorious as it would have been for him tohave remained standing for a long time on oneleg. It was only denying to himself the doingthe good which riches would have enabled himto do. The desire of wealth is the desire, inavague form, to possess what wealth canobtain. So again, his denying himself assistancefrom others was a mere self-regardingcalculation, it was only to excite their self-esteemfor other purposes ; it was a calculationto receive more than he would otherwise obtainit was a refusal of 100/. in order to get200/.So Epictetus, — he had more pleasure in pridethan in benevolence. He paid himself out ofthe testimonies of respect with which he wassurrounded. He calculated on getting morefrom self-denial than he could get without it.But he was less meritorious than the Orientalfakirs, who suffer more than he. His conductwas that of the miser who stores his wealth,that, on any future occasion, he may commandwhat he pleases by the exercise of that instrumentof power. He pays himself with theFi\LSE VIRTUES. 261pleasures of imagination, which are greater tohim than those of actual fruition. Misers, asthey grow older, have less sense of presentenjoyment, and become, therefore, more andmore disposed to avarice, which is an anticipationof a future reward.Love of Action, Love of action, without anobject, is nothing : it has in it neither vice norvirtue. Such part of it as proceeds from thewill, and is directed to the production of happiness,is virtuous. Such part as is intellectualis neutral ; where it is the act of the will,and is directed to the production of evil, it isvicious.Attention. It is the quality which distinguishesthe botanist who carefully gathers theflower, from the clown who tramples it underhis feet. Felled attentmi has been latelybrought forward as a virtue, and a pretty virtueit is ; so that if I purpose to murder a man,and fix my attention upon it, that is a virtue !Enterprize has also been honoured with thetitle of virtue. Enterprize, which may be asbad a vice as any in the calendar. Anddispatch has reached the same laudatory elevation.*Dispatch is the employment of theleast quantity of time sufficient for the attain-mostof the above are introduced as virtues by Jevons,in his Principles of Morality.262 DEONTOLOGY.ment of an object. It is quickness withoutprecipitation. It is a prudent means, whichmay be used for an end either of good or evil.But, having established a general rule, whichevery one may apply for himself to the estimateof those qualities of which he desires to form ajudgment, — having shown that unless they canbe classed under the heads of prudence andeffective benevolence, they are not virtues, — thatonly such parts of them are virtues as can be soclassed, — it is scarcely needful to pursue thesubject farther.•JUK Passions. 2G3CHAPTER XVIII.THE PASSIONS.Passion is intense emotion — emotion is evanescentpassion.The nature of the passions can only be understoodby their division into the differentheads of pleasure and pain : for the principlesby which they are to be governed, referencemust be made to the list of virtues and vices.Let the passion of anger be analysed, and itsconsequences traced. When under its influence,a man is suffering pain — pain produced bythe contemplation of the act wliicli has excitedthe passion. An immediate consequence is, adesire to produce pain in the breast of the partywho has awakened the anger. Anger, then,has in it two constant ingredients — pain sufferedby the angry man, and a desire to give pain tothe person by whom he has been made angry.And now to the question of virtue and vice.As there is no anger without pain, the man whodraws pain upon himself without the compensationof a more than equivalent pleasure, violatesthe law of prudence.Next comes the desire to produce pain in the2G4 DEONTOLOGY.breast of the object of anger. This desire cannotbe gratified without malevolence and maleficence.Here is an obvious violation of thelaw of benevolence. And here we have an exemplificationof the relationship between passionand pain and pleasure ; between passion andvirtue and vice.Cannot anger then be indulged without vicein both its shapes, without imprudence, andwithout maleficence ?It cannot ! It cannot, at least-whenever itrises to the height of passion. And here a moreremote, but more mischievous result presentsitself to view, as a violation of the law of self-regardingprudence. The passion cannot begratified but by the production of pain in hisbreast by whom the anger has been excited,and pain cannot be produced there without acounter-desire to retaliate the pain, or greaterpain on him who has produced it. To the painin the breast of the angry man there is a termination,and most commonly a speedy termination,but to the remote pain, which may be consideredthe third link in the chain of causes andeffects, who can put a limit ? Anger may havehad what is called its revenge, but the exerciseof that revenge may have created the durablepassion of enmity, to whose consequence it isimpossible to affix a boundary.Since anger cannot exist without vice, whatTHE PASSIONS. 265is to be done ? Can a man exist without anger ?Without anger can injuries be averted, can self-defence,can self-preservation be provided for ?Certainly not without the production of painto him who has inflicted the injury. But tothe production of this pain anger is not necessary.Anger is no more necessary thanto the surgeon by whom, to save suffering orlife, a painful operation is performed. No angeris excited in his breast by the view of the agonyhe inflicts, or by the contemplation of thegreater evil which would follow but for his interference.That anger should never have placeis not possible ; it is not consistent with thestructure of the human mind. But it may besaid, and that on every occasion, and withoutany exception, that the less there is of it thebetter : for whatever pain is needful to the productionof the useful effect, that pain will bemuch better measured without the passion,than by it.But, it may be said, there are circumstancesin which not only jiain — the natural effect ofanger — pain purposely produced, but angeritself, the passion of anger, is useful, and evennecessary to the existence of society, and thatthese circumstances in our own country, extendover the whole field of penal jurisprudence.I have been robbed. The offender.266 DEONTOLOGY.on conviction, will be capitally punished, ortransported in a state of servitude. Shall Iprosecute him ? Not if self regarding prudenceis alone to be my counsellor ; for her counselswould be — Add not to the loss inflicted by therobbery, the farther loss inflicted on you by theprosecution. Not if I consult benevolence, forshe would say, the punishment is too great forthe offence. And such is the response whichin the knowledge of every body, and especiallywhen the punishment of death is menaced, frequentlydetermines a man's conduct.But, were the matter rightly considered, theresponse, it might be said, would be — Yes!prosecute ; for the good of the community requiresthat neither the suffering of the offenderin the shape of punishment, nor the suffering ofyourself, the prosecutor, in the shape of vexationand expence, should be grudged. Good !but I can ill afford it : the pecuniary burthen tomewill be greater than that uncertain, estimated,and remote benefit which will grow outof the prosecution and its results. Again, theresponses of benevolence have no influence withme. Be they ever so decisive, they have not apreponderant weight in my mind.In this case, neither prudence nor benevolencewill produce action ; and yet, if action werenot produced, the security of society would suffPASSIONS. 267fer a serious shock — a shock serious in proportionto its frequency ; and, if constant, securitywould be wholly destroyed, and the generalruin of property would immediately follow.The supposed virtue in both its forms, is insufficientto preserve society, and anger, howeverdissocial its character, is indispensably necessary.It is not easy to refute this reasoning, underthe present state of our penal code. But it willbe immediately seen, that the necessity of thepassion does not arise out of the nature of thecase, and that it is produced, to a great extent,by the imperfections of our laws : for if thoseimperfections were removed, the demand for thepassion of anger would, at all events, be verygreatly diminished. Were the needless expenceand vexation attending a prosecution removed,the answer of self regarding prudencemight be opposite to what it now is. Were thepernicious excess of punishment taken away,the answer of benevolence would be opposite towhat it is. And if you suppose a state in whichthe passion of anger were subjected to the demandsof prudence and benevolence, how fewwould be the occasions in which the passion itselfcould find field for its exercise.The legislator, indeed, whose purpose is tokeep delinquency within bounds, and whose268 DEONTOLOGY.conduct is to produce effect on the nationalscale, has a claim upon him somewhat differentfrom that on the individual. The self regardingmotives are, in his case, not the prominent ones,and while the inhibition of the passion in thebreast of individuals seems demanded by virtue,benevolence requires from the legislator suchan exercise of it as will lead to those inflictions ofpain, which are likely to minimize the quantityof crime.Anger has the quality of being increasedby giving vent to itself. He who swears becausehe is angry, only becomes the more angryin consequence. The appetite is increased, notsatisfied, by the aliment it feeds on.What has been said of anger applies to envyand jealousy. They both imply the presenceof pain. To suppress them in our own breastsis demanded by prudence ; if they exist there inan inoperative state, it is prudence alone thatrequires their suppression. If they are likelyso to be awakened as to produce a maleficentinfluence upon others, their suppression is calledfor by benevolence.But vv'hy is reason inefficacious againstpassion ?It cannot raise up images lively enough.What is called reason, as applied to thegovernment of the passions, is the making theTHE PASSIONS. 209scale turn in favor of a greater pleasure in preferenceto a less.The will necessarily yields to the solicitationof the greatest apparent good.And the causes why the influences of passiondomineer over the influences of reason are —1 . Want of apparent intensity in the distantpleasure which reason promises — want of vivacityin the idea of it.2. Want of apparent certainty — want ofready discernment to trace out, at the instant,the train of effects and causes that promote orimpede the production of the distant pleasure.Hence the use of the expedient, which hasbeen frequently recommended, of playing off"one passion against another.Habitually to exercise the mind in the applicationof the true standard of morality, will behabitually to train the affections and the passionsto virtuous tendencies and virtuous conduct.And the occasions are infinite — they areoccurring every hour of our existence, nor isany occasion to be despised. Like flakes ofsnow that fall unperceived upon the earth, theseemingly unimportant events of life succeedone another. As the snow gathers together, soare our habits formed. No single flake that isadded to the pile produces a sensible change; nosingle action creates, however it may exhibit, a270 . DF.OXTOr.OGY.man's character ; but, as the tempest hurls theavalanche down the mountain, and overwhelmsthe inhabitant and his habitation, so passion,acting upon the elements of mischief, whichpernicious habits have brought together by imperceptibleaccumulation, may overthrow theedifice of truth and virtue.IN TEI.LFXTUAL FACULTIES. 271CHAPTER XIX.INTELLECTUAL FACULTIES.Between the intellectual faculties and virtueand vice there exists an intimate relation.Wherever the will has any influence on theirdirection, they belong to the moral field ; and,in as far as it is in the power of the will to addto their efficiency, they become instruments ofpain and pleasure, and important in the proportionof the amount of pain and pleasure whichtheir exercise is able to produce.The faculty of invention, for instance, belongsto the understanding — it is intellectual ; but,whether it is an instrument in the hands ofvirtue or vice, depends upon its application topurposes beneficent or maleficent.But the influence of the understanding uponthe weill is yet more important. Tt is to the understandingthat every appeal must be made,and unless it can be associated with the demandsof morality, there is little prospect for the successof the Deontological teacher. His reasonings,his persuasions must be addressed to theintellectual faculties. He must win them to his272 DEONTOLOGY.side before he can influence conduct. It is bytheir assistance that he is to teach the arithmeticof pains and pleasures. By them he is toshow what are the penalties to be paid by vice,and what are the recompenses to wait upon virtue.He reasons ; and his reasons are propheticof inevitable evil to imprudence and improbity ;of infallible good to prudence and benevolence.Passion appeals only to that which is, — the intellectualfaculties bring what will be into thethoughts. They, in fact, constitute the maindifference between the virtues of beasts andthose of men. The lower animals, for the mostpart, are unchecked in their search of pleasureby any anticipation of future pain. No apprehensionof consequences would lead them toabstain from any present enjoyment. Exceptamong a few of the more intelligent, all the lessonsare lost even of experience : the waste ofexperience being, perhaps, attributable to theimperfections of the recollecting faculty. Butthe mind of man stretches before and after.Reason brings events that are passed to bearupon the future. It not only draws upon experience,but on imagination. The field of itsinfluence is boundless as the range of thought.Observant of consequences, it presents them tothe inquirer. It abstracts pains and pleasuresfrom the dross that surrounds them ; it analysesINTELLECTUAL Faculties. 273their value by dividing them into their componentparts, or gathers them up into a whole inorder to ascertain the sum total. It comparesthem one with another when they are arrangedon different sides, generalizes out of the collectedelements, and deduces the ultimate result.In this way do the intellectual facultiesbecome the most important servants of virtue,leading men into the true and trust worthy pathsof felicity.Hume introduces his intellectual facultieswithout any arrangement or order. They may,however, be conveniently classed.First : Passive Faculties. § I — Those whichoperate, without need of much attention or comparison,on more than one object.1. Perception — the source of all the otherfaculties.2. Memory — becomes active when attentionis applied to it.3. Imagination — a passive quality, for it isbusy even in dreams ; when active, it becomesinvention.§ II. Operating on two or more objects, butstill without need of much attention.1. Judgment — as in the case of vision.Second : Faculties active — volitional.^ I. Operating without need of the judgmenton more than one object.VOL. I. T274 DEONTOLOGY.1. Attention.2. Observation — which is attention appliedto a particular object.§ II. — Requiring the assistance of the judgment,and the presence of more than oneobject.1. Abstraction.2. Analysis.3. Synthesis, or combination.4. Comparison.5. Generalization.(5. Deduction.§ III. — Requiring the presence of two ormore of the active-volitional faculties, and oftwo or more objects.1. Distribution.2. Methodization.Invention is performed by the use of the otherfaculties, including attention in an intense degree,under the direction of the judgment, andhaving for its object the discovery of some newfact, the production of some new effort, or theformation of some new combination of ideas.Communication, with which Hume closes hislist, seems to have no right to be classed amongthe intellectual faculties.When the intellectual faculties are not, orcannot be called into operation, conduct istaken out of the regions of virtue and vice. InINTELLECTUAL FACULTIES. 275infancy, for example, before the mind is broughtinto action ; in insanity, where the thinkingpowers are overthrown, there is no responsibilities,and, consequently, no title can be madeout to praise or blame. In the case of temporaryaberration of the reasoning powers, asunderthe influence of intoxication, the actor isnot responsible for the act committed, while hisjudgment is, as it were, extinguished. It is asecondary consequence of a primary imprudence.In the case of insanity, the course to bepursued by society is clear, — the power ofvoluntary action must be taken away. In thecase of infancy, the demand for impunity mustdepend on the quantity of mind which is developed; and it will be found that, at a very earlyage, the influence of pain, which is made to visitmisconduct, may be brought into operation, andfrom the moment that such discipline becomesoperative, there is a demand for its application.In the case of acts committed under the influenceof inebriety, there is no claim to impunity,nor can any general rule be laid down whichshall be applicable to every case. All the sanctionsmust be consulted, in order to exact thesufficient penalties for the past, and to obtainthe most appropriate securities for the future.270 DEONTOLOGY.CHAPTER XX.CONCLUSION.To what does all we have been advocating tend ?To the development of two principles, — first,the greatest happiness principle, or the diffusionof good, — and, secondly, the disappointment-opposingprinciple, or the prevention of evil.Out of these two items all the branches of moralitygrow.It may be objected, that all our reasoningshave not brought our principles into the field ofdemonstration. What then ! If our argumentsshould so regulate conduct as to produce aresult which will leave no regret behind it,what more have we reason to desire ? Arethey strong enough to communicate that balanceof pleasure towards which they tend, and towhich alone they look? What better shouldthey do .''Whether they be of that kind to which we havebeen accustomed to give the name of the intuitive,or of the demonstrative, or only of theprobable, it is no matter ; the satisfaction theyCONCLUSION. 277give us is perfect; and, whatever be their name,their success could be no more.Give them the name of demonstration or anyother, what matters it ? It is not the name weareconcerned in, but the thing.There is however something at the bottom ofall this anxiety. What men want to know is,the degree of assurance they are warrantedto indulge. What evidence is there that thismorality is the true morality?Call the sort of proof men have of a proposition,demonstration, they may be positivewithout being exposed to accusations of rashnesseither from themselves or any one else.No one can have present to his mind theproof of every proposition, how true soever,which he believes. It is for want of the thing"*that men are so anxious about the word.No man, how philosophical, how scrupuloussoever, but believes infinitely more propositionsupon trust than upon perception : the onlydifference in this particular between the philosopherand the no-philosopher, or in short betweenthe wise man and the weak is, that thelatter rests upon authority conclusively, in thelast as well as in the first instance ; the formeralways keeps open the appeal to reason, that is,to his own perceptions. The judgments of thefirst, upon hearing the report of authority, are278 DEONTOLOGY.provisional ; the judgments of the latter aredefinitive.But of demonstration certain propositions arenot susceptible. The proposition that happinessis better than unhappiness cannot be subjectedto mathematical proof. But let him whoimpugns the doctrine impugn our reasonings.It is the only axiom we desire to have taken forgranted, and this is to make a very smalldemand upon confidence or upon credulity.The march of utilitarian principles has beenobvious. They have made their way by theirnative strength and excellence. How shouldmen be better occupied than in tracing the consequencesof conduct ? Observation broughtwith it its corresponding results.Men perceived such and such actions wereuseful ; they perceived such and such otheractions were mischievous. They took a particularaction, of the sort, for instance, that wasmischievous : by abstracting the particularcircumstances of time, of place, of parties, theyformed a general idea ; to that general idea theygave a name ; that name constituted a genus towhich other acts of the same nature were referredin common. If any one took into considerationthat genus or species of action (no matterwhich we call it) and said of it that it was mischievous,the proposition in which he said asCONCLUSION. 279much, — the proposition in which he predicatedmischievousness of action— formed a maxim ofutility.But it is not probable that people put thequality of an action that affected them uponthis conspicuous footing, in the early timesof which we are speaking; those times whichpreceded the formation of laws. Men in generalare not arrived so far even now. They expressedtheir sentiments in some such obscureterms as * right ' or * fitting,' terms which servedonly to express their disapprobation, and notthe ground of it. It is one thing (how strangesoever the proposition may appear, experiencehas taught the truth of it), — it is onething for men to feel pain from an act, and markthat act accordingly with a sentiment of disapprobation; and another thing to fix explicitlyupon that pain as the cause of that disapprobation.Nothing can be idler than the appeal to antiquityas authority. In the midst of some truthsthere are a thousand fallacies. The light to befound shines by contrast with surroundingsdarkness. Of instruments of delusion, eruditionhas frequently made use of the most baleful.True, such language was held, such opinionswere professed by self-styled philosophers.What then ? For, if from their language nopractical conclusion can be drawn, — from their280 DEONTOLOGY.opinions no result of good can be elicited, whereis their value ? Men there are whose preachingcomes to this :Read modern books less and ancient more.Go for the moral sciences to Aristotle, to Plato.For metaphysics, not to Locke, but still to Aristotle.For Botany, not to Linnaeus, but toTheophrastus — to ^lian.'This is precisely the way to talk of everythingand know nothing; — to be as much farther fromknowledge in almost every science as a childwho cannot tell his letters is from the mostintelligent professor.Life is not long enough to store the mind withthe facts that form the stock of the several sciences,were no propositions presented but whatare true and those dressed in their simplest garb.Yet many men would send us to rake in books inwhich, for ten propositions evidently false, and tentimes the number of unintelligible ones, you willscarcely find a single one that is true, and that onedished out over and over again in the meanestmodern compilation on the subject you can layyour hands on : you may turn over whole volumesof antiquity without discovering a solitarytruth to make you amends for your pains.To make this any but the most absurd as itis one of the most pernicious species of prejudice,the whole order of nature must be reversed.CONCLUSION. 281The acorn must be larger than the oak it willbecome. A man must be wiser in his mother'swomb than in the vigour of his manhood. Everythingmust be supposed to grow backwards.New experiences added to the subsisting stockmust lessen the number there existed before.It is scarcely possible to believe a man tostand bona fide on so noxious a system. If hedo, grieve over him, but treat him as an enemyto knowledge, and to that happiness which isfounded upon knowledge. The public interestsdemand that his notions rise not into credit.A man thinks not so highly of Plato as hedeserves. What is the consequence ? Nothing.A man thinks more highly of Plato than hedeserves. What is the consequence ? He goesand reads him. He tortures his brains to findmeaning where there is none. He moves heavenand earth to understand a writer who didnot understand himself, and he crawls out ofthat mass of crudities with a spirit broken by disappointmentand humiliation. He has learned thatfalsehood is truth, and nonsense is sublimity.Of all the works that can be imagined, therecould scarcely be a more useful one than an * indexexpurgatorius' (but the composer of it mustbe a writer of sufficient eminence to give law tomen's opinions) of the books which have bewilderedand betrayed mankind.282 DEONTOLOGY.If the theory of morals which has been heredeveloped, has in it any value, that value willbe found in its simplicity, intelligibleness, anduniversal applicability. But let it not be supposed,because a standard has been recommendedby which the multitudinous questions ofright and wrong are measured and decided, thatthe discovery of this standard, and of its all-comprehensivefitness has been unattended withlaborious meditation and inquiry. The meritof deep thought consists, not in compelling thereader to descend into the profound well of truth,there to draw for himself of its healthful andrefreshing waters, but in its having enabled thewriter to descend and to bring up for the use ofothers the invigorating draught. There is littledue to the man who sends another forth in search ofundiscovered truth ; but he has established someclaim to the good opinion of his fellow men who,having gone forth in pursuit of the treasure,brings it home and delivers it over to the keepingof all who are willing to receive it at hishands.Of the merits of a work of which truth is theobject we cannot have an adequate idea nor aperfect relish without some acquaintance withthe errors against which it is levelled and whichit is calculated to displace. With respect tomany, the apparent merit of such a work willCONCLUSION. 283be apt to be in an inverse proportion to the real.The better it answers its purpose of making anabstruse subject plain, the more apt it will beto appear to have nothing in it that is extraordinary.A single observation that seems to containnothing more than what every body knewalready, may turn volumes of specious and formidablefallacy into waste paper.The same book may succeed ill with differentsorts of people for opposite reasons : by theignorant, who have no opinion about the matter,it may be thought lightly of, as containingnothing that is extraordinary ; by the false learned,who have prejudices they cannot bear tohave questioned, it may be condemned as paradoxical,for not squaring with these prejudices.HISTORYGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE.ftHISTORYGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE.If the intentions of the Author and of the Editorhave been accomplished, this volume will befound to be nothing but an application of theGreatest Happiness Principle to the field ofmorals. When the principle first presenteditself to Mr Bentham's mind, he denominatedit the Utilitarian Theory; but he soon discoveredthat the phrase did not immediately present tothe views of others, the ideas which he attachedto it ; namely, that any thing is useful only inas far, and in as much as it promotes the happinessof man. Happiness being the end andobject to be kept constantly in view, the wordUtility did not necessarily bring with it felicityas its associate. It can hardly be without interestto trace the influences of the Greatest-happinessPrinciple upon Mr Bentham's philosophy,from the period when it first occupied his seriesHISTORY OF THEvous thoughts, until it became the master-keywhich he applied to unlock all the intricacies ofmoral and political science.It was indeed his directing post, which heconsulted in all the walks of life, whether publicor private ; the oracle, to whose voice heunhesitatingly and on all occasions deferred,both in his individual capacity, when seekingguidance for his own steps, and as one of thecommunity endeavoring to mark out for othersthe path of popular wisdom and virtue. Inevery part of the field of thought and action heinvoked its aid and counsel : he appealed to itfor its laws, and for the reasons of those laws,and registered its responses for the use andgovernment of his fellow men.To himself he suggested it, and to others herecommended it, not only as an end to be proposed,but as a means of attaining that end,and as a motive to impel men to its pursuit.It was to him a storehouse of arguments,objects, instruments, and rewards.He did not leave his purpose clouded in avague, misty and general phraseology, but drewforth from the regions of happiness and miseryall those pleasures and pains of which happinessand misery are composed, and of which man'snature is susceptible. In the pleasures whichthe human being can enjoy, in the pains fromGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 289which the human being can be exempted, hefound the elements of the science he taught.To calculate their number, to weigh their value,to estimate their results, was the object inwhich he was perpetually engaged; and to gatherup the greatest possible quantity of felicityfor every man, whether by alleviating sufferingor increasing enjoyments, was the great businessof his life.These pains and pleasures when applied tothe business of government, whether legislativeor administrative, are but so many elementaryparts of the stock enjoyable by rulers in themanufacture of human happiness.The history of the Utilitarian Principle, is thehistory of contributions to the stock of happiness;it is the history of what has been done,from time to time, to improve and perfect theoperations of which enjoyment is the result.The finished work is felicity, and every instrumentand every workman assisting in its production,or producing it in a more complete andenduring shape, is intitled to the honor of cooperationor of discovery.Those literary works which have led to theefficient application of the instruments of happiness,— those instructions by which advanceshave been made from the speculative and unemployedprinciple, towards its use in the businessVOL. I. u290 HISTORY OF THEof life, must be considered among the most importantauxiliaries in the furtherance of thetriumphs of felicity.The earliest known mention of the principleis to be found in the 3rd Satire of Horace (bookfirst), written a few years before the birth ofChrist. The poet speaks of the opinions heldby the Stoics, that all misdeeds {peccata) standon the same level in the scale of ill desert, orrather should be visited with the same amountof blame, and thus pursues the topic — ■Ques paria esse fere placet peccant, laboringQuum centum ad verum est : serious lorsque repugnant ;Atque ipsa utility just prope mater et aequi.Men's feelings, customs, and utility itself are,he declares, in hostility with the Stoic theory.And he is right : the observation, as far as itgoes, if not profound, it is at least correct. Itproposes an end; the end to which justice andequity lead and are subservient ; and yet more,he avows that, if our ideas of justice and equityare right, they will have their source in utility.At a somewhat later period than that in whichHorace flourished, Phaedrus taught a somewhatsimilar doctrine.Nisi utile est quod faces, stulta est gloria.Your glory is foolish, unless it is obtained by usefulness.But, in both Horace and Phaedrus, the PRINCIPLE. 291tion of utility as a motive to conduct appearsrather accidental than otherwise. Neither ofthem seems to have understood the value andimportance of the doctrine they put forward.In neither case does it occupy the position of agreat and important principle. It seas adoptedby no sect ; it was avowed, followed, worshippedby no votaries. It was wholly in an embryostate. It had no influential, no presiding power;it had not obtained a place in the Elysian fields,among those aphorisms, written in letters oflight, which aeneas found Anchises passingunder review. Unvalued and unheeded, it remained,like the truth which dropped by chancefrom the heedless pen of Aristotle, — that allideas have their origin in the senses; anothermagnificent principle whose consequences werehidden from the perception of many, many generations.Locke was the first to discern thevalue of an observation, whose developmentenabled him to subvert the universal empireusurped by so-called logic, under the commandof Aristotle himself, while David Hume, in 1742,gave importance to the word UtUiti/.Hume's Essays recognised Utility as a principle.He employed the word with much indistinctness,sometimes representing the idea ofusefulness — usefulness considered as conducivenessto an end, no matter what ; sometimes as292 HISTORY OF THEsynonymous with conduciveness to happiness asan end. On no occasion does he intimate, thatthe idea of happiness is to be inseparably connectedwith the idea of utility. He speaks of itas * inhering' to * a machine, a piece of furniture,a vestment, a house,' where these are usefulby being conducive to the end that is sought.He mentions pleasure and pain, but no wheredoes he present pleasures and exemptions frompains as the elements, whose aggregate is designatedby the word happiness. He introduces,without any attempt to show their relationshipor dependence, pleasures, pains, desires, emotions,affections, passions, interests, virtues,vices, and other entities, in the direst confusion,looking like so many equestrians in the ride calledRotten Row ; or dancing before the eyes, asatoms in the sunshine, undefined and indistinct.The reference to a pleasure is like the referenceto utility, vague and unsatisfactory ; the referenceto pain, exemption from which is at least asnecessary to happiness as is the presence of pleasure,is even more vague and distant. No trace isvisible of that analysis by which one sort of pleasureor pain is distinguishable from another.Of the elementary component parts of everymass of good and evil, whether pure or mixed,no account is taken ; no criterion of right orwrong is advanced ; no answer found for theGREATEST-HAPPINESS Principle. 293question, * What ought to be done, and whatleft undone?' And so as to virtues, — of particularvirtues, names in great abundance arescattered here and there ; but as Horace'sSatires placed misdeeds (pcccatn) all on thesame level, so Hume arranges his virtues inthe same line, drawing no boundary betweenthem, giving no rules by which they are tobe distinguished from one another. Classified,indeed, they are, but their classification is ofno assistance to the great and only importantinquiry, as to the proportions in which theyare conducive to happiness. The propositionsthat Hume has put forward are thus, for themost part, vague generalities, a dangerous andunsatisfactory result, affording no informationto the ignorant, and no comfort to the perplexedinquirer.From a mind so acute, and with no interestsopposed to the interests of truth, somethingbetter might have been expected. If, in thefield of law, the whole herd of ordinary writersare rather engaged in ascertaining what wasor is, instead of what ought to he, their pursuitis not to be wondered at. The practice, andnot the philosophy of law, is to them thesource of gain ; but it is sorely to be lamented,that David Hume should have so missed hismark as not to have seen that pains and HISTORY OF THEsures were susceptible of different estimates ;that they represented different values ; thatgood and evil were undefined, and really unintelligiblephrases, until they could be dividedinto their component parts ; that happinessitself was but a chimera, until the elements ofwhich it is made up could be rendered accessibleto investigation. Hume has left the greatmoral questions in the regions of speculation ;no part of them has he made applicable touseful purpose by intelligible and distinguishingmarks. He has exhibited his theory like amist in the air, a cloud floating at different levels ;but never in the form of dew or rain descendingon the earth : it tantalizes the weary traveller,without contributing any thing towards hisrelief.Hume, however, did this great service. Hepointed out utility as the foundation or cornerstoneof a system of morals. He put it forward,in contra-distinction to the ground-workon which another set of philosophers built theirethical theories ; that groundwork being whatthey denominated the moi^al sense. It wassomething to bring the two principles intocontrast. When thoroughly investigated, theywere far as the poles asunder, the moral-senseprinciple being only one of the forms of dictationand dogmatism, resolvable into the moralGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 295sense or opinion of the individual ; while theprinciple of utility almost certainly directedthe thoughts towards, if it did not necessarilylead them into, the regions of pain and pleasure ;and hence of vice and virtue.In 1749, Hartley published the first editionof his work on Man. In it he gave the truemeaning of happiness, by showing that it iscomposed of those elements which the differentpleasures furnish. He translated, so tospeak, the language of felicity into the languageof pain and pleasure. He made out alist of pleasures and a parallel list of pains,but saw not the bearing of the whole on theGreatest-Happiness Principle, nor referred to itunder that name, nor under the name of utility,nor under any other name, as the all-directingguide in the walk of public and private life.He advanced beyond his forerunners, and thenstopped short in sight of the shore, upon whichhe never landed. This work of Hartley's, DrPriestley popularized to a certain extent in anafter edition, from which he expunged what,in the quaint phraseology once in vogue, wascalled the ' quisquilious mattersHelvetius wrote, in 1758, his work DerEsprit a title for which no adequate translationhas been found in our language ; the word,unfortunately, having no English equivalent.296 HISTORY OF THEGreat indeed was the contribution which thatbook brought to the science of morals andlegislation ; but it would be most difficult, inafew sentences, or even pages, to convey a correctestimate of all it did, and all it left to do.For sometimes it blazes forth in the splendorof a mid-day sun, throwing light and truth overthe whole domain of thought and action, — anonthat light is veiled in clouds of darkness, leavingthe gazer to wonder how it should be sosuddenly withdrawn. There are to be foundflashes of eloquence, rather than the steadylustre of reason ; the lightning that dazzles, foramoment, with more than needful splendor,which the oppressed eye would often fain exchangefor that regular and quiet illuminationwhich the ordinary lamps of evening provide.To that book, however, Mr Bentham hasoften been heard to say he stood indebted forno small portion of the zeal and ardor withwhich he advocated his happiness-producingtheory. It was from thence he took encouragement,flattering his efforts with the assurancethat they would not be useless. It wasthere he learned to persevere, in the convictionthat his power would strengthen, and his fieldof usefulness extend. Not that Helvetius haddone the work, which remained to do. Hehad not marshalled pains and pleasures, norGREATEST-HAPPINESS Principle. 207classified them according to their value ; buthe had brought prominently into view theinfluence of interest on opinion, and this was apoint overflowing with important consequences.He laid bare many of those springs of action,the knowledge of which is absolutely essentialto any thing like a right estimate of conductorcharacter. And in showing the subserviencyof opinion to interest, he demonstrated not onlythat the opinions publicly advocated were subservient,but those privately and even clandestinelyformed. His list of the causes ofmisconduct, especially in public men, is asprofoundly philosophical as it is sagaciouslyobservant. Sinister interest, interest-begottenprejudice, authority-begotten prejudice, andprimeval or inbred weakness, — in these he saw,and in these all men may see, the sources ofhuman infirmity.Helvetius thus applied the principle of utilityto practical use ; to the direction of humanconduct in the ordinary course of life. On thatairy nothing,' happiness, he conferred a substantialexistence by identifying it with pleasures,to which he gave ' a local habitation anda name.' He made utility pregnant with pleasure,and thus it gave birth to ideas in abundance: ideas of a positive and intelligible character; ideas so successfully elicited, so attractsHISTORY OF THElively recommended, that they could not but becontinually present and familiar to the mostinattentive, unobservant, and scantily-instructedminds.Dr Priestley published his Essay on Governmentin 1768. He there introduced, in italics, asthe only reasonable and proper object of government,* the greatest happiness of the greatestnumber.' It was a great improvement uponthe word utility. It represented the principalend, the capital, the characteristic ingredient.It took possession, by a single phrase, of everythingthat had hitherto been done. It went,in fact, beyond all notions that had preceded it.It exhibited not only happiness, but it madethat happiness diffusive ; it associated it withthe majority, with the many. Dr Priestley'spamphlet was written, as most of his productions,currente calais, hastily and earnestly.Somehow or other,' to use the words takenfrom Mr Bentham's lips, when he was talkingover with the writer what he called the " Adventturns of the Greatest-Happiness Principle, its'* parentage, birth, education, travels, and history,"— * Somehow or other, shortly after itspublication, a copy of this pamphlet found itsway into the little circulating library belongingto a little coffee-house, called Harper's coffeehouse,attached, as it were, to Queen's College,GREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 299Oxford, and deriving, from the popularity ofthat college, the whole of its subsistence. Itwas a corner house, having one front towardsthe High street, another towards a narrow lane,which on that side skirts Queen's College,and loses itself in a lane issuing from one ofthe gates of New College. To this librarythe subscription was a shilling a quarter, orinthe University phrase, a shilling a term.Of this subscription the produce was composedof two or three newspapers, with magazinesone or two, and now and then a newly-publishedpamphlet; a moderate-sized octavo wasa rare, if ever exemplified spectacle: composedpartly of pamphlets, partly of magazines, half-boundtogether, a few dozen volumes madeup this library, which formed so curious acontrast with the Bodleian Library, and thoseof Christ's Church and All Souls.The year 17G8 was the latest of the years inwhich I ever made at Oxford a residence ofmore than a day or two. The motive of thatvisit was the giving my vote, in the quality ofMaster of Arts, for the University of Oxford,on the occasion of a parliamentary election ;and not being at that time arrived at the age oftwenty-one, this deficiency in the article of agemight have given occasion to an election contestin the House of Commons, had not the majority300 HISTORY OF THEbeen put out of doubt by a sufficient number ofvotes not exposed to contestation. This year,1768, was the latest of all the years in whichthis pamphlet could have come into my hands.Be this as it may, it was by that pamphlet, andthis phrase in it, that my principles on the subjectof morality, public and private together,were determined. It was from that pamphletand that page of it, that I drew the phrase, thewords and import of which have been so widelydiffused over the civilized world. At the sightof it, I cried out, as it were in an inward ecstasy,like Archimedes on the discovery of the fundamentalprinciple of hydrostatics, Evpr]Ka. Littledid I think of the correction which, within afew years, on a closer scrutiny, I found myselfunder the necessity of applying to it.'Long before this period, the mind of Benthamhad been taken possession of by the Utilitarianprinciple. At a very early age, he had beenannoyed beyond measure, and scarcely lessannoyed than disgusted, by what he then calledCiceronian trash.'I had not completed my thirteenth year,' touse his own words, 'when at Queen's College,Oxford, the task was imposed on me, not, indeed,by my academical instructors, but by anot less irresistible authority, the task of renderinginto English that work of Cicero whichGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 301is known by the title of The Muscular Questions,or Muscular Dissertations. Pain, I therelearnt, was no evil. Virtue was, and is, ofitself, sufficient to confer happiness on any manwho is disposed to possess it on these terms.What benefit, in any shape, could be derivedfrom impregnating the memory with such nonsense?what instruction from a self-contradictoryproposition, or any number of any suchpropositions? When it happens to a man tohave a pain, whether in the head or the greattoe, or any intermediate part of the bodilyframe, can he, by saying to himself or to anybodyelse, that pain is no evil, drive the painaway, or diminish it at all ?'As to virtue, — to have shown in how many differentways, or though it were but one way, itcontributes, as it really does, to happiness, thiswould have been of some use, and might havebeen made of great use. But to say that virtueis of itself to produce and maintain happiness,whatsoever be a man's condition in otherrespects, is merely giving utterance to aposition directly in the teeth of universal andconstant experience. To have given a definitionto the word virtue would have been something,and this is what the Greatest-Happiness Principlewill enable a man to do. But if you seea man suffering under a fit of the gout, or the302 HISTORY OF THEstone, or the tic-doulouveux, to inform him thathe is happy, or that if he is not, it is for want ofvirtue, would this be any relief to him? Wouldit not rather be a cruel mockery and insult?This was the sort of trash which a set of menused to amuse themselves with talking while paradingbackwards and forwards in colonnades,called porches : that is to say, the Stoics, socalled from stoa, the Greek name for a porch.In regard to these the general notion has been,that compared with our contemporaries in thesame ranks, they were, generally speaking, agood sort of men ; and assuredly, in all times,good sort of men, talking all their lives longnonsense, in an endless variety of shapes, neverhave been wanting ; but that, from talking nonsensein this or any other shape, they or theirsuccessors have, in any way or degree, beenthe better, this is what does not follow.'Mr Bentham's Fragment on Government waspublished in 1776. It produced no little sensationin the world. The fame of Blackstone'sCommentaries was at its very height,and it was the first successful attempt to lowerthe reputation, and curtail the influence of thateloquent flatterer of all English abuses ; thatindiscriminating worshipper of good and evil.Dr Johnson attributed the work to Dunning ; andMr Bentham confesses that he had, to a greatGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 303extent, made Thinning's style the model of hisown, having been struck by its * precision, correctness,clearness, guardedness in expression,and closeness in argumentation.' The immediateobject of the * Fragment' was, to destroythe foolish fable of ' original contract,' upon whichlawyers had been long in the habit of raisingthe edifice of government ; and the instrumentused for the overthrow of an assumption sogroundless was the principle of utility, andwith that principle in hand complete was thedemolition of the great Commentator's theory.In the ' Fragment,' however, the language oi happinessis not substituted to that of iitiUty, — bothterms are employed, as if convertible, and translated,as it were, one into the other. Beyondthis primary step the * Fragment' did not proceed.Neither was the word utility, nor the word happinessanalysed into its component elements.Pains and pleasures are not brought into view,still less are they divided into their differentspecies, or classified according to their separateor com narrative value. Mr Bentham has oftensaid, so intimate in his own mind was then theassociation between utility and happiness, thathe could scarcely fancy the ideas separated inthe mind of any man. Whatever was left undoneby the * Fragment,' it succeeded in annihilatingthe * original contract' scheme. Mr304 HISTORY OF THEBentham's first quarrel with the dogma grewfrom his observation of the purposes to which itwas turned, in order to justify law-abuses, andto oppose the most necessary reforms in theadministration of justice. The dogma had beenintroduced into the world under the sanction ofJohn Locke's great name ; but before Benthamhad attained the age of sixteen he was disgusted,while sitting at the feet of Blackstone,by the use which that smooth sophist made ofit in his lectures for the justification of the abominationsof misrule. * I determined to grapplewith it,' he says, in one of his memoranda ; ' Idetermined to fling it to the ground, — I did so,and no man has since ventured to raise it up,and give support to it.'The ascetic philosophy received a mortalwound from Mr Bentham, by his exposure ofit in the ' Introduction to Morals and Legislation.'No man is, perhaps, now to be foundwho would contend, that the pursuit of painought to be the great object of existence, howeverhe might deem the infliction of certainpains upon himself meritorious and virtuous. Noman will now deny, that there are occasions onwhich pleasure may reasonably and morally bepursued as an end, or on which the avoidance ofpain may be alike an interest and a duty. Buthe who contends that the pursuit of a balanceGREATEST-HAPPINESS Principle. 305of pleasure is an offence in any case, is boundto produce that case, and to show the groundsof its exception from the general rule. On himthe onus probably rests with all its force. Inthe monkish ages the demon of asceticism ruledin his sanguinary power. That demon was alikethe creator of misery and the father of lies.Come what may of the Greatest Happiness Principle,its open antagonist is silenced for ever.In fact, asceticism is characterised by everythingthat is mischievous, absurd, inconsistent,and self-contradictory, — all heightened in thevery proportion in which the ascetic principle iscalled into action. What is mischievous, if itbe not mischievous to create misery ? What isabsurd, if not the doctrine which would induceits supporter to dash his head against the wall,since, according to him, to create suffering isthe proper ultimate end of human action? Whatis inconsistent, unless a creed be so which isbelied by every practice of a man's existence ?And what is self-contradiction but absurdityand inconsistency, exhibited in their most flagrantforms, and pushed to all the extremes offolly and delusion ?But to dispose of the indirect antagonists ofthe Greatest-Happiness Principle is not quiteso easy. Ipse-dixitism is a very Proteus, assumingevery conceivable shape which caprice andVOL. I. X306 HISTORY OF THEarrogance can form or fancy. Its progenitoris despotism ; its offspring every species ofabsurdity.John Locke's misconceptions of the end andobject of government were not only exhibitedin his * original contract ' theory, but in the extremelynarrow view taken by him of theregions of pains and pleasures, and by thatnotion of his that morals and politics are explainableby the mere exhibition of the relationswhich one word bears to another. Again,his doctrine respecting uneasiness as the causeof action — as if a man enjoying certain pleasurescould not seek other pleasures in addition,shows how vaguely the ideas of pleasure presentedthemselves to his mind. By his theoryof the ' original contract,' an end of governmentis advocated independently and in preferenceto that of its conduciveness to the felicity of thecommunity. And this end, even were it a fact,and not the fable, the fiction, and the falsehoodwhich it is, would be wholly unworthy to competewith the Greatest-Happiness Principle.For though in most cases observance of contractsis demanded by that principle, yet theirobservance in every conceivable case would bedestructive of it. Suppose a contract enteredinto by one individual for the commission of acrime, must that contract be deemed sacred ?GREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 307And what must be said of the contrivance bywhich every body would be bound to a contract,the operation of which might be thedestruction of pleasures, and the continuation ofpains, even after experience had proved thatthe pleasures might be preserved and the painsalienated by setting the contract aside ?It is by thus substituting a partial and subordinate,to the only legitimate and comprehensiveend of government, that misrule has founda terrible instrument of power. By this sort ofappeal to promise, and to contract, adherenceand support have been given to principles andconduct the most deleterious and maleficent.By fear or hope, in a word, by corruption inany shape, exercised by a ruler or rulers, declarationsare extorted to which the sanction of anoath is frequently given, that a particular line ofconduct shall, at all events and under all circumstances,be maintained. Such promises are amongthe strongest holds that despotism has upon itsdevotees, and hence the quarrel of despotismwith the Greatest-Happiness Principle. As amatter of history, such engagements have rarelybeen entered into between rulers and nations,and if they had they would be of no value ; nomore binding on posterity than the engagementsof a drunken man. If the engagement were consonantwith the Greatest-Happiness Principle,308 HISTORY OF THEthe recognition of that principle would be farbetter than the engagement ; if opposed to it,if the object or practical end be the productionof crime, evil, or human suffering, removableby its removal, who will contend for itscontinuance ?If there be cause for mourning in the world,it is that men of powerful talents, comprehensiveminds, and generous affections, are so oftenengaged in closing their own eyes, or the eyesof others, and keeping them closed against thelight of reason and experience !In holding up to view the rights of propertyas the sole foundation for justice, Locke had lostsight of a great variety of other topics, uponwhich maleficence might be exercised by individuals— that maleficence requiring in consequenceto be inhibited by governments. Power,reputation, condition in life, exemption frompains, and other possessions, (for language doesnot give an apter word) which demand protectionfrom the civil and the penal code, are passedover in silence.Sad, unguarded, infelicitous, was in truththat ill-considered definition, — that attempt tolay with such loose materials the foundation ofhuman happiness, as resting alone upon justiceand the rights of property. Sad the triumphswhich, by a designing and uncandid antagonist.GREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 309might on this occasion have been reaped overthat honest, candid, and in every respect amiablemind ! Property the only thing intitled tobe the object of care to government! Possessorsof property, accordingly, the only personsintitled to be objects of that same care 1 Thepossessor of property the only person intitledto be represented in and by a representativebody forming part and parcel of the sovereignauthority ! The poor, in a body, held up asacommunity which the rich, in a body, areintitled to make slaves of, and for ever treat assuch ! Corporeal slavery, a state of things stillworse, perhaps, than political slavery ; a stateof things the production and maintenance ofwhich is a proper object of government ! Themeridian of the West Indies is the meridian wherethe supposed champion of liberty and goodgovernment would find a striking applicationof his theory! For, indeed, with but too muchreason might the theory of John Locke havebeen employed for the defence of slavery, — forthe defence of boundless mischief, — for thedefence of boundless misery.The case is, that in the mind of this philosopher,— to whom, after all, the debt owed bymankind is so indisputable, real and extensive,experience had not at that time at least, gonebeyond aristocracy , the opulent rulers and influxHISTORY OF THEenthral few ; the people, the opulent andsubject many, had not as yet fallen within thesphere of his observation, or arrived at an apparentimportance necessary to the being numberedamong the objects of his care.That, in respect of experience, such was thestate of his mind, that in the application of thatexperience his views of morals, politics, andlegislation, as the consequence, were verylimited and imperfect, is evidenced in and byhis constitution for one of the Carolinas : a performancewhich from that day down to this hasnever been spoken of in any other characterthan that of a failure.He is, accordingly, the most adored of all theidols which, within the temple of British devotion,lay claim to the worship of those whosepolitical Bible is the matchless and all-perfectconstitution emanating from the glorious Revolutionof 1688, with Protestant despotism andCatholic slavery among its immediate blessings.It was in 1785 that Paley published hisElements of Moral and Political Philosophy. Hementions the principle of utility, but seems tohave no idea of its bearing upon happiness.And if he had any such idea, he was the lastman to give expression to it. He wrote for theyouth of Cambridge, of one of the colleges ofwhich he was tutor. In that meridian, eyesGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 311were not strong enough, nor did he desire theyshould be strong enough, to endure the lightfrom the orb of utilitarian felicity. Insincerehimself, and the bold, oft-declared advocate ofinsincerity, what could be expected from hiscourage or his virtue ? Over his bottle, thosewho knew him, knew that he was the self-avowedlover and champion of corruption, richenough to keep an equipage, but not (as hehimself declared) to * keep a conscience.' Forthe remaining twenty years of his life, his bookwas the text-book of the universities ; but he leftthe utilitarian controversy as he found it; noteven honoring the all-beneficent principle withan additional passing notice.It was in the year 1789, that the * Introductionto the Principles of Morals and Legislation*appeared. Here, for the first time, are painsand pleasures separately defined, and regularlygrouped; and the classification and definition ofthem is so complete for all ordinary purposes ofmoral and legislative investigation, that MrBentham, in after life, found little to modify orto add to in the list. By the side of the painsand the pleasures, the corresponding motives arebrought to view, and a clear and determinateidea attached to the springs of action by showingtheir separate operation. And, moreover, theauthor uncovers and sifts that phraseology which312 HISTORY OF THEhas done so much mischief in the field of rightand wrong by the judgment of motives, instead ofthe judgment of conduct, so that the same motiveis frequently spoken of in terms opposed to andincompatible with one another. Sometimes theeulogistic form is adopted, to convey sentimentsof approbation ; sometimes the dyslogistic, tocommunicate sentiments of disapprobation ;sometimes the neutral, to avoid the expressionof either praise or blame ; but in all cases theseirrelevant and delusive adjuncts serve to bewilderinquiry, and to distort truth. Of this trulyextraordinary and philosophical volume, it haschanced to the writer to hear the opinion ofseveral of the most acute and distinguishedmen of the present day (not of the Utilitarianschool) who, after a discussion as to whatliterary work ought to be considered the mostremarkable intellectual production of the lastcentury, unanimously decided that the ' Introductionto the Principles of Morals and Legislation'was intitled to that honor. In the lateryears of Mr Bentham's life he was far fromdeeming it complete. He had not taken man'sinterests and man's desires into his list, and heemployed the phraseology of utility instead ofthat of happiness.The first part of ChrestomatJiia was publishedin 1810, the second part in the year following.IGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 313Its principal object was, to bring together theseveral branches of art and science, and toexhibit their conciseness to happiness ; topoint out their relationship to each other throughthis their common property, and to give thewhole that direction which, as a result, shouldproduce the maximization of felicity. It wasas early as 17C9 that Bentham's mind wasoccupied with this topic. Even then he fanciedthat happiness might be made the commontrunk to support all the branches of knowledge,forming together a perfect encyclopaediatree. In Lord Bacon's writings he foundplanted the pristine tree ; it was in some sortimproved by D'Alembert ; but neither theEnglish nor the French philosopher had takenany notice of that most useful of properties,to which all arts and sciences tend, and towhich alone they are indebted for any valuethey possess. The trees they sought to planthad, however, never taken root, and, in thepresence of Bentham's nobler production, mustbe considered as mere cumbered of the ground.It was in 1817 that 'The Table of theSprings of Action' appeared. The purpose ofthe author was to facilitate comparisons of andobservations on the mutual relations betweenpains and pleasures, inducements or motives,desires and interests. He endeavored to make314 HISTORY OF THEthe list complete of all the elements that influenceconduct. While, in his previous writings,pains, pleasures, and motives had been theprincipal topics of inquiry, Mr Bentham added,on this occasion, the corresponding desires andinterests, proposing, as a means of consistencyand completeness, the designation of each interestby a particular name. Helvetius had insome cases attached names to interests, andMr Bentham proposed to perfect the nomenclature,and to assist the association betweenall the points of comparison, by presenting thetopics in a tabular form. To these Tables hesubjoined notes, explaining and giving determinateexpression to other psychological terms,such as passions, virtues, vices, moral good,moral evil, and so forth, showing their connectionwith the objects displayed in the Tables.Though the Greatest-Happiness Principle wasconstantly in view — the now all-ruling influencein Mr Bentham's mind — no reference ismade to it by name in ' The Springs of Action.'This volume is, however, the evidence of agreat progress in utilitarian philosophy. Theoperations of motives on conduct had beenmost lucidly explained in the * Introduction toMorals and Legislation.' Motives, the sourceof action in all its modifications, are broughtinto association with all the pleasures and painsGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 315they are able to influence : a motive, in fiict,being only the fear of some pain from a certainmode of action, which pain the will is urgedto avoid, or the hope of a pleasure which thewill is urged to create. The ' Springs of Action'did for interests what the * Introduction'did for motives ; they also drew the distinctionbetween motives and desires. To each desireBentham attached the adjectives by which thedesire had been qualified, in order to suit thepurpose of the speakers or writers who hadoccasion to refer to it, either in terms of praiseor blame, the very same desire having ordinarilythree designations, one laudatory, one vituperation,and the other neutral.Having observed the prodigious extent towhich these collateral adjuncts are in use, asinstruments of delusion and deception, especiallyin the hands of interested deceivers, itoccurred to him that it would be a useful serviceto mark out, and, as it were, give warningof the characteristic difference between thethree classes, by means of appropriate denominations.Accordingly, for the designation ofthe case in which, to the idea of desire theidea of disapprobation, as existing in the mindof him who is speaking of it, is attached, heemployed the epithet dyslogistic; as a synonyme,he might have added disapprobation: and, for316 HISTORY OF THEthe designation of the case in which, to theidea of desire, the idea of approbation, as existingin the mind of him who is speaking of it,is attached, he employed the epithet eulogistic ;as a synonyme, he might have added appro-bative.Mr Bentham has mentioned, that, in all hispursuits and inquiries, one idea was constantlyoperating on his mind. If Bacon, with hisExperimentalize ! ' was justly honored for doingmore than any man who had preceded him, forthe diffusion of the philosophy of physics, Bentham,with his ever-present maxim — 'Observe!'is intitled to the first rank among those whohave successfully labored for the advancementof the philosophy of morals.The phenomena of the material world, notonly as they present themselves, but also asthey can be made to present themselves,together with the relations in the way of causeand effect that appear to have place betweenthem, may, without reserve (so as injury topersons and things be avoided) be taken forsubjects of experiment as well as observation,when applied to the material world : in thecase of moral and political science, the propersubject-matters of observation are pains andpleasures, as they respectively result fromthe several modifications of which human conGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 317duct, or say human agency, is susceptible.Without reserve, these may be taken for of observation : but, not withoutgreat reserve and caution, for subjects of experiment; especially in the case where the institutorof the experiment is any other personthan the sovereign, or a person or persons constitutedfor the purpose, in authority underhim. Accordingly, it is by the observation ofthe occasions on which, and shapes in whichpain and pleasure result from the modes ofagency respectively productive of them — painsmore especially — that Mr Bentham ascertainsthe quantity and quality of the applicationsnecessary as remedies for the evils which actionsof the maleficent class bring in their train :and while the graphic pencil is engaged inthe delineation of their respective qualities orforms, — scales, with weights and measures, areat the same time to be kept employed in givingintimation of their respective quantities.In the application of legislation to the purposesof life, the legislator has only the choiceof evils. There can be no government withoutcoercion ; no coercion without suffering ; and,separately considered, that coercion must beanevil. The monitory functions of governmentconsist in the application of that evil to theindividual misdoers, for the purpose of obtainsHISTORY OF THEing, in the interests of the community, anexemption from greater evils, or a productionof pleasures of greater value than the sufferingscreated by its coercive interposition.It is thus that the Greatest-Happiness Principlebrings the legislator into the field ofparticular pains and pleasures, and the firstemanation of that principle is the * ,'or, as Mr Bentham morehabitually called it, the 'non-disappointment'principle. Upon this the laws of property havetheir sole foundation ; for if no disappointmentwere felt — no pains suffered from the loss ofproperty — no demand would there be for penalvisitation in cases of the violation of what arecalled the rights of property. Let disappointment,as far as possible, be prevented. Why prevented? Because disappointment cannot haveplace without pain. Inseparably connectedwith the idea of disappointment is that ofexpectation — of agreeable expectation. Thedisappointment prevents the expectation frombeing realized. The legislator's business is toprotect the subject from the sufferings of thatdisappointment.An observation made to Mr Bentham byLady Holland produced a great impression uponhim. She said that his doctrine of utilityput a veto upon pleasure ; while he had beenGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 319fancying that pleasure never found so valuableand influential an ally as the principle of utility.It was clear, therefore, that the word ' utility'not only failed in communicating to other mindsthe ideas which Bentham attached to it, butthat to some minds it communicated ideaswholly different and opposed to them. Andtrue it is, that unless the Greatest-HappinessPrinciple be recognized as the end, the doctrineof utility might be represented as useful tosome other end. And if the pursuit of pleasurewere assumed as worthy of disapprobation,utUiti/ would teach abstention from that pursuit.Dissatisfaction, therefore, with utilitarian phraseology,gradually increased in Bentham'smind.The phrase * greatest happiness of the greatestnumber' was first employed by Mr Benthamin 1822, in his * Codification Proposal.' Everysuggestion there put forward is made to turnupon the requirements of the * greatest happinessof the greatest number.' In this work,happiness, utility, pains and pleasures, are constantlyintroduced for the purposes of explainingone another ; and the augmentation of thefelicity of all, by the increase of pleasures, andthe exemption from pains, is the constantly presenttheme.In our language, and in every known language.320 HISTORY OF THEthe advance of philosophy is greatly retardedby the want of appropriate expressions. If withthe word * utility ' the idea of happiness couldhave been habitually and irrevocably associated,utilitarianism' would have conveniently representedthe Greatest-Happiness Principle, andutilitarians' its advocates and supporters. Andhitherto it has been almost necessary to usethe terms which have indeed received a certaincurrency. Bentham once thought of proposingthe employment of the word F.uda'imonology y torepresent the utilitarian doctrines, and Eudai-theologians its professors. To those acquaintedwith Greek the meaning would be sufficientlyobvious ; but that acquaintance is so rare, thathe did not venture to recommend the terms togeneral adoption. Besides, custom must bedeparted from in not rendering the word EudcE-monotony ; and in such a shape umbrage mightbe given to men of pious minds, who wouldpossibly associate with it the idea of a doctrine,art, or science, of which devils were the subject.Hereafter, when the principle shall havemade new conquests in other lands, and especiallyin those, the roots of whose languages areLatin, some terms may be found making way togeneral acceptance. Felicities, or Felicitations,— Felicities, or Felicitations, may then putforward their claim. The word 'felicity' hasGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 321already two conjugates, to felicitate, and felicitous.The increase of the number of conjugateswould be of important assistance to language;but for our purpose the idea of * greatest'is needful, and the Felicity-maximizing principlewill, perhaps, be found the most convenientof all the terms hitherto employed.The Gothic branch of our language unfortunatelydoes not lend itself to the wants of theutilitarian. There is no making one word ofGreatest Happiness;' still more difficult is it toextract from its roots the substitutes for thoseconjugates which the Latin will supply.The antagonist to the felicity-maximizing is,the ipse-dixit principle, and there is no reasonwhy the ipse-dixit root should not produce allthe branches necessary to discourse, — as ,and ipse-dixitism.It is scarcely out of place, by the way, tostate here, in answer to those who have so frequentlyanimadverted on Mr Bentham's unusualterms, that there is no topic on which his mindwas more habitually occupied than in the searchof fit terms to convey his ideas. No man wasever more impressed with the importance ofappropriate nomenclature, as the necessaryinstrument for logical reasoning, for introducingand disseminating correct ideas. It was theambition of a Roman emperor to plant a wordVOL. I. Y322 History OF THEwhich should be allowed by after times to grow.Two words, at least, have been planted byBentham, and adopted into our language, — theadjective international, the noun codification, withits conjugates, to codify and modifies; andthough he can hardly be said to have introducedthe verbs to maaHmize and to minimize, with theircorrespondent nouns, he has certainly giventhem that currency, and attached to them thatvalue, which afford the assurance of their escapingthe doom of oblivion.But even the words which are every day inthe mouth of every man are constantly employedwithout any accurate understanding of theirprecise or real meaning. Virtue and vice, justiceand injustice, what are they ? By nothing butinconnection with the Greatest-Happiness Principlecan any clear or useful application bemade of them, or any of them. Whenever,indeed, they are employed, there is some reference,implied or expressed, to one of these principles,— the Greatest-Happiness Principle, orthe principle directly opposed to it, that is, theascetic principle, or the dogmatic principle ofipse-dixitism. For the end in view, the standardof right and wrong must be either happinessor unhappiness, or else some opinion whichis put forward as sufficient in itself to determinethe standard. The appellative of PRINCIPLE. 323d'hvitism is not a new one ; it comes down to usfrom an antique and high authority, —it is theprinciple recognised (so Cicero informs us) bythe disciples of Pythagoras. Ipse (Jic, the master,Pythagoras), ipse dixit, — he has said it ; themaster has said that it is so ; therefore, say thedisciples of the illustrious sage, therefore so it is.When the 'Introduction to Morals and Legislation' was published, Bentham imagined thatthe principle of sympathy and antipathy was tobe considered the groundwork of one of thetheories of morals. In after life, he discoveredthat this was only the dogmatic, or ipse-dixitprinciple divided into two branches : — thebranch of sympathy applying reward, that ofantipathy, punishment ; but, wherever disassociatedfrom the Greatest-Happiness Principle,being really nothing but the authority of theipse-dixit doctrine.The principle of caprice was the appellativethat afterwards occurred to, and has been employedby him for the designation of that branchof the ipse-dixit principle which applies to thecivil, or non-penal branch of law, includingevery portion not comprised within the denominationof the penal ; the civil, or non penal,over which, in his view of the matter, the non-disappointmentprinciple presides.To return to virtue and vice. By virtue,324 HISTORY OF THEunder the direction of the Greatest-HappinessPrinciple, is understood that line of conduct andcorrespondent disposition, which is conducive tohappiness : by vice, that which is conducive tounhappiness. In the case of the virtue oneaddition, however, and that productive of aimitative effect, requires to be made ; this isthat of the sort of action denominated virtuous,the exercise requires more or less of self-denial: that is to say, of a sacrifice made of thepresent good, whether pleasure or exemptionfrom pain, to some greater good to come. Forkeeping the position in question within the paleof truth, this imitative adjunct is altogetherindispensable. And the evidence that it is so isirresistible. Among the actions, by the exerciseof which the existence of the individual is continued,and among them of those by whichpleasure is experienced, or pain averted andexcluded, small is the proportion of those bywhich virtue, in any shape, can with proprietybe said to be exercised. Why? Because, inthe exercise made of them, no self-denial, nosacrifice of the present to the future good ismade. Thus it is, for example, with the pleasuresof sense in general.But here comes in an objection. Suppose aman to have his appetites and desires of allsorts in such complete subjection, that, in theGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 325sacrifice of the lesser present to the greaterfuture good, no uneasiness is experienced,nothing that can be called self-denial is practised.Of such a man will you say, that, inhis mental frame virtue is on a lower level, inthe scale of perfection, than in the case of onein whom the contest between the lesser presentand greater future good, or, according to DeanSwift's emblem, the game of leap-frog betweenflesh and spirit, is continually renewed? No,assuredly. But for this not less true is it, thatto the applying with propriety to a man's habitand disposition the appellatives virtue and virtuous,the supposition of the existence of reluctanceand self-denial in the character of an accompanimentof an ingredient in the habit isindispensable ; at the time in question no suchunpleasant sensation has place, but at someanterior point of time it had place ; only in theintervening space of time it has been graduallyworn away ; as a laborious exertion by long-habitbecomes pleasurable.The Greatest-Happiness Principle is not onlyattacked by principles openly and professedlyopposed to it ; it has had to suffer from covertand influential usurpers of its name andauthority ; and from such sources it hasperhaps been most injured. Reference hasbeen made and homage paid to it by principles32G HISTORY OF THEwhich have claimed alliance with it, while theyhave, in fact, been only subordinate to .This has been too often the positionof the preachers of * Justice,' — men, who, underthe cloak and covering of an attractive title,have generally strung together their directionsprecepts, mandates — call them what you will —saying to every body who will listen, * Do so andso, for this is what is required by justice.' Twoassumptions are here, and both are representativesof the ipse-dixit system: — first, thatjustice is the proper and sufficient standard ofreference; and second, that this which you arerequired to do is dictated by justice, — assumptions(need it be said ?) both unsupported byargument, both gratuitous and dogmatical.When Mr Godwin took * Political Justice ' forthe title of his well-known work, he committedan act of insubordination, not to say rebellion,or high treason, against the sovereignty of theonly legitimate, all-ruling principle.Justice is subservient to the Greatest-happinessPrinciple, or it is not : its dictates teachthe civilization of misery, and the maximizationof happiness, or they do not. If they do,and as far as they do, they are in accordancewith that principle, and they represent it.But, suppose their dictates differ, supposethere is dissonance, hostility between the two,CREATEST-HAPPTNESS PRINCIPLE. 327which is to succumb ? Justice or happiness, —the end or the means ?In order to a proper intelligence and applicationof the meaning of the word justice, it mustbe divided into its two branches, civil andpenal ; for nothing can be more vague, obscure,and unsatisfactory, than the ideas attached tothe word justice, as it is ordinarily applied.Civil justice is the recognition of proprietaryrights in all their shapes, whether as objects ofdesire, or of possessed value. To invade theproprietor of them in his expectations or possessions,or to deprive him of them, is to createin his mind the pains of disappointment, — pains,which the felicity-maximizing principle requiresto be averted. This disappointment-preventingprinciple stands second in importance to thehappiness-creating principle.The penal branch of civil justice presents adifferent aspect. Its purpose is to minimizewrongs. Its means are preventive, suppressive,satisfaction, and punitive. It is only in asfar as wrongs arc the cause of unhappiness thatthere is any demand for penalties. To reducethe aggregate of wrongs, and thereby thesources of suffering growing out of them, andto do this at the least cost of pain, is the demandof that justice which is in alliance withthe Greatest-Happiness Principle. But under328 HISTORY OF THEthe name of justice very different objects, andthose to be accomplished by very different ends,are frequently proposed.In the later years of Mr Bentham's life thephrase ' Greatest happiness of the greatest number' appeared, on a closer scrutiny, to be Meaningin that clearness and correctness which hadoriginally recommended it to his notice andadoption. And these are the reasons for hischange of opinion, given in his own words : —Be the community in question what it may,divide it into two unequal parts ; call one ofthem the majority, the other the minority; layoutof the account the feelings of the minority ;include in the account no feelings but those ofthe majority, — you will find, that to the aggregatestock of the happiness of the community,loss, not profit, is the result of the operation.Of this proposition the truth will be the morepalpable, the greater the ratio of the number ofthe minority to that of the majority; in otherwords, the less the difference between the twounequal parts; and suppose the undivided partsequal, the quantity of the error will then be atits maximum.'Number of the majority suppose 2001,'number of the minority, 2000. Suppose, inthe first place, the stock of happiness in suchsort divided, that by every one of the 4001 anGREATEST-HAPPINESS PRINCIPLE. 329equal portion of happiness shall be possessed.Take now from every one of the 2000 his shareof happiness, and divide it any how among the*2001: instead of augmentation, vast is the'diminution you will find to be the result. Thefeelings of the minority being, by the supposition,laid intirely out of the account (for such,in its enlarged form, is the import of the proposition),the vacuum thus left may, instead of'remaining a vacuum, be filled with unhappiness,positive suffering, in magnitude, intensity, andduration taken together, the greatest which it is*in the power of human nature to endure.• Take from your 2000, and give to your 2001all the happiness you find your 2000 in possessionof : insert, in the room of the happinessyou have taken out, unhappiness in as largea quantity as the receptacle will contain : tothe aggregate amount of the happiness possessedby the 4001 taken together, will theresult be net profit ? on the contrary, the wholeprofit will have given place to loss. How so ?because so it is, that such is the nature of thereceptacle, the quantity of unhappiness it iscapable of containing, during any given portionof time, is greater than the quantity of happiness.At the outset, place your 4001 in a state ofperfect equality, in respect of the means,VOL. I. z330 HISTORY OF THEor say, instruments of happiness, and in particular,power and opulence : every one of themin a state of equal liberty ; every one independentof every other : every one of them possessingan equal portion of money and money'sworth : in this state it is that you find them.Taking in hand now your 2000, reduce them'to a state of slavery, and, no matter in whatproportions of the slaves thus constituted, divide'the whole number with such, their property,'among your 2001; the operation performed,of the happiness of what number will anaugmentation be the result ? The questionanswers itself.Were it otherwise, note now the practicalapplication that would be to be made of it inthe British Isles. In Great Britain, take thewhole body of the Roman Catholics, makeslaves of them, and divide them in any proportion,them and their progeny, among the'whole body of the Protestants. In Ireland,take the whole body of the Protestants, anddivide them, in like manner, among the wholebody of the Roman Catholics.'The danger of putting forward any propositionas a leading principle, other than thatwhich would maximize felicity, consists in thisthat if it coincide with the greater principleit is supererogatory ; if it do not coincide, it isCREATEST-IIAPPINKSS PRINCIPLE. 331pernicious. Any principle that is not subordinateto it may be opposed to it, either diametricallyor collaterally. The ascetic principle, ifall-comprehensive and consistent, may be evidencedas one of direct opposition, — the ipse-dixitprinciples of all sorts may be rankedamong the indirect opponents. Qui non subme contra me. * He who is not under me isagainst me,' may be said with figurative or metaphoricaltruth by the Greatest-Happiness Principle,and with literal truth by every one of itspartisans. And let not this declaration be takenas the result of arrogance of disposition : itgrowls out of the nature of things, and the necessitiesof the case. Let it not be consideredto bespeak unkind ness towards any advocate ofthe opposite opinions, for such unkindness isneither its necessary, nor even its naturalaccompaniment.END OF THE FIRST VOLUME.LONDONC. AND W. REYNELL, PRINTERS,LITTLE PULTENEY STREET, Haymakers