MINOR MORALSFORYOUNG PEOPLE.ILLUSTRATED IN TALES AND TRAVELS.BYJOHN Bowing.WITH ILLUSTRATIONS, BY GEORGE CRUIKSHANK.Pivot IL; ;LONDON:WHITTAKER AND COAVE-MARIA LANE.MDCCCXXXV.r^'-/ f 4 : ^ ^^LONDON:Printed by C. and W. Reynell,Little Pulteney street.DEDICATED TOxMY WIFE AND CHILDREN,THEIRS AFFECTIONATELY,J. B.Westminster,June, 1835.CONTENTS.I.The Storm . . Page1 to 13II.Uses of Animals to Man14— 28III.Excellence and Excelling29— 44IV.Slavery45— 59V.Swallows60— 74VI.Love of Home75— 90VII.Commerce . . .91 — 111VIII.Fishes, and Friendly Counsels112— 122IX.War . .' . .123 — 134X.Sense and Sensitiveness135 — 155XI.Mushroom Hunting156 — 180XII.Selfishness181 — 194XIII.Affection for Inanimate Objects195 — 206XIV.Prudence207 — 224XV.Flowers225 — 238XVI.Filial Affection239 — 254XVII.Songs of the People255 — 264LIST OF PLATES.The Storm . . . . To face Title.George Matthewes in Prison , . . Page 21The African King . .55Tom Traffic . . . . . 105Abballah, the Last of the Moorish ChieftainsIN Spain . 202PREFACEI AIM aware that in the present volumethere are many parts which may not,at first sight, appear suited to the capacitiesof children. But my ownobservation leads me to think thatchildren are more apt to learn thanparents and instructors generally suppose; and that their powers of mindare much strengthened by being exercisedwith topics which are sometimesdeemed too exalted or abstruseIV PREFACE.for their undeveloped faculties. It is,no doubt, difficult to draw an exactline, at the point beyond which it isunwise in the instructor to pursue asubject ; but some experiments mustbe made, and the intellects of childrentried and strengthened by excursionsinto regions remote from their habitualwalks. It is only thus that thestandard of mind can be raised, or thepath prepared for investigations intomore distant and more elevated studies.Yet I have not ventured far; nor haveI made my Morals, as I hope, unintelligibleto Minors.THE STORM.Many were the happy days which the Howardfamily enjoyed — always busy in improving andin serving one another. Kindness became thehabit of their daily existence; and it was akindness without show or parade — the naturalflow of minds that were training themselvesand one another to enjoyment, and gatheringinstruction, and practising virtue, as the bestmeans of enjoyment.No doubt there were now and then exhibitionsof petulance and ill-humour; but thesewere transitory. They were the gloomy momentswhich were succeeded by sunshine, andthey were not without their use, for childrenVOL. 11.*^ B2 MINOR MORALS.are quick in observation, and their young mindsare easily taught to reason on the consequencesof conduct. Edith was once overheard to say,How very foolish I was to be so angry —how very foolish ! " — and Arthur, after an occasionon which he had struck his brother withviolence, not feeling courage enough to appearin the presence of the gentle Edith, hadhid himself in the hay-loft, where he sobbedand wept as if his heart were breaking, andwas found in tears by one of the servants whocame to look after the horses, and to whomhe confided his sorrow and his penitence.Go, Master Arthur, George is very forgiving;"and Arthur went, his eyes red withcrying, and held out his trembling hand toGeorge, who shook it warmly; and Edithsmiled. It was not necessary for either toutter a word.One stormy evening the Howard familyTHE STORM. 3were gathered round the fire, and, as the windblew louder and louder, Edith said, " I fancy,Mamma, that I love you better when the tempestis so noisy, because I think of the homethat shelters me, and of those who make thathome so dear."No doubt, my child," said Mrs Howard,for we should soon forget how much we haveto be grateful for, were we not sometimescompelled to think how severe the privationwould be. It is pain that teaches us the valueof health; hunger and thirst enable us to estimatethe importance of food and drink; thebiting cold shows us the blessings of raiment ;the storm makes the sunshine doubly welcome ;and now that the rain is driving hard againstthe windows, and the loud blasts shake ourhabitation, we begin to feel most sensibly whata privilege it is not to be exposed to the violMINOR MORALS.hence of the weather. Do you remember thehurricane we witnessed on the sea shore ? "How should I forget it. Mamma? Yourecollect we were walking on the beach, ancjthe thunder-clouds gathered and grew blackerand blacker, and the wind became fiercer andfiercer, and the waves rolled higher and higher,and foamed as if they were in a passion, andflung the stones and shingles on the shore,and we had great difficulty in getting home,and were drenched and almost drowned; forthe heavens seemed as full of water as theocean itself, and poured it out with the samevehemence. Was it not a terrible day,Mamma?"And was that all, Edith ? "O no ! Mamma ; for the dreadful thingwas to see the ships and the boats tossedabout upon the waves, and to fancy we couldTHE STORM. Ohear the voices of the poor sailors; and eventhat. Mamma, was not the worst — oh, nothinglike it : for, don't you recollect how we wentto the fisherman's hut, and saw the poor widowwringing her hands, and some of the childrencrying; and you, Mamma, cried too, and Icould not help it; and even now, when Ithink of it "Poor Edith could not proceed; she burstinto tears.She wiped them from her cheeks, and Georgeran and kissed her; Arthur did the same — forthey felt additional love for their sister wheneverher benevolent affections were displayed.But I do wish," said Arthur, " that Mammawould tell us the story of the poor fisherman."^^ I do not know much of his life, my boy;and perhaps his life, if I knew it all, wouldgive but little to tell. I dare say he was bredb MINOR MORALS.from his boyhood to the sea — a fisherman — aswere his fathers. In the times of war, nodoubt, he, like most of his fellows, was compelledto serve the state, and may have traversedthe ocean for thousands and thousandsof leagues, accompanied by sad thoughts ofhome, of wife and family. Such thoughts, nodoubt, he had; for when he was dead everybodytold us how much he was loved — lovedby his wife — loved by his children. I daresaythe small hut in which they dwelt wasdearer to him than any spot in th world; and,if he visited great ports and splendid cities,that he often wished he could exchange thesight for one glance of the little cove in whichhe was born, and where he had left his family'*No doubt he did," said Mr Howard; " andMamma will forgive me for interrupting herto tell you that I have heard of an instance inTHE STORM. 7which a sailor, after a long voyage, becamestone-blind from overstraining the nerve calledthe optic nerve, by which the eyes communicatewith the brain, in an attempt to discovera point of land which was particularly interestingto him; and I knew of a case wherethe delight of revisiting a beloved abodebrought with it a mental excitement so vehementas to end in death. Joy itself shouldbe moderated by reflection; but go on. Mamma,there was no such joy to precede thepoor fisherman's death."Edith has told you of the violence of thetempest. It was known that many vesselshad been wrecked, for planks, and brokenmasts, and merchandise, were driven on theshore. The tempest had continued furiouslythrough the night, and the night was one ofthick darkness. The fisherman's wife felt someanxiety, but not much alarm. Her husband8 MINOR MORALS.was a practised mariner, and many such stormshad he mastered, and come home in safety.Misgivings came and went. The fisher-boathad gone to sea the day before. Again andagain had the fisherman returned in high spirits,when ships had been driven ashore, andcorpses found on the coast; and he said thathis ' Frisky,' for so he had named his boat,would ride in security through any gale; andhe laughed at the fears which he heard sometimesexpressed, vowing that Frisky had learnedto dance in any waves or waters whetherhigh or low.In truth, he had subdued his wife's apprehension,and imparted to her a portion ofhis own courage.At break of day, the morning after thestorm, three of his children, two girls and aboy, went forth as they were wont, to gatherfrom the beach such fragments as the billowsTHE STORM. 9had washed upon the coast. There was atsome distance from their hut a rock called'the perilous point,' which jutted far into thesea, and which could only be passed round atlow water. To proceed beyond it was so dangerousthat it was generally the terminationof the walk. The tide was ebbing fast,though the billows were still agitated by theviolence of the tempest. One of the childrensaid, ' Let us go home.' ' No,' said another,let us wait to go round the perilous point,we shall soon be able; the tide is lowering —perhaps we shall find something.' ' Yes, perhapswe shall find something,' the others answered.They waited : they did find something— it was their father's body.The waves had left it high upon thesand: the children recognised it instantly,Father ! father ! ' they shouted to one anon10 MINOR MORALS.ther; and shouted to the lifeless corpse thatwas at their feet. They kissed it; they liftedits hands; they wiped away the sand from theface and the bosom; they cried; they ranabout wildly; they threw themselves on thebeach. They forgot that the tide was turning,until one of them shrieked out, ' Wecannot pass the rock.' An instinct of self-preservation,stronger than any other instinct,compelled them. They had to wade nearlyup to their breasts, and every now and thena wave washed over them: they held by oneanother, and by the rock, as they turned thePERILOUS POINT. They passed it in safety, andran, screaming dolefully as they ran, ' Father !father ! '"Ere they reached the house their motherheard them. The truth rushed into her mind r« Where ! where ! * she said ; and she saidTHE STORM. 11nothing more. The children ran before herto the rock ; but the tide had long beforecovered it — there was no passing.The poor widow tore her hair — looked ather children ; and, while the waves were dashingaround, she sat down silent as the rock,and gloomy as death. There she waited till thewaters fell; and as they fell, many and manya vain attempt did she make to pass roundthe point. She was beaten back again andagain ; but at last forced her way, while thechildren believed she would be carried off bythe waves. No corpse was there, nor signthat any corpse had been. Her children onceheard her shriek, ' No ! no ! ' but could notjoin her. When the tide had ebbed muchlower, they got round the rock, and found herlying senseless near the spot where they hadseen their dead father lie. With difficultythey aroused her, and forced her over the12 MINOR MORALS.PERILOUS point; a widow she, and orphans theywalked to their desolate hut. People say-shehas never smiled since then; but that shewill not believe her husband is dead. Shehas never once talked of him to her children,because she knows their testimony would interferewith her delusion. * He will comesome day,' she often is heard to whisper."Would it not be charity," said George,to persuade her of the truth; and that sheis deceiving herself with idle dreams?"I know not why," said Mr Howard:those dreams are hope and happiness toher, perhaps; and they do no harm to anyoneelse. Do you remember Horace's storyof the maniac, who reproached the medicalattendant that visited him for having curedhim of the fancy that he heard divinely harmonioussounds, and brought him back in consequenceto all the discords of the world? ITHE STORM. 13once met, in a lunatic asylum, a lady whoseillusion consisted in the belief that she wasperpetually in the presence of the wise andgood of all ages, hearing their words of wisdom,and herself the object of their peculiaraffection. She was so happy as to be enviable.And when you meet with calamity,my children, do not exaggerate it, nor magnifyit, either to yourselves or to others. Yourown calamities, especially, never attempt tomake greater than they are. If others formtoo low an estimate of their calamities, donot persuade them they are worse than theythink them to be."USES OF ANIMALS TO MAN,Among the favourite books of the Howardfamily library was ' Bewick's Birds andQuadrupeds.' Again and again had theleaves been turned over, and occasion wasoften found by Mr and Mrs Howard torelate some anecdote in illustration of thecharacters of the different animals, which areso prettily and so truly depicted by theNewcastle wood-engraver. " To observe,"was one of the constant lessons which wastaught in the Howard family — " To inquire,"the children were told, was not always curious we might be, asour curiosity could not on all occasionsUSES OF ANIMALS TO MAN. 15be satisfied — respect for others, and regardfor the variety of men's situations and stations,made it often incumbent on us torestrain inquiry, when it might seem intrusiveor impertinent. But, to observe wasalways right and proper ; and observationwas constantly encouraged — as was the communicationof what had been observed.Natural history was one of the most frequent,and (to the children) most agreeabletopics of conversation. Imagine, then, theHoward family gathered together as usual,after the tea had been removed from thetable, and Mr Howard, having called Edithto him and placed her between his knees,thus addressing them :We talked some time ago, children, ofthe services which animals might render toman— services voluntary and involuntary.And I remember a circumstance so remarksMINOR MORALS.able and so interesting, that it will do wellfor our evening tale.Perhaps you have heard of GeneralRafael Riego ; he was well known duringthe war of independence in the Peninsula,and still better after he and Quiroga hadheaded an insurrection of the Spanish troops inthe Isle de Leon, and set up against the despotismof Ferdinand the Seventh a popular representativegovernment. I was then a travellerin Spain, and saw the constitutional monumentserected in many of the towns andcities amidst the acclamations of the people.In France, you know, they planted trees,which they called trees of liberty, while inSpain they erected stones, which were denominatedlapide de la constitution. At thattime Riego was absolutely the idol of thenation: he was a man of gentle manners,kind affections, and made to be loved. ButUSES OF ANIMALS TO MAN. 17in those political vicissitudes through whichmen almost always are doomed to pass whenstruggling for political change, Riego perished— perished on the scaffold. One ofhis aide camps was an Irishman, namedGeorge Matthewes.It happened that many Englishmen wereengaged in these contests, which ended inthe subjugation of freedom and the re-establishmentof despotic power ; and many ofthese Englishmen occupied the prisons ofSpain. I was called upon to inquire intothe fate of one of them, who was believedto be immured in the dungeons of theSpanish capital. I employed a banker ofsome influence to ascertain whether anyEnglishman, who corresponded to the descriptionI gave of the party, was reallyconfined in any of the jails of Madrid.He could not be found, notwithstanding the18 MINOR MORALS.most anxious and persevering search of myfriend. But, while he was engaged inhis investigations, a dirty memorandumwas put into his hand by a soldier whowas guarding one of the condemned cells inwhich a human being had been long keptin solitary confinement — excluded from allcommunication, except such verbal conversationas, in opposition to the orders of hissuperior, might be charitably entered on bythe soldier stationed at the door of the cell.No writing materials — no pen, ink, or paperno means of intercourse with any personbeyond the four walls of the dungeon, wereever allowed to the unhappy prisoner. Thename of the prisoner was unknown to hisguard; all he knew was that he had beencaptured with Riego, and confined in thecell adjacent to that from whence Riego hadbeen led out to execution ; but the soldier hadUSES OF ANIMALS TO MAN. 19mentioned to the prisoner that inquiries hadbeen made about an Englishman of the nameof Harper, and the answer had been, that nosuch person was within the prison-walls.The prisoner intreated the soldier to conveythe scrap of paper that he gave him to thegentleman who had been making the inquiries— he consented to do so — the bankerreceived it and sent it to me.It was signed ' George Matthewes.' Itwas scarcely legible ; but it stated that thewriter had been long in solitary confinementwithout accusation — without judgment — yetin apprehension of sentence of death ; andthat he was an Englishman.Mr Canning was then Prime Minister.I wrote to him immediately, and a despatchwas sent off without delay to Madrid, directingthe British Minister to claim the personwho, without the forms of legal proceeding,2Q MINOR MORALS.had been thus arbitrarily detained. The interventionwas successful, and the prisonerwas released.He accompanied the returning messengerto England ; he brought with him the funeralmementos of Riego — the pocket handkerchiefwith which he wiped his last mortal butmanly tears — and gave it to his widow. Poorthing ! she was then drooping — like a lily onits stem — fair and pure; and the weight ofgrief soon overwhelmed a broken hearty andloosened the silver cord of an existence attenuatedby long disease. I remember her — asaint-like beauty— disassociated, as it were,from earth.Matthewes brought with him one othertreasure — it was a white dove. While excludedfrom all knowledge of what was passingin the world — hopeless of ever communicatinghis forlorn condition to any living soulUSES OF ANIMALS TO MAN. 21that dove had flown into his cell. Heplucked a feather from its wing, and, withhis teeth and nails, shaped it into a pen.He made ink of the filth he gathered in thecorners of his miserable abode ; he tore outthe lining of his hat, on which he wrote theaccount that led to his deliverance — that wasthe memorandum I received. What becameof the dove I know not ; but GeorgeMatthewes died some years afterwards a prisonerin Portugal.I was one day talking with MademoiselleDuvaucel, niece of the celebrated naturalist,Cuvier, on the tractableness of animals, andshe said they had then a curious example ofthe influence of one bird upon another,though of wholly different species. A vultureand a raven were neighbours in the Jardindes Plantes. The raven was, by commonconsent, allowed to be the most amiable22 * MINOR MORALS.animal within the garden-walls, and was, inconsequence,a universal favourite. He hadlearnt all sorts of tricks — such as catchingbread in the air, dancing and flutteringwhen visited by any of his acquaintances,and generally giving evidence of a superiorintelligence. He was often over-supplied withfood, from the contributions of his friends,and never failed, when he had eaten a sufficiency,to bury the rest for future use, andnever forgot the place of its concealment.Whether the vulture had perceived or notthat his neighbour raven's reputation wasgreater than his own, and the spirit of emulationgrew within him, in consequence ofhis observations and reflections, could not bepositively ascertained; but, certain it is, thevulture took to imitating the raven, andsoon made considerable progress in his fascinatingarts. He abandoned animal food, andUSES OF ANIMALS TO MAN. 23adopted bread nourishment. He was greatly-perplexed,however, by his curved and crookedbill. The raven easily picked off the dustfrom the bread, or plucked the bread out ofthe dust, with his sharp and piercing instrument,and had got into the habit of pokingit about till he found a clean place for it.The vulture's difficulties were at first insurmountable— nature had denied him the toolswhich the raven had to work with. He succeeded,however, at last ; and, after muchtwisting and writhing, and inexhaustible patience,was able to regale himself comfortablywith his newly-adopted food.Among the galley slaves whom I saw departfor Toulon, on the 21st April 1834, wasone, all whose attention was absorbed by alittle creature that ran up and down his arms,hid itself in his breast, played about hisneck, and seemed busied in diverting the criedMINOR MORALS.final from the dark and dreary thoughtswhich must have been rushing through hismind. I saw him fully occupied with hisplay-thing, and far more concerned in protectingit from mischief than with any othercare. An intruder into his cell, he had managedfirst to capture and then to tame it;and, having no other receptacle for what remainedin him of kindness and benevolence(and I never knew kindness and benevolencewholly eradicated in the most ferocious criminal),he had poured out upon the .sleekskinned mouse all that he had of love. Isaw him full of apprehension lest the poorlittle animal should be injured or crushed inthe crowd. As the convicts were led forth,one after another, and seated in the long linefrom which they are to rise, with the heavyiron collar rivetted around their throat, andchained together, in companies of twenty, IUSES OF ANIMALS TO MAN. 25watched his eye, and fancied I could followhis thoughts. He seemed wholly careless ofwhat was passing around him; he took nonotice of the spectators; and even when thehammer smote the rivet upon the anvil, hewas watching the courses of the little creature,and was, perhaps, contrasting their mutualdestinies. ' A prisoner, too,' I fanciedhe said — ' a fettered prisoner ; but still withone being at least to watch over and protectthee. While there are hands to aid, and aheart to feel for thee, ever present and everthoughtful, no hand will be stretched out, noheart will beat, in charity for thy keeper.When the wind blows and the rain falls thouhast a shelter in my bosom; its warmth willbe for thee in the cold and wintry season ;but where shall 1 retreat? ' And then hesmiled upon the pretty little animal, strokedVOL. II. c2(> Minor MORALS.its back gently, and hid it again in his beatingbreast." ."Do you know what became of him?"asked Edith.No, my dear ; he was probably forgotten.When I visited the Bagnes I was toldthat it was not allowed to the officers tomention the names of the prisoners. Thepunishment was intended to remove themfrom the world, and to break up all theirconnections with their old acquaintances."But would it do so. Papa ? Could theybe made to forget everybody, and everybodyto forget them ? "The attempt did not always succeed,Edith ; for I found that love, and kindred,and other claims, brought many people tothe vicinity of the Bagnes, who tried, andsometimes were successful, in establishingUSES OF ANIMALS TO MAN. 27communications with the prisoners. I heardof an instance where a lady of rank had livedfor many months in the neighbourhood, for thepurpose of obtaining the release of a criminalto whom she was attached, and she succeeded,by large and repeated bribes. Sostrong are the human affections, and so ill-advisedlyare they sometimes directed ! Butwe must take care not to err by severe judgments.There is often much virtue amongcriminals — virtue which, if it had found timeand place for its proper exercise, would havemade them illustrious public benefactors.Those who have never known the pressureof want are often apt to condemn too harshly.If they changed places with the unfortunate,it might be found that the scale of meritwould be wholly changed. The rich are tooapt to be severe on the errors of the poor.^? MINOR MORALS.Could they but fancy themselves smittenwith poverty they would be more charitable,and, being more charitable, would be morejust to others."LOVE OF EXCELLENCE ANDLOVE OF EXCELLING.Papa," said George, one day to Mr Howard," alien we are endeavouring at schoolto get the highest places in our class, I sometimesobserve that the boys who cannot geton are made uncomfortable by the successof those who can, so that the good fortuneof some cannot be obtained without givingpain to others. Ought this to be ? "When I was a boy," said Mr Howard,I went to a school in which there waswritten in letters more than a foot long, ' Letemulation prevail,' I was much perplexedby it; for it often happened that the boys30 MINOR MORALS.who made the greatest progress annoyed andtormented others, so that this very emulationwas often the cause of much vexation; andthis led me to consider that there was agreat difference between the love of excellenceand the love of excelling."Oh," said Arthur, " indeed there is, becauseI have seen boys who got to the headof their class, and whom we loved better thanany boys in the school."And I am sure that may well be," saidlittle Edith, " because some of the cleverestand wisest people I ever knew were thegentlest and the kindest. Don't you remember,Mamma, when we were on the sea coast,how pleasant it was to listen to Mr Harcourt,who was a great philosopher, and who knewall about the causes of the rising and fallingof the tides, and the different shapes of themoon, and the reason of the summer's heatLOVE OF EXCELLENCE, ETC. 31and the winter's cold, and eclipses, and whotold us of all the changes the earth had undergone,and of the rocks that were oldest,and those of later date, and of the animalsthat lived before the deluge, and of thestrange world they must have had to existin, and who taught us the causes of lightand darkness, and how men breathe the airthat is given out by plants, and plants breathethe air that is given out by men, and agreat many other wonderful things, and yethe never made us feel uncomfortable? Weloved him for his wisdom, and we neverfeared him, and his visits were always mostwelcome."Oh," said Arthur, " that is like our mathematicalfriend who talks to us about anglesand triangles, and Euclid, and wrangling atCambridge, and helps us in our Algebra difficulties,and in all our sums and cyphers,32 MINOR MORALS.and yet never says a single word to provethat he knows more about these matters thanany body else, and yet we know he does,but feel quite as happy in his company as ifhe knew no more than any of us."And happier, too," said Edith, " becausewe can learn so much from his knowledge,which his good nature makes so verydelightful."Then, my dear children," said Mr Howard," you will see what is good and what isevil in that word, emulation, and the differencethere is between love of excellence andthe love of excelling. The love of excellencegives no pain to others ; the love ofexcelling may give pain, and when it does,it is unamiable. I will tell you a storywhich will show you the difference.In the county of Devonshire there is anextensive desert, which is called a forest, beloveOF EXCELLENCE, ETC. o3cause in remote times there is no doubt itwas covered with woods. It is now surroundedby granite rocks ; among which manyof those beautiful rivers have their source,whose crystal brightness and wanderingcourse through a rich variety of rocky andverdant scenery, have often excited the attentionand led to the descriptions of travellers.On the verge of Dartmoor, by theborders of the Dart, a river, rapid as itsname, — there was a cottage almost hidden inthe rich variety of verdure which the mildand humid climate of Devon produces ingreat abundance. Myrtles were there, whichdared every season, and were equally greenin the wintery as in the vernal months, andin the summer season the blossoms of thepomegranate hung in clusters of vermilion,as bright as ever was seen in tropical islands.The cottage was inhabited by a widow Whoc284 MINOR MORALS.had two daughters, whose names were Janeand Emily Macdonald. They had been bornin India, where their father had been engagedfor some years in the service of the East IndiaCompany, with happy prospects before him offuture prosperity. He had intended to sendhis children to Europe for education ; for, asI dare say you know, the climate is dangerousto children of European origin, and oftenanticipated the delight with which he shouldwatch their progress, and welcome themwhen their education had been completed ;but death, that so often interferes with man'sprojects, interfered with Mr Macdonald's :and he was suddenly carried ois by one ofthose reckless and rapid diseases which makelife so shadowy and uncertain in those remoteregions. When he died, all his brilliantvisions with respect to his childrenfaded away from the mind of their mother,LOVE OF EXCELLENCE, ETC. 35and she returned to England a sad and solitarywidow, with slender means, determinedto seek some spot of solitude where shemight devote herself to the education of herdaughters. She consulted her friends, andfound there was no spot where she couldlive more economically than in the neighbourhoodI have described. She had astrong love for the charms of nature, andhill and mountain, forest and river scenerybrought to her mind the thoughts which sheloved to indulge. She could fancy there wasa friendly voice in the echoes of the hills,and that the music of the wood-birds and ofthe waters was meant to soothe her sorrows.When she went vrith her daughters into thefields and gathered wild flowers, it seemedto her as if they were all made to consoleand to comfort her. ' If I had not beenhere,' she said, * nobody would have noticed36 MINOR MORALS.them.' And it was a pleasant thought thatshe reckoned for something in a part of theworld which, without her, might have beenneglected and abandoned.Jane was only one year older than hersister Emily. Jane had a great desire to instructherself, but she cared not low muchshe sacrificed others. Whenever she knewanything, she was not only desirous of exhibitingher knowledge, but she always wishedto contrast it with the ignorance of her companions.It was not enough for her to putforth on every occasion all she had read andheard, but she seemed desirous of talking onsubjects where she could show her superiority.So, for instance, she was frequentlyblazoning forth that she had been in India —had seen the Ganges — had ridden upon elephants— had had fifty black servants — so thatnobody was allowed to talk with her of greatLOVE OF EXCELLENCE, ETC. 37rivers, of great animals, and great attendants;and, if she had only mentioned this by wayof . information, instead of as a display ofpride, her conversation would have been interestingand instructive ; but she had a passionatedesire to appear to excel, and, in orderto do so, she never thought how much shehumiliated or distressed others. I do not believeshe really meant to give them pain,but she was careless about the consequencesof what she said and did.Emily's character and conduct was verydifferent. The ambition to obtain the goodopinion of others was not wanting to her.She had really and truly the love of excellence.But, while she was under the influencesof a desire to communicate any informationwhich might be useful or pleasant toher companions and friends, she was especiallycareful so to communicate it as to consMINOR MORALS.vey no emotions of vexation to them. Shenever intruded observations which could grievethose who listened to her. She was moredesirous of gathering from others the informationthey were able to communicate thanof displaying her own. When her sisterspoke, people were doubtful whether shemight not say annoying and disagreeablethings; but when Emily opened her lips,everybody was sure that her words would bewelcome, thoughtful, and well-chosen.I have spoken of the Macdonald' companions,for, though they lived in a secludedplace, there are few places in England sosecluded as to be shut out from that intercoursewhich is both refreshing and consoling.There was in the neighbourhood adissenting clergyman — a modest and benevolentman — whose visits were hailed with delightwhenever and wherever he appeared.LOVE OF EXCELLENCE, ETC. 39A newly-arrived neighbour, like Mrs Macdonald,who had seen so much of the world,who had inhabited Asia, touched on Africa,and brought with her to Europe so manytales of wonder gathered in the Orientalworld, was a settler whose arrival excited nolittle interest in the Devonian vales. To thisminister she had brought letters, and he hadmade it his business to seek friends andacquaintances for Mrs Macdonald, who weremost anxious to show the interest they feltin her well-being. It was thus a circle ofsocial fellowship was created, and here it wasthat Jane and Emily displayed the peculiaritiesof their character.The good people of the neighbourhoodwere at first so charmed with Jane's vivacity,that they sought all sorts of excuses for thatlittle defect which it was impossible for herto conceal, but which they overlooked at first40 MINOR MORALS.out of courtesy to a stranger, and becauseshe was really an instructed and intelligentgirl. Bat alas ! her defects became moreoffensive, from being unchecked, and the moretimid, but more considerate Emily, imperceptiblywon upon the kind affections of thelittle social circle. Her information came inamodest and gentle guise, while Jane's voicewas frequently loud, and her manner intrusive.Little by little, those who listenedgrew inattentive— from being inattentive, theybecame uneasy; and, at last, they venturedto tell Miss Jane, that she should not speakin so peremptory and patronising a manner.All that Jane lost in the kind feelings oftheir neighbours Emily won ; for Emily,though she often felt that she might havecorrected many ignorant or imperfect notionsof those with whom she conversed, felt thatshe could not always do this without giveOF EXCELLENCE, ETC. 41ing pain. But a thousand opportunitiesoccurred in which she was applied to forinformation on matters she had studied andobjects she had seen ; and all that she saidshe said so gently and so gracefully, that noone felt the slightest embarrassment, stillless vexation, from instruction coming in sounpretending and attractive a shape.Jane was not unobservant of what passed,and said to her sister, whom she fondly loved,I see, Emily, that you are listened to withpleasure, however much you talk, while theyshow impatience when I get possession ofthe conversation. Tell me, tell me, like agood sister, what this means.'' Indeed, my dear Jane, I have sometimesthought that they do not sufficientlyestimate all your good qualities, and do notlike to acknowledge how much more youknow than they. But — '42 MINOR MORALS.'But what?' retorted Jane.' Wliy, I think answered Emily, . ' thatsometimes you are a little too much contrastedwith those to whom you speak' Oh ! I know what you mean — you thinkI parade myself* Not so, my love ; but I fear that thosewho have seen so much less, and who knowso much less than you, do not always understandyour tone.'' Most true, most true replied Jane, ' Ioften detect myself in a louder voice anda loftier manner than is becoming. I willtry, I will try to mend it.'Many, many years have passed since thisconversation between the two sisters ; a changein their fortunes brought them forth fromtheir retirement into the busy bustling world.Jane has lost all that desire for distinctionwhich could not satisfy itself without becomeOF EXCELLENCE, ETC. 43ing a grievance to others. It was her lot,her happy lot, to be thrown into the societyof those whose information was much greaterthan hers, and she had the good sense tosee how idle it was to presume upon acquirementswhich were eclipsed by those of manywho surrounded her. She has discovered thatthe exhibition of fancied excellence is somewhatdifferent from the possession of realexcellence. She is rather desirous of beingone of many to bring her little tribute ofknowledge to the general stock, than to appearthe possessor of an exclusive fund ofknowledge which she knows is not hers.Emily's fate has been perhaps happier.Her modesty made her a favourite — her informationbrought with it respect. In herthe love of excellence was never linked withpersonal parade; and as she never sought a placehigher than her deserts, but always lower,44 MINOR MORALS.everybody was desirous of honouring her byelevation. How many pains she saved toherself — how many pleasures she created forherself, nobody but herself can know. Butsure I am that, if you, my children, strive tobe excellent, not from a desire of loweringothers, but of raising yourselves — if youremulation have in it no ill-will, no enmity —if, in the honourable race you run, the desireto obtain the prize is not polluted bythoughts of enmity to those who run therace with you, your winning will be honourable,and honourable will be your failures'SLAVERY.Among the visitors who frequently called onMr Howard's family was a gentleman whohad been a great traveller both by land andsea, having visited the four quarters of theglobe. He often delighted the children bythe tales he told of the countries he haddwelt in, and the sights he had seen. Thechildren called him governor, for he had beengovernor of one of the English settlementson the African coast; and whether it wasthat he had seen so much injustice alone tothe blacks as to lead him to suppose that, onevery occasion when there was any misunderstandingwith white men, the white men46 MINOR MORALS.were invariably wrong and the black menright, or whether he had a sort of instinctivepreference for the ebony race, I know not;but his friends were accustomed to say, andto say truly, that he was sure to decideevery question in favour of the negro, andthat the white man lost all his fair chanceswhen our governor was judge between them.He was a rare exception, indeed, to whitemen in general; for in a great part of theworld the negro is looked upon as a fair andfit object for oppression and misdoing. Hislife, his little property, his wife, his children,are too often considered as at the disposal ofsome white tyrant who has obtained possessionof him.In Mr Howard's family the fate of thepoor negroes was often a subject of conversation,and the children were in the habit ofinducing the governor to tell them anecdotesSLAVERY. 47of the woolly-headed natives of Africa, whomhe knew better than most men, and of whomhe always spoke with the feelings of a friend,and sometimes even with the affection of abrother.One evening" the favourite topic was introduced,and the governor said he would tellthem a little story he had heard from thelips of a French captain, engaged in theAfrican trade, assuring them that he believedevery word to be strictly true.Ands' said the governor, " you mustfancy me to be the French captain, becauseI can better convey to you the history if Ispeak in his name and person ; and this iswhat the French captain said : —I was coasting near Cape Palma, whenI observed on the shore some of thosewooden huts which Europeans are wonthastily to construct upon the burning sand.'48 MINOR MORALS.These cabins are fragile, and of short duration,but serve as market places for thosebargains in human beings, which form themost lucrative commerce carried on in theAfrican tropics. A large brig, painted black,was anchored close to the shore. She hoistedno flag, she did not own herself to belongto any civilized nation; her whole appearancebespoke the purposes of robbery whichbrought her there. In a word, she was aslave vessel, endeavouring by stealth to fillup her cargo of misery with which to departto other markets where white men wouldbe found to buy those unfortunate beingswhom in Africa black men kidnapped, andwhite men encouraged them to do so.A young man met me when I landed. —He came out from one of the huts clothed, orrather half clothed, in that careless and slovenlymanner which is very common in hotSLAVERY. 49climates, where no eye of fashionable observationwatches the proprieties of dress. Heapproached me with a careless air, and in alounging and somewhat scornful gait. Hehad much of that cunning, distrustful lookwhich distinguishes those who are engagedin illicit transactions, and which is, as itwere, the last expression of the sense ofshame : ' for the cases are few,' observed thegovernor, ' in which men occupied in misdeedsfail to betray a sense of their disgracefulemployment: and I have often seen,'added he, ' the expression of self-condemnationeven where success and splendid fortunes hadappeared to recompense nefarious transactions.'How astonished I was," said the captain,when, after looking keenly at me for a fewminutes, the negro-dealer rushed into myVOL. II. D ,^0 MINOR MORALS.arms. ' And is it possible he said, ' thatyou are come to this abominable and burningcountry ? What curse sends you here ? 'I looked in his face, and I discovered thathe was one of my own relations, whomhis family had lost sight of for many years.He had always been of a bold and adventurousturn, and it was believed he had perishedat sea. Greatly was I astonished atthe meeting: he hastily told me the historyof four or five years. During these he hadbeen engaged in the slave and gold-dusttrade. He had become wealthy; and I believethe joy with which he welcomed me,and the eager interest with which he devouredthe news I gave him, were mostsincere. He asked me the purpose of myvisit, which was principally to collect elephants'teeth, gums, ostrich feathers, andSLAVERY. 51other African productions, in exchange forthose commodities with which my vessel wasladen."He laughed loudly at this, and said a manmust be a fool to come to so detestable aclimate for any purpose but that of makingas much money as possible. The slavetrade, he said, was the only good thingleft, and he recommended me to change mypurpose, offering his best assistance, and promisingthat I should return to Europe withmy pockets full of gold : ' not grains of golddust,' he said, ' such as you can pick out ofyour gums or your feathers, but solid ounces,and minores, which the people of Savannahor of the Brazils will be delighted to shovelinto your hat.'But this did not suit my notions of morality; and, though I observed that he feltgreat contempt for my rejection of his brillM1^0R MORALS.liant offers, I was not disposed to reject Mscivilities, and walked with him to the principalhut.On our way thither he began to tell me ofall the squabbles he had had with the neighbouringchieftains, and of the difficulties hesometimes found to collect a sufficient quantityof slaves. ^ But I will let you into asecret,' he said. ' I have lately made a masterstroke— a capital speculation; I have just marriedthe daughter of Long Tom, the mightiestof all these rascally African coast-kings.''Married!' said I, *why you are marriedalready! and have left your wife, who nowbelieves herself to be a widow, ignorant, asshe and everybody is, of your existence ! '' So much the better, then there will beno harm done ; I only wish you had beenhere a week ago to have been present at thenuptials; you would have seen a pretty set ofSLAVERY. 53ceremonies when I was spliced to my black-facedspouse, Long Tom's eldest daughter andheiress, who is, between us, as worthyas her father is knavish. But, never fear, 1shall get slaves the cheaper, and make myfortune the sooner. Ah !' said he, laughing*,could you but have seen the grand Alafou,with his charms, and have heard the howlsand the shouts of all the black devils thatwere present I'You may believe that I was shocked atthis heartless language; but it would havebeen useless to have expressed what I thoughtand felt.' And what do you mean to do with yourAfrican wife,' inquired I, ' when you leavethe country? Has she shown any affectionfor you ? Will you abandon her ?'^^ * A pretty question, truly ! I will not54 MINOR MORALS.abandon her; I shall take her with me, andsell her. ''* An exclamation of astonishment fell fromme.' You have a tender-skinned conscience,indeed; dont you think Long Tom's eldestdaughter, the black and the beautiful princess,will fetch a good round sum in the Martiniquemarket? Besides, my royal father haspresented me with a superb dowry, and Ishall load my next vessel somewhat moreeconomically than the last. Come, 111 introduceyou to his majesty.'"He took me to another of the huts, in acorner of which, in a state of drunken stupor,lay an old negro, grotesquely clad. A cockedhat with a long green feather had fallen offhis head, and he was grasping it with hisright hand. He wore an old scarlet uniform.SLAVERY. 55the cast-off dress of an English Serjeant.Around his waist was a faded golden belt,and his legs were covered with pantaloons ofdirty chintz. Upon a barrel near him was anoverturned bottle of rum, a portion of whichhad been spilt, and on the other side was ascooped half gourd, in which was a quantityof wetted manioc flour, which had beenbrought in for that meal which had been interruptedby the ardent spirits the old manhad been swallowing.The old man was in a state too insensibleto notice us, so we withdrew together; mycompanion, hardened by his habits, and breakingout into roars of laughter at what hecalled his majesty's weaknesses, and I, musingupon the scene of vice, misery, and folly,which I had been witnessing.' Since his majesty is not in a condition66 MINOR MORALS.to receive us,' said lie, ' let us go to theprincess Rarara. 'He conducted me to her; and I confessI was surprised at seeing a young and gracefulnegress, prettily ornamented according to thecustom of the country, who looked upon himwith smiles of kindness, and through whoseblack cheeks I could perceive a blush as heintroduced me to her. He had learned thelanguage of the country, and having explainedto her that I was of his own race and blood,she appeared eager to show me all thosekindnesses which were at her command. Sheprepared a simple repast of fruit and vegetables,and urged me repeatedly to partakemore and more of it. In the midst of this,how was I shocked to hear my companionexclaim — ' And don't you think I shall obtaina good price for my ebony log?'SLAVERY. 5TThe next day we returned to visit theking. He looked dull and exhausted withthe debauch of the previous day. His son-in-lawtalked to him somewhat sternly, andseemed to have obtained great authority overhim. His wife trembled when he spoke.Poor woman !' said I, ' thine is a crueldestiny ! 'I left that part of the coast a few daysafterwards.The following year I was at Martinique.Oiie Sunday evening I went to the slave -dance at St Pierre. You have heard ofthe strange torch-light exhibitions in whichthe poor creatures deliver themselves up to adelirium, which is a frightful contrast to thewretchedness of their daily existence. WhileI was looking on, I heard a terrible shriek —who should be there but Rarara. She rushedd258 MINOR MORALS.forward — she threw herself at my feet, whichshe wetted with her tears.' Can it be you, and here ?' said I.' I — wife then — slave now ;' and her tearsflowed forth afresh.I made inquiry as to what had happened.My relation was living at Martinique withhis first wife, whose slave Rarara had become.I sought the poor African woman, to learnfrom her own lips some particulars of hercondition. She said, with great simplicity,that her husband's first wife had the firstclaim, and that she hoped, if the-white wifedied, that she should be the second.I confess I was imprudent enough to smileat the poor woman's credulity, and to tellher that she was indulging a vain and foolishhope. I was deeply interested in her, andSLAVERY. 59offered to intercede for lier redemption, intendingto restore her to her native land.She shook her head when I proposed it, butdid not utter a word.The following Sunday I again went to seethetorch-light dances. It appeared to measif Rarara were absolutely wild with excitement;but whenever it was her turn to comenear me she rushed away, as if she had seennot a friend but an enemy.The next day she was found dead — shehad poisoned herself in her despair."SWALLOWS.It was an evening of May, mild and beautiful,the trees clothed in fresh green, theflowers dancing to the gentle winds, the airmild and balmy, and the family of the towardswere enjoying the delightful season inthe fields.What a pretty bird is the swallow," saidEdith: "how busy — how swift — how irregularits course ! "The proverb which connects its comingwith the summer season is of great antiquity,"said Mr Howard, " and has passed into allthe languages of Europe. ' One swallow doesSWALLOWS. 61not make a summer, ' implying that manyswallows do infallibly denote the arrival ofthat bright season.""Has it a song?" inquired Arthur.Oh, yes," said Mr Howard, " and SirHumphrey Davy declares that he prefers itsmusic to that of the nightingale."It is a most useful bird, too," said MrHoward; " for it clears the atmosphere ofthousands of small winged insects, whichmight otherwise cause great annoyance. Anobserver calculates that wien a female swallowis seeking food for her young, she returnsto the nest more than a hundred times aday, and has generally caught from thirty toforty insects in every journey, which she collectsat the bottom of her throat, so that athousand swallows will, in the course of tendays, have destroyed between three and fourmillions of living creatures."62 MINOR MORALS.Are swallows much spoken of by ancientwriters. Papa?" inquired Arthur.Frequently; and the song is come downto us which the young people of Greece werein the habit of singing on the arrival of theswallows, when they announced, from doorto door, their coming, and expected somepresent or recompense for the good news.In Attica the people made it a rule to doittheir winter garments on the appearance ofthe swallow. They were accustomed to showthemselves at the beginning of March, whilewith us April, and sometimes May, is thetime of their first presence. The Latinpoets speak frequently of the swallow: thehouse or chimney swallow Virgil calls ' garrulous,'from its being a noisy bird.Pliny says that they never show preferencesin feeding their young, but take each inturn; and are particularly cautious in givingSWALLOWS. 63lessons of cleanliness, by teaching their progenyto keep their nests free from impurities.The swallow that builds its nest in chimneysis careful to place it out of the reach ofanimals of prey, and generally descends fouror five feet for that purpose. Those whohave had occasion to watch the trainingof the young to mount the orifice, havebeen struck with the care and anxietywith which the first attempts are made ;and the task is so laborious and important,that the little bird allows itself aday's rest, either at the top of the chimney orinits immediate neighbourhood, as if naturewere exhausted by its first toilsome effort;there it is watched by its parents, which showanxiety for its early flight: the brood is conductedto the branch of some not distanttree, or to the roof of some adjacent dwelledMINOR MORALS.ing, where they are fed in their accustomedorder for three or four days.They are encouraged to further exertions.They are led by their parents to attempta bolder flight — to try the strength oftheir wings; and as they fly they are fed.The mother gathers up their food; they followher, not to join in the chase, but toshare the spoil. She sings; she calls eachby turns ; the order of procedure which beganat their birth is still recognised. To hersong a chirrup of joy responds ; they aresupplied, but are still on the wing; there isno tarrying — no stoppage of their earnest,joyful activity.They are soon started in the aerial world ;they shape their own course — rapid — irregularas that of their forefathers ; and theirparents return to their nests, to watch overanother generation.SWALLOWS. 65Divers tribes of swallows mingle, and minglewithout hostility. They are in this wiserthan the races of men ; may we not say better ?They associate and combine for common defence;they drive from among them the intrudersof other habits; and though theirquarrels are sometimes vivacious, they are neverbloody; — the shanie of blood-spilling belongsto man !At Blois, in 1830 and 1831, a swallowbuilt its nest on the top of a weather-cock.It turned round and round as the windchanged; but the work of the labourer, andthe cares of the mother were never disturbed.There was noise, there was rocking; butwhat were they to the swallows? Peoplesaid their songs were louder, and their triumphsbolder. Who should reach them inthat seat of restlessness ? There they fixedtheir nest, and there they hatched their66 MINOR MORALS.young; and from thence they launched theminto the free heavens.If a sparrow, or other intruder, get into aflock of swallows, the tocsin is sounded, andthe zeal with which all the confederates rushupon the stranger is curious and amusing.They pluck his feathers — they drive their billsinto his body — they smite, and fly beyond allpower of retaliation — in a word, they almostalways succeed in repelling the enemy.The sparrow sometimes annoys the swallowby taking possession of its nest. Thesparrow is a lazy bird, and a quarrelsomeone ; and is on all occasions willing to possessitself of the labours of others, in orderto save its own exertions. It thus frequentlyseeks to usurp the property of the swallow —hides itself in the nest it has occupied, andpresents its sharp beak against the true proprietor.What does the swallow? It is theSWALLOWS. 67weaker of the two, and it cannot dislodgethe intruder by violence ; its wisdom comesto the aid of its physical inferiority — itblockades the sparrow — it makes a mud wall;and compels the enemy to surrender by famine— it calls others to its help ; and thefortifications are the work of sympathy. AtMezieres, in France, a case occurred in whichthe sparrow was completely immured and suffocated.These practices of the swallow havenot only been remarked by Europeans — theyhave been recorded by American observersWhat becomes of the swallow tribes in thewinter season is stir a mystery. Whetherthey wing their way to distant lands, or becomedormant in stagnant waters, or both, is asyet undecided. Great authorities (Line andCuvier) are in favour of the latter opinion.Temps, 3 Avril, p. 25, 539.68 MINOR MORALS.A few certainly remain in our climates — per-haps too weak to undertake the long andweary travels of the great family. Theseabandoned ones come forth when March orApril have a few hot days to invigoratethem. It is in consequence of their comingalone and neglected — that the proverb hashad its currency — which I will give you inItalian, for the sake of a lesson, —Una iodine non fa primavera.*If people would watch the habits of animals,they would learn much. Don't yousuppose that even swallows are interested inone another's happiness? Indeed they are.I wil give you an example.A gentleman well known in the scientificworld (Dupont de Memoirs) mentions, in apaper read before the French Institute, that,SWALLOWS. 69as lie was one day passing in the streets ofParis, he saw a swallow, which, in some wayor other, had its leg entangled in a stringhanging from the water-spout of the collegeof the Quatre Nations. The poor bird wasnearly exhausted with fatigue ; it cried, itstruggled, it rose as far as it could, and wasagain and again dragged down by the fetterwhich bound it.Soon, however, its companions became acquaintedwith its misfortune. They gatheredabout their captive fellow by tens of thousands; they came from all sides ; they evendarkened the sky; they repeated one to anothertheir cries of distress and pity. Theywere bewildered with their anxiety, andseemed, says the narrator, to hold a tumultuouscouncil as to what was to be attemptedwhat was to be done."70 MINOR MORALS.How interesting !" exclaimed Edith ; " butwhat could the poor creatures do?"You know," said Mr Howard, " thefable of the ' Mouse and the Lion.' Repeatedefforts of very little creatures sometimesproduce a very extraordinary result.And the swallows did find the means ofliberating the prisoner."But pray tell us how — pray tell us," saidEdith, hastily, — who was extremely charmedby the story, and who thought to herselfthat, if she had been a swallow, no usefulsuggestion would have occurred to her.You would not have been wanting, Edith,in good will, I perceive, though you mightnot have been of much use as a ready counsellor; but a counsellor was found, and thecounsel was adopted, and all joined in theexecution.SWALLOWS. 71A swallow proposed — or, if it did not propose,it set the example, of striking thestring on their rapid flight. The first swallowwas soon followed by others; every oneof which rushed against the string as itpassed, and at the same point : they camethicker and thicker — faster and faster; andthus, for half an hour, the string was worngradually away at the place which they allstruck; and liberty was at last given to theprisoner.In the Peninsula, the swallow is considereda sacred bird — as the stork in some othercountries. You know that in many parts ofEngland there is a superstitious affection forthe redbreast. I remember I was taught almostas soon I could speak to say, —The robin and the jenny-wrenAre God Almighty's cock and hen.*72 MINOR MORALS.There is in Spain an old legend which says,that, when Jesus was crucified, swallows cameand loosened the crown of thorns around hisforehead. The superstitions that teach humanityand kindness are the least pernicious ofall; and in ignorant nations have often amost useful influence. I should not wonderif some of them had been invented by benevolentpersons, who were unable to discoverany means of instruction so efficacious.'* M. Moulin, from whose charming papersI have found so much to say about swallows,*mentions, that, while he was travelling onthe borders of the Orinoco, he desired oneof the Indians to shoot an urubu (a speciesof crow) that was attacking a lizard which hewished to possess. The Indian had been engagedby him for the purpose of shooting♦ Temps, 28tli Aug. 1834.SWALLOWS. 73wild animals, but lie positively refused toobey. ' If I were to kill that bird,' he said,the poison of my arrow would lose all itsvirtue;' and M. Moulin adds, that he foundall the Indians influenced by a similar superstition.In those sultry climates, the animalmatter which this bird removes would, if leftuntouched, soon infect the air with noisomeinsects. Perhaps gratitude for the services ofthe urubu was the first cause of its findingthat protection which it now obtains.I will tell you one more instance of aswallow's thoughtfulness. It is mentioned byKali. ' In the habitation of a lady who isa friend of my own, two swallows had constructedtheir nest; the eggs were duly laid,and as duly did the mother attend to them.We were daily expecting the young brood.One day, however, we saw the male swallowviolently agitated — flying in great con-vol.11. E74 MINOR MORALS.fusion and embarrassment about the place —making a great noise, and appearing muchdistressed. It excited our curiosity. The servantsof the house mounted a ladder, andfound the female swallow dead upon the eggs.They removed her, and we watched the conductof the male. He took possession ; but,finding himself ill at ease, or engaged in anaffair he did not well understand, he soon flewaway, but returned in the evening with afemale companion — who took charge of thenest — who hatched the young ; and showedthem all the attention they could have receivedfrom their natural mother.' — But it istime to get home, my children."So the Towards again returned to theirhappy dwelling, pleased and instructed, withmuch to think about and much to enjoy inthe recollection of the evening's walk.LOVE OF HOME,^^ Is it true," said Arthur to lies father, " thatthe word Home, or one with a similar meaning,is not to be found in any language but English ?For that is what I have heard said, Papa !"No ! my boy," answered Mr Howard,both the word and the thing are to be foundin many other languages, and several of themhave even a name for that passionate longingfor home which sometimes accompanies theabsent, and which may be translated home-acheDo you think the love of home is equallystrong among all nations ?"Certainly not ; nor is it to be wished that76 MINOR MORALS.it should be so. I have known many peoplemade unhappy by it; and sometimes the prejudicein favour of a particular spot, and thewish to return to it, have even destroyed thedesires of the powers of usefulness. In mytravels in Denmark, I fell in with an Icelander,who was exceedingly uncomfortablebecause, as he told me, he had not heardthe winds roar, nor seen the ocean rage, ashewas accustomed to do at home : he longedto look upon Mount Hecla, and the bubblingof the hot springs of mud."Perhaps' said Edith, " they were as dearto him as the Alpine mountains to the Swisspeasant — or the green plains to the Friesland,or the vast forest to the American savage'*True," replied Mr Howard, "and thesubject brings one or two little circumstances,which you shall hear, to my memory.There is a rich and lovely mountain, situatedLOVE OF HOME. 77close to the town of Ay, which is distinguishedfor the exquisite champagne wine it produces.It was once an arid and useless surface, bringingforth nothing but a few coarse weeds, such asachalky rock, and a scant and sandy surfacewould allow to grow. But in progress of timethis hill was found singularly adapted to thecultivation of the most luscious grapes, and ithas obtained a value equalled perhaps by noother landed property in Europe. The wholebosom of the mountain has been turned to theproduction of the vine, and it now bears thecharacter of one vast garden, divided and subdividedinto numerous plots of ground, manyof which are scarcely larger than a large ; and these again are subdividedamong the children as the parents die, — theFrench law requiring that all property shallbe equally partitioned without any referenceto sex, or to earlier or later birth.78 MINOR MORALS.I have visited this elevated district, and wasmuch struck with its charming appearance.It overlooks the village of Ay, and the riverMarne runs slowly and sluggishly through thevalley below, close by the town of Eternal,whose vaults in which the champagne wine istreasured, have obtained a great reputation;as indeed they well deserve, for some of themwill hold more than a million of bottles, and,with their sections and intersections, are abovea mile in length'* Mr Howard described thecare and caution with which the champagnewine is brought to its marketable shape; andthe children where pleased to hear a fact veryhonourable to the work-people employed, — thatthough this attractive and intoxicating beveragewas constantly accessible to them in any* quantity,an instance of drunkenness had scarcelyever occurred. It is not therefore the presenceof intoxicating beverages which necessarilyLOVE OF HOME. 79leads to excess, but other causes which maybefound perhaps in the habits of the people.The vineyards on the mountain side areaswas mentioned, of extraordinary value, particularlythose which lie between the summitand the valley — that is to say, the line whichis to be traced along the middle of the hill,where the sun shines with all its brightness ;and where neither the winds which blow overthe higher, nor the humidity of the lowerregions, interfere with the rich products of thevintage season. Four or five hundred poundssterling per acre is not an uncommon priceto pay for this privileged tract of land. Itis wholly in the hands of small proprietors :scarcely one possessing even to the amountof an acre; and most not a half, a quarter,or even a tenth of an acre. It is almostintirely cultivated by the hands of its owners ;and the attachment shown to the soil — the80 MINOR MORALS.eagerness with which each one seeks to extendhis little possessions — the unwillingness ofchildren to consent to any arrangement butthe subdivision, however small, of the land oftheir fathers, are among the striking circumstanceswhich excited Mr Howard's attention.To the desire of adding something more totheir landed property almost all the distress ofthe district may be traced. No sooner has thepeasant amassed a small sum of money, by afavourable vintage, than he immediately setsabout buying new vineyards. He is frequentlyembarrassed for want of capital ; but rather thanget rid of any inch of land he has acquired,he borrows money at enormous interest, whichhe has the greatest difficulty in repaying, andhence is frequently embarrassed, not only bythe claims of the lender, but by the wantof capital to carry on the necessary laboursof his little possessions. This want of capital,LOVE OF HOME. 81however, is no check to imprudent adventures,though upon the whole the vine-growing peasantsof Champagne must be considered asahappy race.During the reign of the Emperor Napoleon,the conscription played sad havoc with thepeaceful peasantry of Champagne. Torn awayfrom their native vineyards to carry on warsin which they had no concern, sad were thescenes of their separation, and many were thecurses they flung at those who dragged themfrom their homes. But soon the general feelingmastered their local attachments, and theChampenois became as enthusiastic in favourof Buonaparte as any of their fellows. Afterthe wars, the oppression and the cruelty ofthe conscription were forgotten, and the oldsoldiers returned to their homes, to talk oflaurels, and glories, and victories of ' the littlecorporal,' as they called the Emperor, and allE 282 MINOR MORALS.the other dreams of the military mania inFrance. " It was to us," said Mr Howard,no little satisfaction to find the turbulenttumult of warfare settled into the peacefulpursuits of vineyard cultivation ; and nothinggratified me more than to be called on to noticean ancient captain, who had followed Buonapartein all his vicissitudes, who had helpedto win his battles, and who had shared hisdefeats, now occupied with laborious industry inthe cultivation of a small spot of vineyard land,which he had inherited from his father. Hehad been a peasant, and had gone forth ^ conqueringand to conquer; ' he had been crownedwith decorations and honours, but still heyearned for the ' paternal acre ; ' to that hereturned, and that he now cultivates with hisown hand, — a labourer in his old age, as hewas in his boyhood, and deeming himselfsupremely happy to be harboured, after soLOVE OF HOME. 83many troublous voyages, in the port from whichhe set outI found in one of the districts I have beenspeaking of, said Mr Howard, " a singularexample of the love of home, which no ambition— no love of distinction — no attraction ofother countries, or even of their own coulddestroy in the minds of the Champenois. Ofseven conscripts who had accompanied Buonapartein his wars, only one had perished, andsix had returned to their native cottages. Oneof the six was blind, and the other five wereengaged in cultivating with their own handsthe vineyards from which they had been separatedfor so many years.I walked with one of the vignerons alongthat part of the hill, or coteau as they call it,which produces the most valuable grapes.He possessed only a few feet square, but wasin extacies with his possessions. He bid me84 MINOR MORALS.observe that there was not a weed to be seennot a vine which was not as much cared foras if the owner had but one vine in the worldthat there were no white grapes in thewhole plot, 'as you know,' said he, 'the bestwhite wine is always made from the blackgrape He talked of his neighbours, whoconsented to deteriorate their wine by a manure,which he owned greatly increased thequantity, but damaged the quality, and blamedthem severely for sacrificing their reputationto gain. He talked of his champagne, as ifall the world knew its excellence, and of hislittle vine garden, which I could have crossedwith a hop-skip-and-a-jump, as if it were ofimportance and interest to the whole race ofman. He pointed out to me a spot biggerthan his own, belonging to a wealthy neighbour,and seemed to think that neighbourbound to be the most blessed of mankindLOVE OF HOME. 85And yet I doubt if the vigneron had tastedhis own wine twice in his life — if he had, itwas probably in the house of the merchantwho purchased his grapes, it being the customof those who are really the makers of anddealers in wine to have the juice extracted bytheir own impresses.""I remember hearing you say, Papa," saidGeorge, " that you had seen the same attachmentshown by the weaver of Lyons to hisloom as, you say, is shown by the Champagnepeasant to his vineyard."'' Yes ! I have renown instances where theloom has been treated like a pet child — calledby tender names — ornamented with picturesand inscriptions, and its adventures and productionsmade as it were the groundwork ofthe family history."And you know, Mamma," said Edith,*with what delight the old sailors whom we86 MINOR MORALS.saw on the coast used to talk of the shipsin which they had served. Why they wereas proud of them as if they themselves hadbuilt them."Just as the driver of the mail is of hiscoach and horses," added Arthur.It is a very harmless self-love," said Mr.Howard, " and often a most useful spur toexertion."'' Is not Champagne a beautiful country?"inquired Edith.There are some beautiful spots in it,"said Mr Howard, " and during the vintageseason all the vine districts look busy andcheerful. A great deal has been done oflate years, and there are parts where the valueof the lands has increased ten, twenty, andeven a hundred fold in the last half century ;but, generally speaking, the surface of Champagneis dry and arid. You have heard ofLOVE OF HOME. 87what are called the artificial grasses, suchas Lucerne, Colza, Clover, and others. Theirintroduction has been of the greatest serviceto France. And it is pleasant to watch theprogress of improvement with the train ofblessings it brings with it. For every oneperson who enjoyed independence in Franceforty years ago, there are now a thousand.The appearance of the whole country ischanged, and so is that of the people ; theyeat better food, they wear better garments,their habitations are more comfortable, theyhave escaped from the vassalage of theirfeudal lords; and I mention these matters toyou, my children, and talk with you frequentlyof foreign countries, because I desireyou to feel, and to show that you feel a deepinterest in all mankind. Nations, like individuals,return the friendly acts of othernations, and their friendly thoughts and cares.88 MINOR MORALS.The patriotism which teaches hatred is wickednessand crime. The patriotism whichlooks with satisfaction on the happiness ofall men is alone virtuous and exalted'**' But," inquired Arthur, " ought we notto love England better than France, — our owncountry better than any foreign one ? "That, my boy, you cannot fail of doing —just as you love your own family better thanstrangers. Yet you know that your lovingus is never a reason for hating others; andif you love us you weill desire we should loveyou. We shall best love you by approvingof your conduct; bit we shall not approve ofyour conduct if your words and deeds arethose of unkindness and ill will to others.The world has been made a miserable worldby short-sighted and mischievous men, whohave talked of foreigners as ' natural enemies.'All nations are natural friends. ToLOVE OF HOME. 89say nothing of what charity and Christianityteach, they have a deep interest in eachother's prosperity. They cannot do evil toone another without bringing the evil backon themselves. The policy of war is almostalways shallow and miscalculating : the certaintyof a vast loss, with the remote chanceof a trifling gain.The spirit of good is spreading, and willspread. It will proceed from individuals tofamilies ; from families to communities ; fromcommunities to provinces ; from provinces tonations. I saw an instance the other day : agentleman arrived from Burgundy to study inChampagne the method of making their renownedsparkling wine. The people of thelast generation leagued together to preventhis obtaining the information ; they would notforsooth communicate their secrets — they wouldnot sacrifice their provinces ! What were the90 MINOR MORALS.people of Burgundy to the people of Champagne?Yet there was at Chains a wiseand a good man ; he not only exhibited allhe knew to his Burgundy visitor, but he saidyou shall take with you a set of my bestworkmen to instruct you how to proceed.*My children, he did no harm to himself — farfrom it : he did himself much service, and hedid much good to others. I honour that man,and you will honour him, and hope that hisconduct will soon become that of one nationto another."COMMERCEOne morning at breakfast Mr Howard said tohis children, '' Now, I should like you to tellme, how many nations have contributed to ourbreakfast table, and then you will see what agreat blessing commerce has been to the world.Try if you cannot find something from all thequarters of the globe to begin with ? "*asia!" shouted Arthur; "there is tea fromChina."Africa ! " exclaimed Edith ; " there are theivory handles from Africa."America ! " said George ; " there's the mahoganyof the table from America,"92 MINOR MORALS.And for Europe they had twenty things tospeak about.Now, see if you cannot go another round ;and you, Edith, for Africa first.""The gold with which the sugar basin islined'* " That may be, for gold in greater orless quantities is the produce of all the fourquarters of the globe. But for Asia, Arthur ? ""Coffee — is it not Mocha coffee. Mamma?And then there are the table mats, which cameyou know, from Calcutta."Are the napkins of cotton. Mamma ? — forthat comes from America." — "No ! George,but of linen, which is made of flax. Do youknow where the finest flax comes from ? " — " Isit not from the Netherlands ?"—" Yes ! " answeredMr Howard, "but you have not madeyour American discovery, George."The tea urn — is not copper an Americanproduct ? " — " Yes ! but it is more likely thatCOMMERCE. 93this copper was furnished by English mines,"was his father's answer.Oh, Papa ! I see America in the scarlet ofthe urn-rug — it must have been dyed withcochineal." — "Perhaps with lac-lake, boy!which is an Asiatic production, and which hasnearly superseded the use of cochineal. However,you have answered well."It is not necessary to go on with theconversation. One after another the origin andadventures of the different articles on thetable were traced. One topic led to another,and Mr Howard talked to his children of theeffects of commerce as a means of makingpeople better and happier.Everyone who makes an exchange," saidMr Howard, " if he acts wisely, obtains somethingof greater value than that which hegives; and this is the case with both parties —each supplies some want or some desire of the04 MINOR MORALS.oilier. Tims the two virtues of prudence andbenevolence are exercised — prudence inasmuchas an addition is made to your own enjoymentbenevolence inasmuch as an addition is madeto the enjoyment of others. And the infinitevariety of production with which the worldis covered — the boundless differences of climateand soil, and national habits and education,give to every part of the earth somemeans of exchange with others, the exchangebeing a mutual benefit. Some lands havetheir riches on the surface, others buried deepbelow. In some, agriculture is the great sourceof wealth — in others, manufactures — in some,mines — in others, navigation. Out of theirpeculiar facilities commercial relations grow.They are infinitely happier, infinitely wealthierby their intercourse than they could possiblybe by being insulated and separated. Thenotion of every nation being sufficient to itselfCOMMERCE. 95is as foolish and far more mischievous than,the notion that every individual should besufficient to himself. It is but selfishness ona large scale calling itself by some name asfalse as fine — ' patriotism,' for instance, or ' nationalindependence. ' The dependence ofnations upon one another affords the truesecurity for peace a nd cimon prosperity.As a wisely calculating self-interest would addnecessarily to the well-being of others, if itwere only because their well-being would increaseour own, so a wise and generouspatriotism would see in the strength, wealth,felicity, and industry of another nation areason of confidence, and a subject of rejoicing.It is the destiny of commerce to undo whathatred and war have done. Out of the veryselfishness of man it will extract benevolence.It will make nationality itself subservient tophilanthropy. I know no profession moreMINOR MORALS.honourable than that of the instructed merchant'shistory is the history of contributionsto human pleasures. He brings nations intocontact which are placed by nature far apart.He brings to the frozen north the productionsof the burning tropics, and makes the wholeworld contribute to the daily happiness ofevery home. He has given to the meanestenjoyments formerly denied to the mightiest,and the portions of the world are small andfew which have not been benefited by theforeign trader. Into the obscurest villages ofEurope, Asia, and America commerce haspenetrated, accompanied by its novelties andits attractions ; and in the very heart of Africa,at the court of one of the petty princes ofthe country, a French traveller informed methat he himself had seen very considerablequantities of European manufacture, and hadbeen able to clothe himself as he would haveCOMMERCE. 97done in London or Paris. The desire ofgain, in itself a laudable and even a virtuousfeeling, when controlled by prudence andkindness, is thus by commerce made subservientto the happiness of man. But this leadsme to tell you the history of a little boy whobecame a great merchant.Tom Traffic was the most active lad ofthe small town in which he was born. Whensent on an errand nobody ran so fast as he ;nobody rose earlier in the morning; nobodywashed and dressed more expeditiously; nobodywas more regular at school, more sharpat his lessons, or more ready and active atplay. Everybody liked Tom, who was briskas a bee, and playful as a grasshopper : hiswhistle was well known in the streets, andhis hands were always ready to do service toothers.Tom was the only child of an aged ma-vol.II. F98 MINOR MORALS.river — a pensioner — whose pittance just enabledhimself to live in decency ; and Tom wasthe son of his old age ; for he had married atthe end of a long service, and the boy was bornto him when he had passed sixty years. Youmay believe he was proud and fond of Tom,which, indeed, he was; and having little elseto do, his time was almost wholly devoted tothe boy. He rocked him in his cradle, whetherhe lay down at morning, noon, or night ;carried him about in his arms almost whereverhe went. As soon as the boy ran alonethe old mariner seemed to grow young again,so did he share in all the boy's sports andpleasure: he taught him to play at marbles,to trundle a hoop, to ' follow my leader :' in aword, the father was the son's playfellow, andthey were a very happy pair.The first time Tom had ever known realsorrow was when his mother died. He wasCOMMERCE. 99then six years old; and her death was thelast real sorrow that the old mariner knew.Tom's mother had always been an affectionatemother, and did not like her husband the lessfor all the care and attention he bestowed ontheir only son. She told him often that he wouldspoil the boy; but said so between jest andearnest. But the old mariner's indulgenceswere not of a sort to do Tom any harm.On her death-bed, however, she said to herhusband, ' You will always be kind to Tom ! 'And to Tom she said, ' You will always bekind to your father !' She did not speak toeither as if she doubted ; or as if she meant togive them lessons which really they did notneed; but she spoke as if foretelling thatthey would be kind to each other.*the living and the dying of the poor isfor the most part a short and simple history.Duties to the poor as to others come daily to100 MINOR MORALS.be done, and are as honourable to the poorwho do them, as the more influential virtuesof the opulent are honourable to the opulent.Through the years in which Tom'smother had managed her little household, shehad managed it well and prudently; andwhen death removed her from her husbandand her child, many there were to praiseand none to blame her. And no one canaspire to a higher privilege among survivorstian this — to be thought of with nothing butaffection.There was some danger, indeed, that thedeath of his mother might have a baneful influenceupon Tom, in whom all his father'scares and thoughts were now centred, andwho was little disposed to check any of hisson's impulses. But Tom had been gifted bynature with a happy temper; and he didnot give way to unavailing grief; such griefCOMMERCE. 101would not have brought back his mother, andhave only distressed his father ; so the tearshe shed were soon dried — not that he forgothis mother; not that he failed to think ofher, and to remember her kindness to him, andher affection for him ; but he thought that sheherself would not have wished him to be lessbusy, less useful, than before; so he indulgedhimself in the habit of talking about his mother;and, though at first the subject waspainful, it became by and by the sweetest ofall subjects to him and his father; and, byfrequently conversing, his memory becameimpressed with a thousand little circumstances,that he would otherwise have forgotten, andthe recollection was a delight to him throughthe remainder of his life.One day the old mariner said to Tom,I am unusually out of spirits. I havebeen thinking, my boy, of what your future102 MINOR MORALS.fate may be; and that it is time for youto be thinking about it too, for I am growingold, and fear I shall not last long; andI shall not die in peace unless I know thatyou have some business, and some prospectsin lifeNow, Tom had himself often thought ofthis, for he was nearly twelve years old, butdid not like to speak to his father lest heshould give him pain, by appearing desirous ofleaving one he loved so well; but as hisfather now mentioned the matter, Tom said,Father, I am glad you have spoken of this.If I knew your wishes, perhaps I might bedoing something to fit myself for some honesttrade.'The old man hoped Tom would havehinted at some line of life that he preferred;and Tom wished that his father should speakout. Their thoughts and wishes were in-COMMERCE. 103deed the same; but each feared to suggestwhat might be unacceptable to the other.^ When you were at sea,' said Tom, ' didyou ever carry on any trade with the nativesof foreign countries ? ' The inquiry showed thebent of Tom's mind ; and the old mariner answered,' Oh yes, my boy, and have turnedmany an honest penny in that way. Shouldyou like to go to sea, Tom ? ' ' Indeed shouldI, if I could establish a little business with thenatives of distant countries.'After this the subject was often talkedof, and the old man told Tom how barter wasconducted with people of various lands : hetaught him, too, all he knew of the art ofnavigation; explained to him, as far as hewas able, the trade winds and the ocean currents,and the equinoctial gales; he loved torecount the dangers he had seen and the riskshe had run; he spoke of the different moneysused in different countries, and taught Tom104 MINOR MORALS.many a foreign word wMcli lie had pickedup when abroad. Tom listened with greatattention, and stored in his mind everythingthat was likely to be useful: and his father'sconversation became more and more interestingas it became more and more instructive.Sometimes, indeed, the old man feltthat by these conversations he was preparingTom for his early departure ; and even whenTom was most excited by an account of theway in which, when a young sailor, he hadexchanged with a naked negro a string ofbeads for a noisy parrot, the old man suddenlystopped; he thought of dangerous climates,and the shipmates he had buried on theAfrican coast — he stopped suddenly, and toldTom that he would end the story some otherday.'' A short time after this, while Tom was readingto his father from the Bible, as he was usedto do, the old man's face grew pale, and he fellJ<^'^^^C Cr-oJC^^COMMERCE. 105back in his chair. Tom fanned his cheeks withthe book he held in his hand ; and after a fewminutes his father was able to say faintly andfeebly, < To bed, Tom ! to bed ! ' Tom helpedhim in, ran to the neighbours for help, butsoon perceived by their countenances thatmatters were in a sad way. And so indeedthey were. The old mariner became speechless ;once he stretched his hand to Tom, Tomseized it and kissed it: in a few hours themariner was dead; in a few days his bodywas laid in the churchyard by the side of hiswife, and a small white grave-stone was raisedover it, on which Tom had roughly engravedwith his own hands the initials of his father'sand his mother's name.Tom had many friends ; they came andoffered their services, and would have kept himamong them, but Tom's thoughts were wanderingthrough the wide world. The neighed106 MINOR MORALS.hours bought the little furniture at its value,for Tom told them he had determined to seekhis fortune afar off. About eight or nine poundshe received for the small possessions of hisparents. He said to himself, ' I hope the peoplewill not forget me if I should come back again ;I have nothing now left me to care for. Thewind may blow from the quarter it will, allports are alike to me.' Tom paid one visitto his parents' grave ; it was then he took leaveof the place of his birth.He went to Liverpool, and lost no time ininquiring out a respectable ship-broker, towhom he told his short but simple story. Itwas his good luck to fall in with a kind-heartedand clever man, who said he would give him aberth on a vessel bound for the coast of Africa.Tom remembered how suddenly his father hadstopped when telling him of his own Africanadventures ; but Tom was not superstitious ; theCOMMERCE. 107climate, he said, he did not fear. The bargain wasmade ; Tom felt as if his life and history werenow begun ; and, as the kind ship-broker hadoffered to assist him in investing his littlecapital, Tom fancied himself the luckiest, ashewas then one of the proudest, of mortals.On the voyage Tom obtained the goodopinion of the captain, and the confidence ofall the crew. The adventure was successful,and when he arrived in England, he haddoubled his wealth. He had got experience,too, and as the vessel was to return to Africa,Tom's observations were of great value to theship-broker and to the owners, to whom thecaptain had reported the cleverness and activityof young Tom.Tom remained on board the vessel duringthree voyages. He was now nearly nineteenyears old, and his fortune was accumulated tosomewhat more than 160/. A favourite with308 MINOR MORALS.everybody, because willing to be a friend toeverybody, there was nobody on board whosegood fortune was witnessed with so much pleasure.On returning from the third voyage, thecaptain told Tom that the owner had beentalking of him, that he desired to see him, andhe believed would make to him an agreeablecommunication. Tom went — it was at the timewhen the supplies of timber were checked bythe war ; and the merchant, after many inquiriesabout Tom's success, reminded him that he hadonce spoken of the vast forests on the shores ofthe African rivers, and expressed an opinionthat the negroes might be induced to fell thetrees and barter them with Europeans. 'Theidea has often occurred again to my mind,'said the merchant, ' and if you still think so,we will make the experiment; we will findships and capital, and you shall have an interestin it.* In truth, it was a favourite project ofCOMMERCE. 109Tom's; he was delighted to see it adopted,and soon after a vessel was fitted out, of whichTom had the charge.« He sailed for Africa, and I have often heardTom describe the toil and trouble which it costhim to teach the Africans how best to fell andsaw the trees, and bring them to the river'sedge. But Tom succeeded, and the speculationsucceeded. At first only a few stragglingblacks came to cut down the forest trees, but,as they were liberally recompensed, they afterwardscame in great numbers, and built theirhuts in the neighbourhood of the place whereTom fixed his own habitation, and where hedwelt for many years. The trade became avery large one, and Tom dwelt like a prince,surrounded by his subjects. He taught themmany arts, and reclaimed them from manybarbarous and savage habits; he administeredjustice among them; settled their misunder-110 MINOR MORALS.standings, and, though so young, was alwayscalled by them their father.'' Six years Tom lived in Africa ; he had becomewealthy, and the desire to revisit hisnative country grew stronger and stronger.He fancied too that he was beginning to feelthe effects of the climate; so, having madearrangements for supplying his place, he returnedto England, and visited the spot wherehe had seen his father and mother buried.He ordered the grave to be surrounded withiron railings, and a stone to be erected to thememory of his parents, with their names andages at length; but he would not allow thestone to be removed on which he himself hadcut the first letters of their names.'ait is the beginning of a successful careerthat is most difficult, not its progress. MrThomas Traffic is still living, a rich andhonourable merchant and magistrate. HeCOMMERCE. Illhas not forgotten, nor is lie likely to forget,that he was the son of a poor old mariner.He often speaks of it not for the purposesof pride and parade, but for the encouragementof others, and the young especially,showing them that they must learn to conquerdifficulty, and that those who endeavourto gain the good opinion and confidence ofothers seldom fail to obtain them."FISHES, AND FRIENDLYCOUNSELS.Did you ever wateli the graceful motion —the joyous activity — the rapid gliding of a troutor grayling in the stream ? Did you eversee it showing its various tints of beauty tothe sun ; resting for a few moments, and thendarting away like an arrow; as if it had detectedyou intruding upon its privacy ; likea vain person delighted to have an opportunityof exhibiting a mock modesty?"Standing by the side of one of the fishpondsin the Tuileries, I was amused by theexhibition of various character which the goldfishes displayed among themselves : for notFISHES, AND FRIENDLY COUNSELS. 113only were the gravity of age and the levityof youth easily distinguishable, but it appearedto me very obvious that every fish had somepeculiar qualities — whose union was called idiosyncracyby the Greeks — which gave it individuality.I fancied that I could trace somethingof those different dispositions which we callvice and virtue. In that society was therenot something to be studied — something to belearned ?Peace was there — no one of the communityseemed willing to injure another. Their disputeswere not settled by violence. Even inthe competition for the food that was sometimesscattered on the surface — or floating inthe water — or buried in the deep beneath —there was no hostility — no war. The successof one did not disturb the good humour ofthe rest.Virtue was there — for what is virtue but theexhibition and exercise of virtuous qualities?114 MINOR MORALS.Prudence was there employing wisely all itslittle means, and benevolence was there; forI observed again and again that a gold fishshared with its neighbour a common fare.Happiness was there — happiness, the bestof all — happiness, sportive, vigorous, multiform.It could be seen in every motion,whether of fin or frame. Even the capricesof the little creatures seemed to be the resultof joy. They sprang forward like a ray oflight — then suddenly rested — then darted offin another direction. Sometimes they movedon as slowly through the water as movedthe swan upon its surface, at other times theyfled as rapidly as the swallows that dippedtheir wings in the ripples above.A distinguished poet fancied that theflowers might have their affections and passions,so he wrote a book in which he describes their'Loves.' Do you know his name, Edith?"Was it not Dr Darwin?"FISHES, AND FRIENDLY COUNSELS. 115^' Yes, and he introduced into lies poem agreat deal of natural philosophy and knowledgeof many kinds, and set, I have nodoubt, many persons thinking, on account ofthe oddity of his subject."I remember," said George, " that there isa passage in it which has been called prophetic,because it speaks of the wonderful results ofsteam, which were then hardly dreamed of,but have now been realised."Now if flowers can be fancied to haveprivate and social feelings don't you thinkthat fishes may, with far more justice?"'* I think so, indeed," said Arthur.Well, then," Mr Howard continued, " Flltell you a sort of a fancy that passed throughmy mind while I was standing on the vergeof the fish-ponds in the Tuileries' gardens.I fancied I was the personification offriendship in two gold fishes of about an116 MINOR MORALS.equal size, one of which was gaudily paintedwith scarlet, was exceedingly active and lively,while its companion was distinguished by huesfar less bright, and swam through the waterwith staid and sober gravity.I watched them, and saw the scarlet fishdash among its many companions — splashabout in the water with extraordinary friskiness— stop now for an instant to communicatewith one or other of the other gold fishes —and then return in a hurry-skurry topsy-turvycourse to its more sedate friend.'' Methought I overheard the conversation thatpassed between them. My imagination gavethe fishes names ; the one was Laetus, theother Placid.' What a strange fancy, Laetus, is thine !to be everlastingly bustling about, always occupiedwith the concerns of others. Thoucanst not pass by a neighbour without a greet-fishes,AND FRIENDLY COUNSELS. 117ing, and however important the subject onwhich thou art engaged, off thou hurries,whenever an excuse for interruption can befound.'« Why really I don't think thou, Placid,art less interested than I am in the well-beingof our neighbours, only thou hast the art ofnot appearing so much interested.''* ' Not quite so, dear Lsetus ; there are manysubjects in which I take no interest at all;they don't concern me in the least, and toomuch curiosity may be sometimes annoyingto those who are the objects of it.'' Don't be so vague, Placidusus ! I can beara little more frankness.'« Well, then, yesterday our friend Venustusrose to the surface and seized a delicate bit,which he hurried away with, and hid himselfbehind the lotus leaf. Thou knowest Venus-tusis a dainty feeder, and fond of solitary118 MINOR MORALS.meals. Thou couldst not leave Mm to hishabits. I know thou didst not mean to dohim any mischief, but he told us afterwardshe could have loved thee much better hadstthou allowed him to enjoy his privacy, and Imention this because I am sure Venustus ismuch too courteous and urbane to mention ithimself.'' Indeed I never thought of it,' said Lsetus,and much obliged am I for thy hint,which I will not forget in the future; andnow, I pray thee, give me some other instancesof my infirmity.'' Thou art in such a beautiful humour,Lsetus, that I will even avail myself of it tounbosom more of my thoughts and observations.I am sure thou wilt not take themamiss.'^ No, kind Placidusus, but gratefully welcomethem.'FISHES, AND FRIENDLY COUNSELS. 119' Listen then ! Last evening thou wertflying, as it is thy usage, through the water,not thinking, I am assured, of doing anybodyany harm, and thou rushed heedlesslyagainst old Canus, whom thou didst so violentlyshake that he complained sadly thismorning of an intolerable pain in the fins. Ineed not tell thee the poor fellow is nearlyblind, so he knew not whose want of care itwas that had aggrieved him, but he said hethought some explanation was due ; that heshould have been very willing to forgive, butthat whoever had done the mischief had scamperedaway in perfect indifference. I wastold it was thou, Lsetus, and those who toldme, and who were lookers on, animadvertedrather sharply on what they called thycruelty. I said they were wrong in turn, thatit was only thy carelessness.'' Indeed ! indeed ! it was nothing worse,120 MINOR MORALS.and I will instantly go and apologize to thepoor old Canus ; ' and round did Lsetus turnhis rudder tail, in order to visit the hoarygold fish.' Precipitate always,' said Placidusus, withan expression that would have been a smile,if fishes could smile. ' Thou wilt find timefor Canus by and by, but thou art in sovirtuous a mood that thou hadst better listena little longer to my moralising.'' Be it so, be it so, Placidusus ! With sucha teacher I shall be well taught; but let meask thee a question. Was I not very usefulto Improved when he was wounded onthe back by the pebble which the boy threwat him so wickedly ? '* Useful ! yes, but less useful than thoulightest have been, for he was rather weariedwith thy too many attentions. He wantedrest — he wanted quiet. Thy excess of kind-fishes,AND FRIENDLY COUNSELS. 121ness was an annoyance ; a little less kindnessaid attention would have been more acceptable.I know thy motives were good, but neitherfishes nor men care much about motives.They see actions and feel their consequences,and by the consequences of actions they judgethey recompense — they condemn.'' Go on, Placidusus ! Hast thou any otheraccusation against me ? '' Remember, Lsetus, I am not accusing —I am narrating. Dost know thou didst disturba friend of ours in his meditationsyesterday ?'*' ' Oh ! ' said Lsetus, ' that was Socius,but he was in such a melancholy mood thatit was but kindness to rouse him,'' True, if the disturbance did not makethe matter worse, as thine did, for thou didstvex him sorely, and he fell into gloomiermusings than before.'VOL. II. G-122 MINOR MORALS.But," continued Mr Howard, " while Iwas figuring or fancying these conversationsbetween the golden fishes, I heard the tramplingof horses; the drums and trumpets wereapproaching, and the sight of ten or fifteenthousand troops filled my mind with far differentthoughts from those with which I hadbeen occupied."WAR."The troops were escorting the king to theChamber of Deputies. I followed them thither,and sat in the Tribune, listening to the debates.I heard an orator eulogize one of his countrymen,by saying, ' His was the noble baptismof blood.' The words were received withunqualified admiration ; the sentiment and thephrase seemed equally acceptable to the representativesof France."Baptism of blood ! — what a thrilling expression!" said Edith.And to call it noble too, — what an idea'*responded Arthur.124 MINOR MORALS.And to think," added George, " that a largeassembly should not only not disapprove, butshow signs of satisfaction ! "But notwithstanding, my children I youmust not be too hasty in judging anothernation. Words have frequently a meaningwhich is not rendered by translation. In themind of the orator, there was perhaps no otherthought than that with which hundreds of thousandsof Englishmen would speak of Trafalgaror Waterloo. The ideas of glory and victory,the exhibitions of power, absorb the mind, andthrow all the misery and crime and follywhich accompany war into the shade. Thusit is, that if we employed words more fittingthe occasion, we should sooner reform opinion,but the mischief is wide and deep which growsout of improperly chosen words.Respect for human life is one of the greatestevidences of improvement and civilization.WAR. 125Death is really a solemn thing, because it isthe destruction of all those pleasures and painsof which the living are susceptible. If it bevicious to inflict unnecessary suffering, or toprevent possible enjoyment, the extinction ofall the sources of suffering and enjoyment, byviolence, must, when unjustifiable, be theheaviest of all offences. War would be impossible,if the value and the sacredness of lifewhere fitly estimated ; it would be found that ajustification for such a sacrifice as war bringswith it is really and in the nature of thingsalmost impossible, — that until every conceivablemeans of discussion, debate, inquiry, forbearance,generosity, had been wholly exhausted,until no shadow of a chance remained for peacefuland pacific arrangement, no excuse couldbe sufficient for venturing upon the vast oceanof miseries which national hostility creates."Strolling over the scenes of the late riots126 MINOR MORALS.of Paris, I tarried before the house, in the RueTransnonain, where many persons had beenkilled, and I was curious to hear the observationsof the people, who were gatheredin groups recounting to one another thehorrors of the day. I observed that theobservation most general among them was,that ' French blood had been shed.* Manysaid, ' If it had only been the blood offoreigners!' I was struck with the minglingof nationality and philanthropy — philanthropyWhich had abundant sympathy for the sufferingsof the people to which it belonged, but whichseemed anxious to exclude every body elsefrom its benevolence. And I thought again,as I had often thought before, on the wretchededucation which nations receive ; how the fieldof brotherhood is narrowed, how all sentimentsof beneficence are chilled and contracted bythe influences of war !WAR. 127Nations that are accustomed to hold life inlittle value, and who employ barbarous punishmentsas a means of terror, are invariably addictedto cruelty. In China, for example,infanticide is not considered a crime, and murderin all its forms is of habitual and constantoccurrence. Yet there is no country thatemploys such a variety of tortures as instrumentsof legislation. There are volumes uponvolumes which represent the penal inflictions ofthe Chinese laws ; and ingenuity itself seemsalmost exhausted in the countless shapes ofmisery which men have thus invented for subjectingothers to agony. A friend of mine,who, in a voyage round the world, landed at aChinese town in the Yellow Sea, told me thathe had witnessed the punishment of a parricide,who eighteen years before had destroyed hisfather; and the exhibition he saw was theseventeenth to which the murderer had been128 MINOR MORALS.exposed. His sentence condemned him tosolitary confinement, to nakedness, to the deprivationof light ; his food was let down froma hole through the top of the cell where he wasimmured, and his hair, beard, and nails wereleft to grow. On the anniversary of the murderhe was dragged forth, a horrible object,and exposed for a day in a barrel of blood, ona public stage ; he was compelled to feed himselfwith rice drenched in the blood, which waforced into his throat by the executioner ifhe refused to eat. Seventeen times he hadundergone the punishment, and there wasscarcely left about him a single fragment ofhumanity. This was horrible enough, but theeffect was far different from that which was nodoubt intended by the legislature. The extravaganceof the suffering had merely gratifiedthe sufferer, while the effect upon the spectatorswas by no means salutary.WAR. 121)How impossible would such inflictions becomeif men had any sentiment of the valueof pain and pleasure ! If they weighed themin the balance as being worthy of theiranxiety ; if they determined to waste noneof them, but to employ them to some goodend ! I tell you the story, children, as Iheard it — as a striking example of ill-judgedpunishment. Happy for you, happy for us,to have been born in a better country, andunder the protection of more beneficentlaws !1 lived," continued Mr Howard, " in theSpanish Peninsula during the War of Independence.Nobody who had not witnessedthe frightful reality could form an idea ofall the sufferings created by long-enduringhostilities. I have passed through villagesalmost wholly deserted — so deserted that noliving being was to be seen, but some poorG 2130 MINOR MORALS.helpless creature wandering like a ghostamong the ruins ! Often and often have Ilooked in the distance on splendid mansions,and, on drawing near, have found them unroofed,the windows all broken, and everychamber abandoned and desolate !*' I entered St Sebastian after the siege.You know how long and obstinate was theresistance of the garrison. It was taken by-storm,and I followed the conquering army.The road by which they entered was strewedwith dead ; there was a stream flowing atthe bottom of the citadel, and it was almoststopped by mutilated corpses. But, whenwe reached the breach, the sight was horrible ;shattered limbs, broken muskets, slices ofhuman flesh, fragments of garments, werespread about in horrible confusion. We enteredthe town — it had been set on fire bythe infuriated combatants. We saw the deadWAR. 131lying under the walls, which had fallen onthem — their hands frequently exposed grasping,in their death-agony, the earth beneaththem. There was a dead mother, with aliving child on her bosom. It was a sceneof revelry and horror — of drunkenness anddeath — of noise and fearful silence — of ferocityand fear — of madness and of misery ! Iwas sick and weary of scenes which I havesince heard honoured as glorious. But, afterthe first frenzy was over — when the eyelooked round on the ruin and the devastation— nobody would venture to talk of theglory' of so frightful a catastrophe — thetale of mischief — the story of destruction.I made my way to the house of a respectablegoldsmith in the town. The soldieryhad broken into it ; they met themother of the family at the top of the stair,and brutally knocked her down from the sum132 MINOR MORALS.mit to the door-sill. She was nearly killedby the wounds she received. With my ownears I heard her lips tell the terrible story.Atrocities far worse than this I witnessed ;and they have been justified by warriors ;and they form part of the natural and necessaryresults of war. War of all plagues themost pestilential — the most prolific ! War,compared to which all other crimes are small —all other follies trifling ! War, the opprobriumof humanity — the scandal of religion ! War,the perpetual insult to man's brotherhood andGod's paternity ! My children ! I hope thetime is at hand in which it will be as impossibleto league men to destroy, as it wouldbe to devour one another. If the sufferingscaused — if the blood spilt — in useless andwicked conflicts, could be made present tomany a thoughtless one who has never dreamedof the price paid for that delusion whichWAR. 133is called ' Victory, ' I am sure the feelings ofdelight would soon be changed into those ofdisgust; and, instead of turning with granulationto the history of destruction, the eyewould be offended and the heart woundedby the contemplation of so much frenzy andso much crime.One day, remembering what I had seen,I wrote the following lines, which you maycommit to your memories: —Children ! I was a traveller once.Before I was a man,And went to see a town besieg'd ; —'Twas St Sebastian !There was a field Pd often cross'd,Adorn'd with poppies red ;I pass'd it — it was red with bloodAnd garments of the dead !There was a stream I oft had heardRun singingly along ;'Twas choaked with corpses, and in vainI listen'd for its song.134 MINOR MORALS.There was a cottage— oft had IEnjoy'd its homely fare :Then — some charred beams and ashes blackWere all I witness'd there!There was a garden — in its walksOft had I mus'd alone :The gates — the fences were destroy' d —Its flowers, its shrubs were gone 1I had seen many a happy dance.Heard many a cheerful word :Then — nought but misery could I see.And nought but misery heard !My children ! happy, happy yeFrom such sad scenes afar !And know ye what such mischief did —Such ruin caus'd? — 'Twas War!My children ! man on earth below.With sin and shame is curst ;But of all sin and shame, my dears !That horrid War 's the worst ! ''SENSE AND SENSITIVENESS.What a shocking thing it is to see miserythat we cannot relieve ! " said Edith to herMamma, one day, as a poor cripple passedbefore the door. " What a shocking thing itis that there should be so many sufferings forwhich there is no relief ! Is it right, Mamma,to accustom ourselves to look at pain andsorrow ? Is it most likely to harden the heart,or to improve it ? "My love, the state which is most likelyto lead to proper and to virtuous conduct isthat where the desire to be useful is not interferedwith, by a susceptibility which deprivesus of the power of active exertion.130 MINOR MORALS.Some people are so sensitive, that they losethe very means of doing good; others socareless that the disposition to do good isalmost extinguished. One defect is nearly asbad as the other; but there is more miserycaused by that foolish agitation which makesa person helpless, than even by the hardheartednesswhich turns away with indifference.They are alike useless to the sufferer ;but, in the case of the over-sensitive, theirown misery is to be added. Fidgety peopleare very mischievous — they make matters worseto others, and are a perpetual annoyance tothemselves.I have known persons who, as if they hadnot real annoyances enough, were always onthe look-out for vexations and grievances, attributingall events to the most unfavourableand irritating cause. If an answer does notcome to a letter, it is sheer neglect; if aSENSE AND SENSITIVENESS. 137visit is not returned, it is an intended slight;if an observation is made, it is to preventthem from speaking; if a person is silent,it is because he has no regard for them ; if ajoke is uttered, it is construed into a matterof grave offence ; and if serious words arespoken, they are not intended to be sincere."And now I will give you two characters,and you shall choose which you like for yourmodel: an old lady whose delight and habitit was to make everything sweet, and an oldgentleman, the business of whose life it wasto turn everything sour.They lived in the same village ; its namewas Briony. The gentleman was Mr ThaddeusTarte — the lady was Mrs MargaretManna. They were as unlike one another asthey could well be ; but being the principalpeople of Briony, they often met; and asMrs Manna was the only person whom Mr138 MINOR MORALS.Tarte never succeeded in driving into a passion,she was frequently favoured with hisvisits. He had such a love for wranglingand jarring that he was sometimes in a ragebecause he could not make Mrs Manna angry.He often stormed against this person and theother, and was vexed and waspish becauseMrs Manna would not agree with him. Hesometimes said he would never go to herhouse again, for that she cared nothing abouthis opinions, and would not blame the mostblameable things. But Mrs Manna was singularlyindulgent to Mr Tarte. With othersshe would be sprightly and sportive, becauseshe knew they could bear it, and would notmisunderstand it. She never made experimentson Mr Tarte's ill-temper; she put adouble check upon every expression whenMr Tarte was at hand. I do not mean tosay that Mr Tarte had, or could have, all theSENSE AND SENSITIVENESS. 139benefit, which the conversation of an amiableand instructed woman would have conveyed,had he allowed her spirits and friendly habitsfull play; and had she not perceived howeagerly he sought every occasion to misconstruethe meanings of other people. It ispossible to tolerate — it is possible to disarmthe ill-natured — but it is not easy to love them.They must pay the penalty of their disagreeableness.But, because they are disagreeable,we have no right to be uncourteous or uncivil.It was a wet and windy day in April whenMr Tarte put on his great coat, took hisstick in his hand, and went forth to make amorning call on Mrs Manna. The weather,which was a little like the temper ofhis mind — cold, stormy, and gloomy — had puthim particularly out of humour ; and so off hewent to vent his spite upon his good-naturedneighbour : a pretty intrusion, you will say ;140 MINOR MORALS.and so indeed it was — which nothing but theexcellent temper of Mrs Manna would havemade tolerable.He knocked at the door : as the servant didnot immediately open it, new fuel was addedto his discontent; he knocked violently a secondtime: the servant came running to lethim in. ' I beg your pardon, sir; but I wasin a distant part of the house when I heardyour first knock: allow me to take your coatinto the kitchen to dry.' ' Yes,' said MrTarte, ' you were attending to anythingbut your business : a pretty thing to keeppeople drenched and drowning in the street!I shall mention your inattention to your mistress.There; — ' and, so saying, Mr ThaddeusTarte threw his coat on the balustrade,without paying any attention to the man'scivility, and followed him into the cravingSENSE AND SENSITIVENESS. 141Mrs Manna was then turning over theleaves of an « Annual,' obviously much delightedwith the succession of beautiful engravingswhich she found in it.' Madam ! ' said Mr Tarte ; ' Good morning,sir ! ' responded Mrs Manna. * Madam ! 'repeated Mr Tarte, very stiffly, ' I told yourservant I should mention his incivility ; it ishigh time that such carelessness should benoticed. I hope, madam, in charity to yourvisitors, you will require your man to be alittle more on the alert.' ' I hope,' saidMrs Manna, ' Thomas has not been wantingin civility towards you; he is generallyso very attentive.' ' Yes, madam, so civiland attentive as to leave me to be soakedthrough and through by this abominablerain — knocking, knocking, and not able toget in.'' I am sure Thomas could not have in-142 MINOR MORALS.tended it.' * Intended it or not,* said MrTarte, ' so it was.' ' But, in truth,' repliedMrs Manna, ' the fault is mine ; I sent himto the garret, and forgot to desire one ofthe women to attend to the door.' ' Whatdetestable weather ! ' exclaimed Mr Tarte.But seasonable and useful,' responded MrsManna. ' No, madam, such disagreeable andviolent storms are never seasonable. I seeno reason in the world why, if we are tohave rain, it should come overwhelming uslike a deluge.' Mrs Manna was about toanswer with some animadversion; for to hermind nothing was a more irresistible evidenceof the foresight and the benevolenceof the Divine Being, than the orderly andregular distribution of the seasons; to eachits task of good is committed ; by each inturn is it fulfilled. Thus, to the humid springbelongs the calling forth the buds and theSENSE AND SENSITIVENESS. 143flowers, and the fruits to summer andautumn; and Mrs Manna lead been justthinking of the beneficial influences of stormsand showers. When any remarks were madein her presence which seemed to impugn thekindness or the wisdom of Providence hermind received a painful shock; yet she feltthis did not warrant her being out of humour; so she made no answer whatever toMr Tarte's observation, thinking some fitteroccasion might occur for communicating heropinions. She introduced other subjects: therewere one or two on which Mr Tarte liked todilate. He was fond of fishing, and lovedto talk of his fishing exploits ; and, in thecourse of the conversation, he dropped theword that this fall of rain would induce himto go out angling on the morrow. Mrs Mannasmiled as he spoke, and Mr Tarte, who washalf disposed to take the smile amiss, behaved144 MINOR MORALS.prudently for once ; and even said, ' Thankyou,' to Thomas, as he brought him his greatcoatwarm from the kitchen fire, and putinto his hands the umbrella, neatly foldedand dried. The rain was over ; above thevillage church a rainbow hung, one end ofwhich was lost in the blue heaven ; thesloping street of the village had been washedclean by the storm ; and Mr Tarte, as heruminated upon the sport of the next day,recollected, too, with how much discontenthe had spoken of ' the deluge ' and its disagreeable.Alas ! all these impressions weretransitory, Mr Tarte had the habit of discontent— and a most melancholy habit it is,my children !Another day (it was at the end of thesummer season, when the trees begin to puton their brown garments, and to shake offtheir leaves), Mrs Manna was walking bySENSE AND SENSITIVENESS. 145the side of a stream that ran close to thevillage, and she discovered Mr Tarte seatedupon a bank, with his shirt-frill ruffled, hishat off, his gloves and stick at some distancefrom him, and looking more than usually discomposed.Her first impression was to turnback, and not subject herself to be annoyedby his peevishness ; but, on second thoughts,she determined to accost him, because as hehad probably seen her approach, he mightbe offended by her sudden retreat; and as itwas her general habit to walk by the bank,where Mr Tarte was now exhibiting his ill-humour,Mr Tarte would be more likely tonotice her conduct; so she advanced with aquiet step, and taking no notice whatever ofMr Tarte's embarrassment, said, * she hadbeen delighted with her evening's walk.'So have not I with mine, madam ! ' respondedMr Tarte, stretching out one handVOL. II. H '146 MINOR MORALS.to gather np his stick and gloves, while withthe other he buttoned up his waistcoat, andthen took a handkerchief from his pocketand wiped his forehead dry. Mrs Mannawaited to hear of some terrible grievance, andfound that the amount of the mischief wasmerely this — that Mr Tarte had stumbledover a stone and fell; but he said he couldhave borne this — it was a common accidenthad he not reason to believe that the wholewas a plot of some mischievous boys to annoyhim; for when he was on the groundhe heard some young scoundrels cry out,Well done, old Taddy Tarte ! ' and theyburst into loud laughter, and clapped theirhands with delight. The subject of MrTarte's meditations, while on the bank, washow he could revenge himself on the boys ; hefirst thought of following them and punishingthem with a hearty drubbing; but he foundSENSE AND SENSITIVENESS. 147they could run faster than he : then he wouldgo to the village school and obtain for thema handsome flogging from the master ; but, asfar as he could distinguish them, they did notbelong to the school. What was to be done ?for punished they should be.The truth was, that Mr Tarte, who wascalled old Taddy Tarte by all the young peopleof the village, was an object of no little dislike;he was so much in the habit of interferingwith the sports, and checking the enjoymentsof the children — he was so spare in his praisesso severe in his animadversions — that theywere always rather pleased when anythingwith him went wrong. If his hen roost wererobbed — ' Well, 'tis a good thing 'twas oldTaddy 'sj' they said. If his chimney were onfire — ' Better old Taddy's than Mrs Manna's'was the exclamation. Once, when returninghome late, his foot slipped and he rolled148 MINOR MORALS.into the gutter and reached his house coveredwith mud. The accident was a subject ofuniversal mirth; and, I am afraid, of almostuniversal satisfaction."But was this right?" asked Edith, who wasalso desirous of learning what duty required,and who was far too kind and generous torejoice in any human being's misfortune.Oh, no ! love, it was very wrong, but itwas inevitable. Restrain our own feelings aswe may, there will be always too many in theworld to feel pleasure in the misfortunes ofthose whom they dislike; and if there wereno other and better means of checking the evildispositions of others, it would be right to usethese means; but a sufficient reason againstusing them is that they are not the best means.However, Mr Taddy had mistaken the matter; the boys had really nothing to do withthe accident; the stone had not been put inSENSE AND SENSITIVENESS. 149the middle of the road by them, it had fallenaccidentally out of a pavior's cart, and the wholeamount of the blame due to the boys was theirhaving laughed at ' Old Taddy.'Now, Mrs Manna was just as much anobject of affection in the village as Mr Tartewas of dislike. Every body from youngestto eldest was delighted to do her a service:it was the natural consequence of her constanthabit of doing services to others.She endeavoured, but in vain, to pacifyMr Tarte: he was determined that he wouldnot be induced to consider the whole affair asanything but a premeditated insult at first,and a wicked mockery afterwards. Mrs Mannafound there was no use in arguing against aman whom nothing could convince; she didnot however utter an angry word, but continuedher walk by the banks of the stream.As she walked, a dog sprung out of a150 MINOR MORALS.farm-yard, and ran towards her, barking as ifit meant to bite her; two boys followed thedog; one of them seized him by the collar,and the other said, ' It is not old Taddy Tarte,he must not hurt the lady Mrs Mannalooked the urchin in the face, who said to her,laughingly, ' It shan't touch you, madam ; wethought old Taddy was coming this way, andwe meant to frighten him ' And why?'said Mrs Manna. ' Oh, ma'am ! he is suchan ill-natured old fellow; we were comingalong the road and saw him fall over a stone,and we could not help laughing, he was insuch a passion; and then he began to abuseus, and said we had put the stone there forthe very purpose of throwing him down; andwhen we said we did not, he only got the moreangry, and so we ran away, and determinedthat if he came this way we would frightenhim with the dog ; and that's the whole truth.SENSE AND SENSITIVENESS. 151ma'am, for we would not tell you anythingbut the truth.'' But you would please me much bettersaid Mrs Manna, ' if you would behave differentlyto old Mr Tarte ; you should not havelaughed at him because he had the misfortuneto fall, but rather have offered to be of anyuse to him ; and if you had done so kindly, hewould certainly not have thought that youwere the cause of the accident, and you wouldnot have required a lesson from me, you know,'she said with a smile.A lady's smile has a great charm in it ;and if ladies knew how to use their smilesprudently and benevolently, I do not knowwhat wonders, Edith, might not be worked inthe world.The boys both said, ' No, ma'am, wewould not do anything to vex you.' ' Verywell, then, you always vex me when you annoy152 MINOR MORALS.MrTarte:' and when she said this, the boysscampered away, shouting, ' We shan't forget !we shan't forget !'It was not very long after, that Mr Tartewas walking through the village, and hefancied he recognized one of the boys whohad been laughing at him. He determinednot to appear to notice the boy, thinking thatif he were the guilty person he would againmisbehave himself, and Mr Tarte had madeup his mind to learn who the boy was, and toget his father or his master to punish him.The boy was one of the two to whom MrsManna had spoken, a warm-hearted anda generous boy, and a brave one too. Theboy expected that Mr Tarte would notice him ;he thought even that he should get a blowover his shoulders from Mr Tarte's cane ; butas Mr Tarte passed the boy made a bow.This astonished Mr Tarte, who said to him,SENSE AND SENSITIVENESS. 153Was it not you who behaved so ill to methe other day ? Was it not you who laughedat me when I fell?' ' Yes, sir said the boy,and I wish I had not done so.' ' Why,my good boy?' said Mr Tarte, who was muchstruck with the manly frankness of the lad.Why, sir, because I do not believe you areso ill-natured as I thought ; and, besides, MrsManna desired I would not vex you ; and Iwon't vex you again if you'll not be angrywith me for doing so before.' ' Not I,' saidMr Tarte ; ' give me your hand, my boy,and I think I have learnt a lesson as well asyou.'The habit had been too long indulged byMr Tarte to enable him to get completelyri of his querulous disposition, but it wasmoderated, and soon after his conversation withthe boy he called on Mrs Manna.Thomas came to the door, and was not aH 2154 MINOR MORALS.little surprised to hear the very gracious tonesin which Mr Tarte addressed him. It wasa new thing" indeed for Mr Tarte to speak toany servant ^dth courtesy. Not that Mr Tartereally desired to show his scorn, or pride, orill humour, but a certain severity of mannerhad become almost a part of his nature, andvery, very difficult it was to restrain it."'^ Did he learn to restrain it. Mamma?"asked Edith.Not wholly, Edith; for, as I mentioned,his temper would frequently get the betterof his intentions; but he found it was quitefor his interest to check himself, and he oftenhad to do so."Did Mrs Manna ever compliment himon his improvement, Mamma?"Never, dear, by any direct observationupon it, as that might have hurt his self-love.But Mr Tarte was not insensible that MrsSENSE AND SENSITIVENESS. 165Manna had perceived a change. His visitswere more frequent, and they were neverdisturbed, as thes used to be, by outbreaks ofbad humour."MUSHROOM-HUNTING."In Russia*' said Mr Howard to the children,after a ramble in the country, " a great numberof species of mushrooms are used for food.In England little attention is paid to thiscurious fungus.Their collection would not alone be asource of pleasure; but the study of theirdifferent characters would be useful, instructiveand even profitable.Some of them are delicious, others dangerousto eat; some pleasing to the palate,and others absolutely poisonous.I have seen a pretty book written by aFrench author, M. Rogues, in which he .157scribes a great variety of mushrooms, andinstructs his readers to distinguish the wholesomefrom the deleterious.He shows, for the use of the poor, in timesof famine, or when the price of food is very-dear,that large quantities of vegetable fungimay be collected, which will be found nutritiveand excellent nourishment. But M.Rogues's book costs twenty-four francs, whichis one pound sterling; how should such abook reach the poor ?If a man were bent on doings a usefulthing, he could hardly find one more usefulthan to write and circulate a small volumeon the means of obtaining ' Cheap Food.'Nature has done far more for man than manhas yet discovered ; and all his discoveries inone part of the world have not reached otherparts. Old and foolish prejudices have preventedmany improvements. Some nations158 MINOR MORALS.that will not eat of a hare have no objectionto snakes and serpents; others that willnot touch a pig will devour frogs or snails.Our habits create strange prejudices, and ourprejudices perpetuate themselves from one generationto another. If wee could but accustomourselves to reason, how very differentan estimate should we form on thousands ofmatters !There lived in the neighbourhood of Moscowa family of serfs, which had obtainedfrom their lord the permission to gathermushrooms, and to take them to the OchotnoiIliad, which is the great market of the Russiancapital."*' Obtained from their lord ! " inquiredEdith ; " what does that mean ? "In Russia' said Mr Howard, '* thereare many millions of serfs or peasants, whoare considered the property of their feudalMUSHROOM-HUNTING. 159master. They cannot, indeed, be removedfrom the soil on which they were born; butthey are sold as the trees or the cattle there.They cannot possess property; and eventheir little gains are not their own, but mayat any time be taken possession of by theirlords. Those lords are sometimes humaneenough to allow them to get money by theirindustry; and there are among them somewho make it their pride, and boast that theypossess slaves whom they can call opulent.But now to our story.'' The busiest and the cleverest of theserf family was a young girl called .She had learnt little — for it is veryseldom that learning enters the log-built cottagesof the Russian peasants — but naturehad given her an active mind; and she hadalways taken a sort of pleasure in mushroom-gathering.When very young, she used to160 MINOR MORALS.request her father to put her into the talegaor little cart, in which he carried his mushroomsto the Ochotnoi Read, and amused herselfoften, for which she sometimes got wellscolded, in separating the different sorts ofmushrooms more carefully than her fatherhad been used to do.One day, in coming home from themarket, her father said, that he had sold hismushrooms more easily, and the price heasked was more willingly paid than usual;for I should tell you, my children, that thereprevails throughout Russia the foolish and insincerehabit of asking a price much abovethat which it is intended to take. I haveoften known the Russians abate half or two-thirdsof what they have demanded."Do you think anything is got. Papa !'said George, " by this custom?"No, George ! but much is lost by it.MUSHROOM-HUNTING. 161Time, patience, and what is far worse, ahabit of sincerity; I fear there are fewbargains made in Russia, about which manylies are not told, lies to induce the purchaserto give a price beyond the value of thearticle.'* Mashenka (to proceed with our story) said,she verily believed the reason of her father'ssuccess consisted in the trouble she had taken,and asked leave to assort the mushrooms infuture as she gathered them. The old mansmiled and stroked his beard, for all the Russianswear beards, and said, ' Kharasho,^ whichmeans, in English, ' It is well,' or ' So be it.'This gladdened Mashenka, and she beganto apply herself with great attention to theseparation of the mushrooms into differentsorts; and as her father really found muchprofit in her knowledge, he gave her a co-peckor two, and she was encouraged to be162 MINOR MORALS.thoughtful and careful by the success of herthoughts and cares.Mashenka had never been taught by thelessons of others, but experience led her tomake many important distinctions. She foundthat the mushrooms which grew under theshadow of the birch-tree were different fromthose she found in the pine-woods; that somespecies loved the sun, and some the shade ;and that various soils produced mushroomsalmost as various. She made her little experiments;she transferred the mould from onespot to another; she learnt to distinguish bythe taste between the wholesome and the deleterioussorts of mushrooms. The Russianscall the funguses which grow on trees, andwhich they do not eat, gribi, and the mushroomswhich grow in the ground, gull made many experiments on the way ofdressing the various qualities; and, at last,MUSHROOM-HUNTING. 163her father allowed her to have a little standin the Ochottioi Read near his own, whichnow became celebrated for the variety andexcellence of the ubi which were sold there,The lord upon whose estate Mashenka'sfamily lived, was one who had some benevolenceand much ostentation in his character.He did not give himself much trouble in visitinghis vassals ; but, whenever he did, his languagewas that of kindness, and he was calledby the peasants, Milostivy Gouda, or 'graciousmaster,' when they spoke of him;while his neighbour, who was a far richernobleman than himself, was known universallyby the title of Nemilostivy, or ' the ungracious.'Milostivy had, however, one of the great andtoo common vices of the Russian nobility. Hewas a reckless gambler. He had seen all thevicissitudes between great and moderate opulence,— he had, in fact, more than once lost164 MINOR MORALS.everything but his estate, — and more thanonce added, enormously, though only for ashort time, to his possessions. He had oftenbeen tempted to gamble with his estate, —but a sense of pride, — a respect for his forefathers— a wholesome fear of consequences, hadalways checked him when temptation said,Try once more and win.' Temptation wasnot for a long time strong enough to breakdownall the barriers of prudence.Nemilostivy had, however, been watchingthe growing prosperity of his neighbour'speasantry ; and Mashenka's family was remarkableamong the prosperous. The gradualaccumulation of wealth, by frugal industry,is sometimes quite surprising ; andMashenka's example had spread its influencethrough the serfs on the Milostivyestate, which had in a few years obtainedcelebrity for its superior mushrooms. AndMUSHROOM-HUNTING. 165do not wonder, children, that even so seeminglytrifling an article became a source ofcomparative opulence to those who collectedit. Had you seen the hundreds of waggonswhich convey mushrooms to market; thegreat and general use of this sort of food;the variety of ways in which it is prepared,preserved, and cooked for table; its universalconsumption, from the tables of the mightiestdown to those of the meanest, you would notwonder that a little fortune might be madeout of mushrooms. But so it was; andsymptoms of Mashenka's bettered conditionwere very visible. She added a gold chainto the ornaments she had been accustomedto wear round her neck; and was seen oneevening dancing the Alaska with two largebracelets of amber ornamenting her arms.Milostivy had been too much engaged inthe pleasures — no, rather the perplexities of166 MINOR MORALS.the capital, to give much attention to whatwas passing on his estate : the peasants paidtheir Pogolovnaja podat, or poll-tax, withgreat regularity; and he appeared satisfiedwith them and with himself, as his steward,who happened to be a kind-hearted man,made the regular collection of the annualtribute from the peasant vassals.But the passion for display, and the farmore dangerous passion, that of the gaming-house,obtained more and more possession ofhis thoughts. He was as restless as a feverishchild, and the unhappy propensity beganto drown all his better feelings. In thatstate, which is more like the drunkenness orthe insanity of the mind, than anything else,Milostivy had been at an evening party, playingone desperate game after another. Itwas with Nemilostivy, who availed himselfof the frenzy and excitement of the manMUSHROOM-HUNTING. 167whom he had called 'friend' to urge him onwards.He lost larger and larger sums. Atlast he put his estate upon the game : luck,as it is called — luck deserted him; and thenoble was penniless. The necessary formsfor the transfer of the estate were drawn upnext morning, and signed by Milostivy. Heleft Moscow immediately afterwards, andmade his way to Mashenka's cottage.The visit of a Russian signior to theShales, or hut, of one of his peasants is anevent of very rare occurrence. So vast adistance is there between the lord and thevassal, so remarkable is the contrast betweentheir mode of life, that the appearance of anoble in the house of his serf is in manyparts of Russia considered what that of asovereign would be to a shop-keeper. Andin truth so wretched and so dirty are thehabitations of the peasants, so suffocating168 MINOR MORALS.from the heat, so offensive from the noisomesmells, and generally so crowded with livingand offensive things, that it is not to bewondered at if they are generally avoided.Milostivy had never before entered Mashenka'sdwelling. He scarcely knew what took himthither. He had a vague recollection of havingheard of the prosperity of the family;but his mind was troubled, and his heart wasalmost broken. He was not clad as usual :he had a wild and weary look. He walkedinto the cottage, and sat down without sayinga word.Nobody was there ; he looked round himand was astonished at the neatness and comforton every side. I do not mean that itwas comparable to an English peasant's happyhome ; but to Milostivy it was a sight suchas he had never seen in the habitation of hisMUSHROOM-HUNTING, 169serfs. It almost aroused him from lies gloomymeditations.*' ' Bore ishav ! — Heaven protect us ! ' saidMashenka, as lie entered and saw her lordseated on the Lejanka, or top of the stove,which is found in all Russian dwellings.^ Ne tai Bog! What can be amiss!' exclaimedMashenka, starting back as if shehad seen a spirit.But Milostivy was silent ; he hung downhis head. ' Milosivjeishii Gouda ! — Mostgracious sir,' uttered Mashenka with a softvoice, and bowed herself to the ground, andkissed her lord's feet as she rose.* Not so, Mashenka ! not so ^- I am nolonger your master, and you are no longermy vassal. Know that I am as poor — Ohhow much poorer than you ! '"Mashenka had only that imperfect feelingVOL. II. I170 MINOR MORALS.of the rights of property which characterisesthose who possess nothing that is really theirown. ' Gouda I ' she answered, ' I do notunderstand you; but all that we have is yours.'' Alas ! it was so yesterday — but to-daythis hut — and its inhabitants — and its possessions— your family — you — all — all belong toanother.'"It was not for Mashenka to inquire howthe calamity had happened. Tears came intoher eyes while she opened a small chest andtook from it a roll of paper money. She trembledviolently — she was unable to speak.Milostivy saw her purpose, and a smile —a cold smile came over his countenance : —^ Matters are not so bad as that yet ; but youare transferred to another master: may he bekind to his vassals 1 'The nobleman uttered a benediction anddeparted. Many a time was his name .171bounced, and his memory blessed; for theserfs lead sad reason to regret his loss.The new lord was altogether of a differenttemper. It was his purpose to drain the peasantsof their last copeck. He immediatelyraised the poll-tax. He extorted everythingon which his cupidity could lay hold. Thepeople, who had no longer any recompensefor their toil, fell into their ancient habits ofindifference. Even Mashenka neglected hermushroom gatherings ; she went less frequentlyto market; her little store gradually lost itsreputation ; all exertion was damped anddestroyed ; for all motive to exertion was takenaway by the rapacious lord.Some years passed on : the peasants thathad been the model of the country — the happyand prosperous race — sunk down to theirformer lethargy. The oppression and crueltythat were practised towards them only MINOR MORALS.iced them the more: — but Mashenka wassoon to witness new vicissitudes.A ukase for a conscription among thepeasants had been issued; and among thosewhose lot it was to be summoned to the armywas a young man who had long been plightedto Mashenka. At times Mashenka made aneffort to adorn the hut; and always lookedcheerful when Ivan was expected, or whenh& appeared ; but the spring of hope was driedwithin her."It was at the time when the EmperorAlexander was founding his military colonies.The first news of the conscription was a terribleshock to Mashenka, for she imagined Ivanwould be comprehended in it. And so he was.Wretched was the day, but still morewretched the night when she was told the news.But Ivan had heard a report that in the militarycolonies soldiers were allowed to marry;MUSHROOM-HUNTING. 173and without communicating his purpose toany one, he went to the neighbouring village,made his way to the Serjeant of the troopsthat were stationed there, who happened tobe an acquaintance, told him his story, andinquired, with wet eyes and a timid voice,whether it were possible that Mashenka shouldaccompany him.The Serjeant answered him in a friendlytone ; on which Ivan broke out into a longdescription of Mashenka's merits and virtues,and the service she could do, and her presentunhappiness, and intreated the serjeantto plead for her.' Kharasho ! Well, that will I ; and I willlend you music for the wedding — if a weddingthere be. '"Light was the step of Ivan as he hurriedto Mashenka's hut. But she could hardlyhope the dream, as she thought it, would174 MINOR MORALS.ever prove a reality. ' The gouda willnever consent. No ! Ivan, you will go alone ;and you will leave me to weep and to die ! 'The moment was, however, a propitiousone. The Emperor was very desirous of extendingthe military colonies. It was one ofhis most favoured projects, and the serjeantknew it. He spoke to the lieutenant abovehim — the lieutenant to the superior officers —and authority was obtained for the celebrationof the marriage, and for the departure of thebride with her husband to the interior.I shall not tell you, children, all thatpassed on the journey. Ivan was a kind husband,and Mashenka a happy wife. Severe,and even cruel, though the army regulationsof Russia are, Ivan was never a defaulter,.and the presence of Mashenka enabled himto bear much which otherwise might haveseemed unbearable.MUSHROOM-HUNTING. 17oThe military colonies were intended tounite the agricultural with the military life.Ivan was not only a diligent but an intelligentpeasant; and Mashenka soon found thather former habits and engagements might bebeneficial to both. They had now also escapedfrom vassalage; for the moment a serf becomesa soldier, the right of the lord overhis person ceases. Any profits he can makebelong to himself, and the seignior cannottake them away.Ivan's good behaviour soon led to hisadvancement; and he was allowed a smallspot of ground to cultivate for himself. Theday when he obtained it was one of the veryhappiest of Mashenka's existence. In it shesaw their future fortunes; and she was notdeceived.She was clearing away the snow onemorning in winter, when an officer's kibitka176* MINOR MORALS.Stopped suddenly; and she heard ' Mashenka !'m a voice that seemed familiar to her ear.It was Count Milostivy. He was thecommander of a regiment in a neighbouringcolony, and had heard that the Moscow was only a few verses away. Hehad passed through many scenes of vicissitude;but having, through tke interference ofsome old acquaintance, obtained a commissionfrom the Emperor, had intreated that hemight be stationed at the military colonies —first, because he wished to remove himselffar away from all the scenes where self-reproachand sorrow went with him at everystep ; and, secondly, because he thought itwas really a scene of great usefulness, wherehe might re-establish a credit that was broken,and regain the peace of mind that had longago abandoned him. He had determined toforget the past — for in it there was no .177more of pleasure. It seemed to lii a darkand dreary spot, to which it was misery toturn. He avoided every occupation whichcould remind him of former scenes. ' I willbegin,' he said, ' a new existence — I cannotalter the past, nor undo that which has beendone; but I can make it as if it had neverbeen. I can — I will rase it all from my recollection.'And to a great extent he hadsucceeded.But the past cannot be wholly forgotten.The mind is not completely its own master,Mashenka*s name had brought out of the pastsome thoughts, which were more bright becausethey came forth from darkness. The visit tothe shales flashed upon him in striking contrastto all the other events of that memorableand melancholy time. He longed tosee Mashenka, and he drove off to visit herI 2178 MINOR MORALS.almost as soon as lie had heard of herarrival.Milostivy had acquired influence, thoughhe had not amassed wealth. Adversity hadmade him thoughtful, and he restrained themomentary impulse which would have offeredat once to change the condition of Ivan andMashenka. He wisely calculated that he couldmake them far more happy by opening tothem more widely the door of future thoughdistant prosperity, than by any sudden or unexpectedchange.He desired Mashenka, whose delight brokethrough the accustomed marks of servile respectwith which the Russian serfs salutetheir masters, to tell him her story since shehad quitted his ancient estate. Many a timehe passed his hand over his eyes, as Mashenkatold him of the distressing changes in theMUSHROOM-HUNTING. 179condition of the peasantry since he left. ButMashenka did not tell all ; for why shouldshe give sorrow to a master who had nevergiven sorrow to her or hers?' Have you forgotten the Ochotnoi RiadVinquired the Count. — ^ No, indeed, my graciouslord, ' answered Mashenka ; ' and Ivanand myself have often thought that if I could,be permitted' — —* I know what you mean, Mashenka !You shall have permission and patronage too.It was for that I came. When the seasonarrives, you shall be set up in the world.'The promise was faithfully kept. TheCount obtained mushroom spawn from differentparts of the empire. He studied thematter as if his own happiness had dependedon it. He helped Ivan and Mashenka tovarious modes of culture. He added the observationsof science to those of Mashenka's180 MINOR MORALS.experience. He assisted them to produce andto sell their productions. The ground-workwas again laid of a little fortune of whichMashenka was not again to be despoiled.Year after year added something to their well-doing;and the Count was enabled to recompensetheir meritorious efforts in a thousandways. Ivan reached the highest grade amongnon-commissioned officers. So popular washe, that none complained of his advancement.Mashenka and he have many children ; andthey are the children not now of serfs, butof free people; for Ivan's term of militaryservice is over, and he has been enabled tobuy a small tract of land close to the colony,through the whole extent of which the of Moscow is a title of fame'*SELFISHNESS,' I WONDER wliy you cry ? ' said a youngprince to his governess one day; ' I wonderwhy you cry, for I am quite well ! 'So much adulation and misconstruction turnedaside the natural current of his affections, thatthe boy thought only of himself, and thought,too, that everybody else was occupied inthinking of him alone. It is by such mistakesthat all the generous feelings are eradicated,and, it is thus, that the mischiefs andmiseries caused by wicked princes have theirorigin in the foolish flatteries of those whoform their characters."This observation fell from Mr Howard one182 MINOR MORALS.day, and produced a great impression on thechildren. It set them thinking on the distinctionbetween selfishness and prudence, —qualities very different, but very ipt to beconfounded.What a bad opinion the governess musthave had of the prince ! " said George.But how badly she must have taughthim!" Edith ejaculated; "for such a selfishnotion would never have got into the boy'shead of itself: it must have been put therebysomebody."I don't think, Edith ! " responded George,^' that the way to make people wise and goodis to flatter them so foolishly, and to talk tothem as if all the world were made to be subservientto them."Let's ask Papa whether the governess reprovedthe prince," whispered Arthur to hLssister. •SELFISHNESS. 183«< We want to know, Papa ! '' said Edith,if the governess corrected the prince, andhow."I am afraid not," answered Mr Howard,though it would have been very fitting totell the lad, who had then every expectationof being a king, that there were other personsin the world besides himself who wereintitled to some thought and care. But donot judge the poor prince too harshly. Hewas but what his teachers made him. Hewas trained and taught to consider himselfas everything, and everyone else as nothing;nothing but in the proportion in which theycould minister to his desires and gratifications.Not long after he used the expression whichshowed what an unfortunate training his mindhad received, the race was dethroned to whichhe belonged, and the discipline of adversitywill perhaps have taught him that selfishness184 MINOR MORALS.and a regard to self-interest are far differentthings.I know a selfish man, and I will give yousome traits in his character. He will not doanother man a service if he can help it, becausehe fancies that in doing a service withoutan immediate return he is giving somethingaway in waste. He forgets that he obtainsfor the service the desire to do him other services.He forgets that the gratitude of othersis fertile in acts of kindness. In what is thesentiment of gratitude but thoughts of kindness— thoughts which will become deeds ofkindness when the occasion offers? But theselfish man fancies he is poorer because hehas transferred something to another, eventhough that something cost him nothing but afriendly will or a friendly word, while reallyby adding to the happiness of others the virtuousman strengthens and increases his own.SELFISHNESS. 185The selfish man wants to establish an instantbarter for all the good he does, not reflectingthat though the good he does may not produceimmediate fruits, it is in the permanent natureof good to be fruitful, albeit the harvest isoften distant. The selfish man, on the otherhand, exacts services and kindness from otherswithout considering himself obliged to repaythem. While he lends nothing on the fairchances of profit, so he will borrow withoutintending to pay either principal or interest.The selfish man is a bad calculator even onhis own selfish grounds. He might if he chosegive much to others, without making any—the least sacrifice himself. He might obtainmuch from others, the return for which wouldcost him nothing at all."But the man whose selfishness is prudentand wise, will be benevolent because he isprudently and wisely selfish. He will see that186 MINOR MORALS.benevolence is the best selfish calculation, —that he realizes more by it than he could doby any other habit. He finds that he getsgreat interest upon all the outlay of his friendlyand generous feelings. He discovers, wereit nothing but an estimate of profits and losses,that he gains more and sacrifices less by hisdisposition to serve others than he could gainor save by a contrary disposition. All truthsare linked to all other truths; and there isnothing in the chain more beautiful or harmoniousthan the communion and identity ofthe selfish with the benevolent principle; theselfish when regarded in its widest bearings;the benevolent when brought home to individualsway. All the disorders of society springfrom the quarrel between the fancied interestsof the one, or the few, contending with theinterests of the many. Every error, everycrime is but the representation of a man, orSELFISHNESS. 187men who set themselves up in hostility topublic opinion and the general weal. Whata result of peace and felicity will be producedwhen the moralist can demonstratethat there is nothing so prudent as benevolence— nothing so benevolent as prudence !I will exemplify my meaning by an anecdoteor two," continued Mr Howard ; " thoughI believe you will understand my meaning,and, as I hope, feel the distinctions I meantto point out.A poor man had been greatly wrongedby his master. His master was a particularfriend of Mr Ego, whose servant the poorman had been, and he fancied that Mr Ego,who had great influence with his master, might,without mischief to himself or anybody, repairthe viTong. The poor man went to Mr Egoand told his story, adding that he doubted not,if Mr Ego would mention the matter, that188 MINOR MORALS.lies master would re-consider the grievancesunder which he was suffering. And it wasa case in which Mr Ego might have interferedwithout intrusiveness : but when the poorman applied to him, he answered, in a surlytone, ' What shall I get by meddling in youraffairs? Cannot you settle your own quarrelswithout involving me ?*'* Now Mr Ego, had he been really a prudentperson, would have considered that hedid get something by obtaining the goodopinion, — the grateful opinion, of the poor man.And he might further have inquired whether,supposing the claim one of strict justice, hewas doing a service alike to the poor man'smaster, to the poor man, and to himself aspeace-maker between them. But he left thepoor man indignant with him and his friend also ;he left his friend in the path of wrong, whenhe might have led him into that of right;SELFISHNESS. 189and he lost the claim he might have establishedon the thankfulness of the servant and themaster, by causing an act of justice to bedone to both.The memory of imagined wrongs that aredone and of imagined rights that are deniedlives long in the mind. The poor man leftMr Ego with bitterness of thought, which, ifit had found safe occasion at that moment,would have broken out into violence. Andyou will suppose, my children, in order tocomplete the moral of my tale, that I shalltell you some instance in which the poor man,being able to do Mr Ego some act of kindness,refused it ; and thus punished him for his unwillingnessto discharge an obvious duty.And such truly was the first impulse of thepoor man's reflections. But he reflected again ;and he asked himself, what motive he had,disapproving of Mr Ego's conduct, to make190 MINOR MORALS.that conduct the guide and model of his own ?Was the punishment of the past, or a betterexample for the future, most likely to influenceMr Ego, or to serve the poor man's interests?Who could doubt?"And the occasion occurred which put thepoor man's philosophy to the test. It wassome time after the circumstance I mentioned,and time had been given to the poor manto meditate on the past.There was a contested election in the town.Parties were pretty evenly balanced, so evenlythat a few votes might turn the scale, andthe poor man was in a position to decide thefate of either candidate.Of the candidates Mr Ego was one. Oh,how bitterly did he repent of having refuseda friendly and reasonable service to the poorman ! What would he not have given to havehad that hour of his existence to pass overSELFISHNESS. 191again ; to pass it over with the benefit of hispresent experience ! Now he felt that theremight be something in future events to repaypresent conduct : now he saw that the friendlydeeds men do to one another are not somuch loss, but so much gain upon the whole.Mr Ego's ambition was raised to the highestpitch. His desire of success, his dread ofdisappointment, were both tormenting hisexistence ; and in the man whom he hadrefused to serve, he saw the arbiter of hisfate.That poor man, however, he determinedto visit; making up his mind to the humiliationof a bitter reproof, and doubting whetherhis known political opinions, which were thoseof the elector he was about to seek, wouldobtain favour at the hands of one whom heknew had such reason to complain. But somuch depended on the poor mean's conduct.192 MINOR MORALS.that it was necessary, at all events, to attemptto conciliate him."With his hat in his hand, and a smileupon his countenance, Mr Ego entered thepoor man's dwelling. Abashed and self-reproved,he hardly knew how to ask for thesupport of the poor but honest elector. Hewas soon relieved from his embarrassment bythe poor man's offering him his hand and saying,— ' Sir ! my first impulse was to give youa lesson of punishment ; and to recall to yourmind the words that once fell from your lips :but'* But — no more, my friend ! no moresaid Mr Ego; 'the lesson is severe enoughalready. I want no other monitor than myconscience.'' My vote is yours,' answered the elector :he who has the courage to own he was wrong,gives the best evidence that he has resolvedSELFISHNESS. 193to he right The poor man lent his supportto Mr Ego : and Mr Ego won his election."I have watched Mr Ego closely," addedMr Howard; "he is not quite the man thata wise and thoughtful prudence would makehim, but his very selfishness has rooted outa portion of selfishness from his mind, andhe feels now that he has more profit tohimself from kindness than he could have fromunkindness; he feels that benevolence is anobler and more gainful policy than selfishness ;while every calculation that he makes advanceshim one step farther on the path of real virtue.Do you understand my meaning, my gentleEdith?'Indeed, Papa ! I think I do. You meanthat we do not get anything by being ill-natured;but that we get something by beingkind and good."Yes, love ! " answered Mr Howard ; " andVOL. II K194 MINOR MORALS.why should we not ? for if we are made happierby our kindness and goodness, and others aremade happier — then all are made happier ; becausethere is nobody in the world but ourselvesand everybody else. But I have been ratherdry and ethical this evening, and was afraidyou would not be interested in what I wassaying."'•' Indeed we were interested," said George ;"for though, now and then, you used somewords we did not quite comprehend, yet wesaw the drift of all you said, and we shallnot confound the selfishness that is wise withthe selfishness that is foolish."AFFECTION FOR INANIMATEOBJECTS.The conversation of the previous night deeplyimpressed the minds of the young" people ;and they were rather flattered with the idea,that Mr Howard had been talking to themin a manner complimentary to their intelligence— reasoning with them, rather thanamusing them. It was, indeed, Mr Howard'spurpose so to blend information with enjoyment,as to make both of them as palatableand pleasurable as possible. Pleasure— solid substantial pleasure, was theend he proposed to himself and his children:not a pleasure leaving pain behindit. He would have preferred a pain that left106 MINOR MORALS.a pleasure ; but pleasure, which, when siftedand sifted again, was pleasure still, — pleasureunaccompanied by vexation, reproach, orregret.In this temper, as we have seen, theHoward family gave to their conversationsthe widest range. By and by we may pourtraythem in their more serious studies, aswe have done in their leisure hours.But, Papa ! " said George ; " you saidthat kindness brought back kindness in returnmay not kindness sometimes fail in doingso''"Surely," replied Mr Howard; " but thehabit of kindness will never fail; and thehabit you know is the result of acts*'Yes," said Edith ; " but may we not lovepersons and things that cannot love us, —persons that are dead, and things that cannotfeel?"AFFECTION FOR INANIMATE Objects 107Undoubtedly you may ; " answered lierfather, " but that very disposition to lovewins the love of others. Men cannot helploving those who give them evidence thatthey love them. What I would have youencourage, for your own happiness, is anamiable and loving temper ; and let thattemper be displayed wherever it can. Inour intercourse with other human beings, andwith a considerable part of the brute creation,we have always, as I have said, a strongmotive for rendering them friendly services,inasmuch as they are able and will be willingto render us friendly services in return.But there are also thousands of objectswhich are sources of pleasure and subjectsof sympathy, independently of any positivegood they can do us. Attachment to inanimatethings with which pleasure has beenassociated sometimes becomes almost a passion.198 MINOR MORALS.There is a famous passage in one of theMoorish poets, expressing in strong terms thesentiments with which the sio^ht of the firstpalm tree introduced into Spain, inspired oneof the Moorish monarchs. It was the renownedAlderman. He made for himself abeautiful garden, in the most beautiful partof which he planted a palm tree, — the palmtree which the Moors maintained to be theprolific parent of the multitudes of palm treesthat now ornament Andalusia and Granada.He had erected a temple for the purposeof meditation, and was wont to sit there,hour after hour, contemplating his favourite tree.His melancholy,' says an Arabic historian,which he thought of allaying by all thepleasant thoughts and stories which the palmtree would bring to his mind, only increasedupon him;' and the following is a faithfulversion of one of the soliloquies he uttered : —AFFECTION FOR INANIMATE OBJECTS. 199Beautiful palm ! thou chief of trees.Thou wert a stranger tree.But now the sweet Algerian breezeSalutes and worships thee.sin fertile soil thou art rooted deep.Thy head is in the sky;But thou would'st weep — how sadly weep !Couldst thou but feel as I.'The tempest-torrent shakes thee not,Thou stances in thy pride.While by the storms of time and thoughtMy troubled mind is tried ;*And I waste tears, while Fortes streamWaters each favourite tree;But trees, and Fort's river, seemOblivious all of me —Of me, whom Alabaz has drivenFrom mine own seat of rest, —Of me, whom Alla's will has rivenFrom all I loved the best.*Thou voiceless palm — no memoryOf country dost thou keep.So I most weep for thee — for me —I cannot choose but weep.'200 MINOR MORALS.When I was travelling in Spain, the palmtrees were shown to me which Aldermanwas said to have planted. They were thestateliest I ever saw, and were tall as thetowers of Cordova, near which they stood.Two of them then remained, venerable asoriental banyans, recalling to my mind thehistory of the Moorish conquest of Spain.But, since I left Cordova, I am told that one hasbeen uprooted by the tempest, and with it athousand interesting recollections. I own that Ihave often turned towards these trees with somethinglike respect and affection, and that Ithink of them still as of distant and departedfriends, one belonging to the living, and theother to the dead.Once, while I was looking at the palmtrees, a fancy came across my mind that Iwas present at one of the scenes described inthe civil wars of Spain, by the romantic his-affectionFOR INANIMATE OBJECTS. 201tories or rather the poets of that country.1 imagined I saw the Moor, Abdallah, as heis described by the chronicler, 'sad, and verythoughtful and all his hopes departed,' surroundedby followers who had sheathed theirswords, and who looked mournfully at oneanother and at their chieftain, — having heardthat their last and strongest fortress had beentaken by the Spaniards ; and that the succoursthey had long expected had returned to Africa,in despair. Abdallah's companions were few,and none of them illustrious. There wasscarcely a straggler in the roads, except shriekingwomen and miserable children : — even thewarriors who had acquired the most renownhad abandoned all human habitations and werewandering in the bye-roads of the mountains,hungry and unsheltered.It was under one of the pain trees, nowso venerable, that Abdallah gathered his last202 MINOR MORALS.council of war. I fancied I saw the chieftainsassemble there, and heard the harangue whichthe chronicler has put into the mouth of theirmonarch. •' Valiant men and brethren ! Wehave toiled and triumphed in vain. Algiershas betrayed — Turkey has deserted us. Fezand Morocco have been deaf to our supplications.We have lost our citadels and ourships. Hunger has destroyed us more mercilesslythan arms. Our wives and childrenperish — they invoke either captivity or death !Surrender then — though I cannot surrender.Another sun is rising, while mine is darkeninginto night. The vow that I have vowed tothe Prophet I must keep ; it only brings withit the doom of perpetual solitude, where I willmeditate on your virtues and mine own adversity.'The women, says the chronicler, allburst into tears ; and the warriors said — ' Let ushave peace ! ' And the word ' peace ! — peace ! 'AFFECTION FOR INANIMATE OBJECTS. 203passed from lip to lip as a fragrant flower mightpass from hand to hand — and Habaqui thevaliant, with a white flag which he placed ona lance, went to the Christian king, anda treaty of peace was made : made to bebroken. Abdallah, deserted by his ancientfollowers, wandered long among the mountains,where he was hunted like a beast ofprey, and being at last discovered, was orderedto Granada, — there to die. As he passed nearone of the palm trees that reminded him ofother days, he broke out into bitter lamentations,and was much more sorrowfully affectedthan he had been by all the misery he hadwitnessed. The chronicler says, that as hewas descending on his mule down the precipitousside of a mountain, where there wasa deep ravine below, he took a last look atthe palm trees, and flung himself into theabyss, being dashed to pieces among the sharp204 MINOR MORALS.and cruel rocks. The Spaniards found hiscorpse there, and decapitated it, suspendinghis head in an iron cage, with an insultinginscription, which an historian of Spain sayshe himself had seen, calling Abdallah ' aTraitor Dog.'Often does some inanimate object become,as it were, the text of history. Places whichhave been the scenes of great and interestingevents are dear to individuals and to nations.They have the celebrated spots they love, aswell as the illustrious men they honour. Allthe feelings may be called into action, wherethere is no real response to them from inanimatenature : — but to fancy such responsesis one of the most pleasing and most powerfulattributes of genius. And sometimes theimpression is so strong as to give a sortof vitality — to introduce a living principle —amidst the very silence and stillness of nature."AFFECTION FOR INANIMATE OBJECTS. 205I recollect, Papa," said Arthur, " when youshowed us Runnymede, that I could not butfancy all the barons assembled there for thesigning of Magna Charta."And," said Edith, '* when we went to theTower, and you. Papa, pointed out the placewhere the infant King Edward, and his brotherwere murdered, I could hardly help shrieking,for it seemed to me as if the murderers werethere, and that I could hear the cries of thepoor children."On such occasions," answered Mr Howard,"the imagination is very busy, as it is assistedby the presence of objects which becomelike outlines to be filled up by recollections.I well remember when I was travelling toForces, in Scotland, near the spot where Ifancied that Macbeth had met the witches.It was in the twilight of evening that threewitch-like forms appeared in the mist before206 MINOR MORALS.me, standing on the lieatli, near a fire. Ilooked, and looked again ; and felt as if Iwere in the presence of the 'weird sisters.'They seemed to be solemnly walking roundthe burning cauldron, into which they threwthe charms, as they moved along : and Iheard their deep and solemn voices; and saw,every now-and-then, with more distinctness,their haggard forms. I approached nearer —the illusion vanished, which had been createdby the associations of the dramatic poet andthe dreary place. There were three peasantswho had been making themselves a fire ofgorse upon the heath ; and in the state of mymind, at that time, it required little to makethe scene and the action verify what Shakspearehas so strikingly imagined.PRUDENCE.*' There was a philosopher in ancient timewho taught that there is only one virtue,namely, prudence. If he had said that therewere only two, — prudence and benevolence,he would have been quite right."*' I think, Papa," said George, " we all ofus begin to see pretty clearly, that the othervirtues are not of much value."My friend, the Philosopher — not Apollosrejoined Mr Howard, "used to say thatthere are only two persons in the world — you,and everybody else — Mr Self, and Mr Allbesides.Mr Self s business with himself is in concerns208 MINOR MORALS,of prudence — his business with Mr Allbesides ismostly in concerns of benevolence. When theyhave transactions together they interchange prudenceand benevolence. In all the affairs whereMr Allbesides is not concerned, all that MrSelf has to do is to take care of himself. He isto take care of himself, too, when he has todowith Mr Allbesides, but in order to get asmuch as he can out of Mr Allbesides, Mr Selfmust do him as much service as he is able.All this means that it is prudent to be prudent,and prudent to be benevolent. So that in factthere is one sense in which the ancient philosopherwas right in saying that there is novirtue but prudence, or rather that all virtues,when thoroughly understood, are but prudence ;for unless benevolence itself gave a manpleasure no man would be benevolent, and itis certainly prudent to get as much pleasureas possible — as much of pleasure which isPRUDENCE. 209not followed by pain. The pleasures of benevolenceare as much a man's own as anyother pleasures, and he has the same interestin possessing them as in possessing any others.If I were called upon to point out that portionof man's nature which most clearly exhibitshow much he was designed to be madehappier by virtue, 1 would refer to that whichproves his own interests to be so intimatelyconnected with the well-being of his fellows.No man so certainly provides for his ownhappiness— no man obtains for himself somuch of happiness— no man lays in a stockof happiness of so pure and perfect a character,as he whose happiness is most intervenedwith the happiness of mankind. I hope, mychildren," said Mr Howard, " that I makemyself understood. Will you each explainto me what he supposes is my meaning?"I understand you perfectly. Papa," said210 MINOR MORALS.Edith ; "I feel pleased when others arepleased. I am always uncomfortable when Isee that Mamma or you are unhappy. If anybodywere to offer to take some of yourhappiness away, and to give it to me instead,I don't think I should thank them for it."No, my dear girl, and it would be afoolish proposal; for, generally speaking, themore we give of happiness to others, the morewe keep for ourselves. Every kind word weutter, and every kind act we do, is a proofthat we really understand how to be as happyas possible. Somebody has said, ' Do nothingwrong in society, for you will lose the goodopinion of others ; do nothing wrong in solitude,for you will lose your own.' You have,therefore, in both cases, a very decided interestin good conduct; for nobody loses the goodopinions of others, and still less his own goodopinion, without suffering.PRUDENCE. 211The great moral distinction between menand brutes is, that men depend for their ownpleasures more than brutes do upon the conductof others. Many animals live lonely orsolitary lives, and even when they are associatedtogether it is for purposes of self-defence.It is very rare that they do oneanother mutual services; perhaps the instinctthat one service may bring another in returnnever occupies their attention. They show prudence,and that often in a most remarkable degree,in avoiding dangers, in obtaining food,in sheltering themselves from the inclemencyof weather, in the care of their young ;and in all the arrangements necessary to theirpreservation, they often show exemplary patience,tact, and sagacity. In domesticatedanimals education brings them close to theregions of virtue. The fidelity and watchfulnessof some of the dog species — the cheerfulnessMINOR MORALS.ness with which they will undergo privationand fatigue, and even endure chastisement, forthe purpose of obtaining the good opinionof their masters — show that such good opinionis necessary for their comfort. Their obediencetheir docility — their delight on receivingpraise may, indeed, have become a habit; butthe habit could not have been formed withoutmany, many little acts which created it.I will, to impress this matter upon yourminds, my children ! give you a short characterof a prudent child, and show you howthoughtful virtue may obtain friends for thosewho possess it.Martha Martin was born in a workhouse.She was the daughter of a profligatemother, who treated her from her very infancywith little kindness. Her mother had seen muchaffliction, but that had not made her discreet.She had lost her husband, with whom herPRUDENCE.life had been miserable, for she was carelessof her dress — careless of her house — accustomedto spend all she had, regardless of the comingof the morrow, so that when the morrowcame, and her husband was out of work,hunger came with it and wretchedness, andwretchedness was soon followed by apathyand recklessness. She sold or pledged thelittle furniture they had, and then her smallstock of clothes, and in the midst of her privationsher husband died; and the overseersof the parish, who had long been weariedwith her importunities, forced her to enter theworkhouse — and, as I said before, in the workhouseMartha was born."Martha was a sickly child, and small wasthe attention she received from her mother.Often, as the visitors passed by, they said,That poor child cannot live long ;' but therewas an old woman, a pauper in the ward, who214 MINOR MORALS.made up for the mother's want of kindness, andacted the part of a parent to the poor infant.Much, indeed, it wanted care ; but in the mereinvoluntary motions of its lips the old womanfancied she saw a smile, and soon it reallysmiled, and then the old woman said it wasthe image of a child she had lost five-and-fortyyears before, and she would kiss it andfondle it with exceeding affection. Well itwas that the helpless baby found such a friend !Its mother gave herself no concern about it.One day she left the workhouse ; it wassupposed, of course, she would return toher child, but she did not, nor was she heardof again ; nor from that day to the endof Martha's existence had she ever tidings ofher mother."Martha was less than twelve months oldwhen thus deserted by her mother. The oldwoman applied to the overseer to be allowedPRUDENCE. 215to take charge of the child, and permissionwas granted. And Martha never experiencedthe want of a mother's presence. True, apoor-house is a sad scene, whether for childhoodor age, but she had known nothingbetter, and had not to contrast its wants withany memory of greater enjoyments. It wasin many respects a useful, though a hard education,for from her cradle Martha wastrained to privation. She was fed with coarsefood, and clothed in common garments; butshe grew stronger and stronger; she was ahappy little creature, and was a favouriteamong all the inmates of the poor-house''Is not a poor-house a wretched place ? "asked Edith.It would seem wretched, very wretchedto you, Edith ; but that which is wretchednessto some is comfort to others, and happily thestandard of enjoyment and suffering is accom-216 MINOR MORALS.rotated by Providence to our habits and ourcircumstances.Martha was not four years old beforeshe exhibited marks of that prudence whichdistinguished her through after-life. Wheneating the porridge that was provided for thepaupers, she was observed never to spill adrop, and when she had done she replacedthe vessel on the shelf with the greatest care.If at any time she could spare a portion ofthe food that was brought her, she laid itaside for another occasion. She had neverheard the proverb ' Waste not, want not,'but it seemed as if a thoughtful care of thefuture was a part of her very nature.Nobody knows how much good may bedone by a little prudent care. I will giveyou an instance. One of the paupers incutting her bread, injured her hand very seriously.There was no surgeon at hand— noPRUDENCE. 217means of dressing" the wound, or of assuagingthe pain. Little Martha, who was then onlysix years old, came into the room, and sawwhat the poor woman was suffering. She hadpicked up, and preserved with her usualattention, the remains of some ointment whichshe had seen used, but which had beenthrown out of the window as of no value.She spread it on a rag, and gave it to thewoman. It answered the end — it healed thewound. Do not think these things trifling,my children ! for Martha's prudence was benevolenttoo ; and in little instances like thisit was exhibited.In matters where the cultivation of usefulhabits is concerned, there is really nothingthat is unimportant. The means which thethe poor possess of doing good are small ;and the means which the children of thepoor possess, are smaller stilL But prudenceVOL. II. L218 MINOR MORALS.and benevolence do not depend so much for theirmerit on the number of persons who benefitby them, as on their intrinsic value: for theywho possess them will exercise them wheneverand wherever they are able, and theycan only be exercised in that station whichit is our lot to occupy.You may fancy that, in the humble spherein which Martha lived — with so few of thepleasures, and with none of the luxuries oflife — she had few occasions to exhibit abstinenceor temperance, or any of the virtuesof restraint. But it was not so — there is nosituation without temptations. Foolish thoughtsoccur to all. Discontent and murmuring arealmost the natural result of the privations ofthe poor. The inequality of conditions is hardto bear, and harder perhaps to explain.A circumstance occurred in the poor-housewhich interfered with Martha's peace of mind,PRUDENCE. 219and troubled her with painful reflections, ofwhich she could not for a long time get rid.A relation of one of the girls of the poorhousehad returned from abroad, having amassedconsiderable wealth, and had sent for thisinmate of the poor-house, who returned dazzledwith all the gay and rich things shehad seen, to tell her companions of her goodfortune, and that she was to be taken intothe house of her rich relation, and to bemade * a lady ' at once. Martha was at thistime between eleven and twelve years old.She listened at first with delight, but afterwardsin silence and sorrow, to all her companiontold her of splendid apartments, andfurniture, and gay beds, and liveried servants,and carriages and horses, and all the gorgeousthings that riches buy. One thought tookpossession of poor Martha's mind — a thoughtthat grew darker and darker — ' What have220 MINOR MORALS.I done that all these enjoyments are deniedto me? How can God, whom I am taughtto consider so good and so just, deal so unequallywith his creatures?' Martha's reflectionsof this sort now imbittered herexistence. Though so young, she had heardenough to 'show her that she was among thelowest and meanest of the human race. Shehad not seen much, but whenever she had]eft the poor-house, all that she observed lookedhappier — more comfortable than that she wasaccustomed to see. On one occasion she wasinvited, and obtained leave to visit her formercompanion, who was no longer dressed inthe coarse garb of the workhouse, but worehandsome clothes, and had even servants toattend her. Martha trembled as she mountedthe carpet-covered stairs. Her friend spokekindly to her, and said she had mentionedher name to her relation, and she hoped hePRUDENCE. 221would interest himself about her. Marthacould hardly say she thanked her; for thethought of her own inferiority came acrossher at that moment with such bitterness, thatshe returned to the poor-house in tears, andfancied she should never be happy again,'but Martha's grief, poignant though itwas, was gradually lessened by reflecting that,instead of rendering her condition better,grief would only make it worse. 'What doI get,' she said to herself, 'by the discontentwhich is but another evil added to all therest? Why should I increase my privationsby depriving myself of my peace of mind?'And thus Martha did really drive away hergloomy reflections, and in the place of themshe indulged in hopes that some day or otherher lot might be more fortunate.And so it turned out : for a few daysafterwards a notice came from the overseerL 2222 MINOR MORALS.that a situation was found for Martha. Shewent to it, accompanied by the best wishesof all the poor people among whom she hadbeen born and bred : and they said, as sheleft them — ' She always was a good girl, andlet good luck be with her always ! 'Martha was soon found to be a treasurein the family into which she had entered.Grateful for all kindness, she made a gratefulreturn. The prudence which had before butlittle to exercise itself on, now became amost useful and important virtue. Her thriftinessand care found ample employment; andher trustworthiness obtained for her more andmore the confidence of all. She could notbear, to waste any thing, and her previoussituation had trained her to attach some valueto trifles which are too often whollydisregarded."Experience had taught Martha the imprudence.223prudence and the folly of indulging in painfulthoughts. As she grew older, she found thatwe may habitually, if we please, dwell uponpleasant thoughts. And this experience madeMartha one of the wisest of women. Shewas always cheerful, because her mind wasconstantly occupied with cheerful reflections,and her hands engaged in cheerful duties.Her labours were lightened by a perpetualgaiety; not a thoughtless or a frivolous indifference; but a disposition which would findin every exertion something to encouragehope, or to reward with happiness. I didnot intend, my children, to tell you much ofa story in speaking of Martha Martin. Iwanted to show you, by an example, the valueof thoughtful prudence. Martha occupies nowthough still young — the highest situationin the family where she filled the lowest. Sheis an object of general respect — I may say224 MINOR MORALS.of affection. I do not know what her lot maybehereafter, but sure I am she has laid upfor future time great stores of happiness —stores to which many of her companions willbe delighted to contribute."FLOWERSIn ancient gardens, flowers were few. Civilization,and travel — the consequence and causeof civilization — have brought with them innumerablebeautiful things as well as usefulones ; and the variety of flowers and fruitsare among the most delightful evidences ofimprovement."I remember," said George, "having read,that in the decorations and ornamented festivalsof Tarquin the Proud, roses were theonly flowers employed."The love of flowers," said Mr Howard,226 MINOR MORALS.was so strong in ancient times, that therewas a law which prohibited any flowergarlands being worn, except by patrician orprivileged brows. But the law was so constantlyviolated, that it was impossible toenforce its observance, and, in the course oftime, the strength of habit became mightierthan the law."We laughed the other day," said Arthur,"when we read Cicero's reproach of Verres,because he was escorted about Sicily upon alitter covered with roses, wearing a crownof flowers, and having all his garments festoonedwith flowery wreaths."The Romans learnt the custom fromthe Greeks," said Mr Howard; 'the Greeks,perhaps, from the Oriental nations. AtAthens, we know the use of flowers wasalmost universal; and the favourites seem tohave been the rose, the pink, the violet, theFLOWERS. 227narcissus, and the iris. They were employedin the dresses of women, for the adorningthe altars, for the priestly costume, and,above all, for the ornaments of social festivals.It was believed the fragrance of flowers hadoccult virtues, and that it dissipated the effectsof excess ; that it stimulated fancy ; brightenedthe intellect, and disposed the mindto cheerfulness and gaiety.The Emperor Augustus spent large sumsin flowers: and Heliogabalus employed themin the most extravagant profusion. His bedswere covered with their leaves : his apartmentsand porticos almost hidden beneaththe quantities of flowers used for their decoration."There is an account of a supper givenby Cleopatra, in which she spent a talent(nearly 5000/. of our money) ; on which occasion,it was said, the saloon was made into a228 MINOR MORALS.real bed of roses, the floor being completelycovered by the quantity of leaves.*' Flowers too formed a great portion ofthe expence of the famous repast of Nero,which cost four millions of sesterces (nearly30,000/. sterling). Historians tell us thatflowers, and particularly roses, were importedat an enormous price, from Asia, and cultivatedin costly style. Great expense wasincurred by the attempts to have early flowers,and to obtain them after the period of ordinarybearing.'you have heard, I dare say, of the passionwhich was so general in Holland, fortulips and hyacinths, and the wonderful priceswhich were sometimes paid for them. Afew flowers of the rarer species were a fortune.Even in these days there are vestigesof this flower-loving mania. In no part ofthe world are the gardens so richly providedFLOWERS. 229with costly flowers; and there is still a largetrade carried on in the exportation of rootsfrom Harlem and other places.Harlem ! " interrupted Emily. " Is thatnot the place where the renowned organ is,whose pipes are so large, and its sounds soharmonious ? "Yes ! " exclaimed Arthur ; " and there itwas that the inventor of printing was born."Whose name was inquired Mr Howard.Coster ! " said Arthur. — " Wittenberg ! "said George, — and Edith hung down herhead, and said she did not know."It is a disputed point," said Mr Howard,"and will continue so. Perhaps there was asuccession of improvements; for it often happensthat the original idea is older than issupposed. Invention has been as useful tomankind in the happy and novel application230 MINOR MORALS.of what is already known, as in the firstdiscovery of facts unknown before."Now, as we were talking of flowers —what numberless and beautiful species arefamiliar to us, of which ancient Greece andRome knew nothing ! In those days, yearsfollowed years without the introduction of anovelty; but now, hundreds and hundreds ofnew plants are added, every generation, tothose known before. Every country that isdiscovered has its botanical characteristics;aid men of science are, happily, now sowidely spread, that the whole field of natureis investigated, and its separate beauties importedinto our own country.Flowers have been the groundwork ofmany an allegory ; and very naturally so.They are so various in form, and size, andcolour; — they are so universally objects ofattention; — they are so lovely and so trans-flowers.231story; — they afford such images to the poetsuch lessons to the moralist ; — they are soassociated with day-light and sunshine — springand summer — with nature, whether rude orcultivated — with fields and gardens — with childhoodand domestic thoughts, — that few minds,however high and noble, have neglected themeven as sources of enjoyment. Bacon lovedflowers — Bentham cultivated flowers — andChrist himself often made them the subjectof touching parables and eloquent lessons oftruth.I one day fancied'' continued Mr Howard,that a Camellia and a Wild Honeysuckleheld discourse together.The camellia was proud of its wax-likecoronal — proud of all the attention that waspaid to it by the gardener — proud of the admirationit excited and the place it occupied.The wild honeysuckle grew unnoticed in the232 MINOR MORALS.garden hedge, unnoticed by the passengers,though it gave sweetness to the breezes asthey glided by.*' The camellia was a vain flower and itsvanity was wounded, as it remarked that, thoughthe gardener and the garden visitors oftengave it their word of praise, it had no constantand ever-present admirers as the honeysucklehad — the unobtrusive honeysuckle thatblossomed on the garden's hedge.'' Now and then, indeed, a bee or a butterflyhovered for a moment over the camellia, butscarcely had it heard the bee's song, or begunto admire the butterfly's beautiful pinions, erethey fled, and the camellia saw, in jealousspite, that they lingered near the honeysucklethat bees and butterflies drank in its sweetbreath, and fanned the fragrant flower withtheir restless wings.In vain the camellia tried all the arts ofFLOWERS. 233coquetry. Not even a blue-bottle would exhibitany marks of attachment. Blue-bottlescame indeed with their buzz and their boldness,but if they lighted for an instant on theleaves of the camellia, off they immediatelystarted, trumpeting their regardless song, whichthe camellia was too fond of interpretinginto an impudent insult, when, in truth, itwas nothing but the humming of light-heartedindifference."At last, the camellia broke out upon thehoneysuckle in these words. ' Wild and ill-bredcreature ! who planted thee there ? Whyintrude into my master's presence ? Why,weed of the field as thou art, art thou clamberinginto the garden ground?'' I meant no intrusion, ' answered thehoneysuckle, meekly : * where we wereplanted we each of us grow: I too have mymaster; and I experience his care. I know234 MINOR MORALS.my humble destiny too 'well to force myway, unbecomingly, into the presence of mybetters.'' Modesty, indeed ! * said the camellia. ' Apretty sort of humility thine ! — dallying all daywith every winged creature thou canst stop,and occupied in nought but listening to theidle songs of flies, and wasps, and robber-bees,or in kissing gaudy and do-nothingbutterflies ! '' I have not stirred,' replied the Honeysuckle,'but as the winds have moved me;and no visitor have I courted, I hope, bylevity or misconduct.'"who art thou, again I ask?' shouted thecamellia, — ' who art thou that fittest thereoverlooking the abode of superior flowers ? '' I, ' the honeysuckle quietly said, ' am,I well know, but a wild, though not whatyou called me — an ill-bred flower. I wasFLOWERS. 235born, like you, from the bosom of earth. Ihave been fed, like you, with water and withdews. I have been taught to flower, as youhave, by the rays of the sun ; and, like you,I shall fade ere long, and wait the renovationof another spring. We have both of usbeen helped by nature. More robust thanyou, I required no other care ; while youhave had the privilege of being attendedby the watchfulness of man. 1 never seducedaway from you either bee or butterfly. Youhave your admirers, and lowlier and lessaspiring flowers may have theirs.'But it was in vain the honeysucklesought to reason. Defeated pride soon becomesactive hate. The camellia complainedof the honeysuckle to the gardener. Hesnapped off the flowers as they were growingon the hedge — just raised them to his nose236 MINOR MORALS.to enjoy their sweet scent, and threw themcarelessly upon the ground.Did the camellia get any recompensefor its selfishness and spite ? None at all.It heard less of the music of bees — saw lessof the beauty of butterflies : for while thehoneysuckle was blowing, they often passednear the camellia; but now, the honeysucklebeing removed, they came no more.The fragrance was gone, and the melody,and the bright colours that shone in thesun.Another spring came round. Modestlyas ever the honeysuckle peeped forth. Nocamellia was there. It had been nipped bythe frost. Its place was occupied by anAzalea — a sweet-smelling azalea.*' * Will there be any jealousy now — anyill-nature — for the azalea will win admirers.FLOWERS. 237with its perfumed petals and golden garb —and I shall be left at peace.'So it turned out. The azalea bloomed —was an object of admiration and felt andexpressed no annoyance at the neighbourhoodof the honeysuckle. On the contrary, a sortof communication was established betweenthem, and they lived and blossomed on thesame spot for many a long year, withouta thought of unkindness.And, why, my children ! should discontentand jealousy imbitter our existence?We have all so much to enjoy — so muchto enjoy in the very enjoyments of others !If the breath of the azalea is sweet, so isthat of the honeysuckle. If we have pleasuresof our own, others have pleasures toopleasures which we may blend with thosethat belong to ourselves, and thus increaseour portion far beyond the amount which238 MINOR MORALS.any solitary pleasures could give. Benevolencedoes not beggar, but enrich; and themote we confer of kindness, the more weshall retain of happiness."FILIAL AFFECTION.The more closely the world is looked into,"said Mrs Howard one day to her children,"the more strange things will be found in it,in all and every part of it. A gentlemanwho has lately been in Britany, told yourpapa a few days ago, that one of the principalmeans which the Breton peasant girls have forobtaining ornaments is the sale of their longhair, which is regularly collected by a numerousclass of hair-cutters, their harvest time beingin the months of April and May. In Francealtogether about 250,000lbs. weight of humanhair is annually sold, at a price of about eightshillings per lb. In Paris alone there are 6,300240 MINOR MORALS.persons employed, who receive in wages nearly2OO5OOOZ. sterling, at the end of the year, andit is said that, on an average, the hair is increasedby human labour four or five times invalue.The gentleman narrated to your papa alittle history which had lately occurred in Britany,and which I will repeat to you, for itis pleasant to speak of the patience and virtuesof the poor. It is useful, too, for itteaches us to think of them, and to acttowards them with kindness. It raises them inour estimation. Our pride refuses not to regardthem as our brethren when they distinguishthemselves by honourable actions.In honouring them we honour the race towhich we ourselves belong.In the outskirts of the town of Vannes,which the Bretons call Quenelt, and is thecapital of the department of Morbihan, (aFILIAL AFFECTION. 241Breton word, meaning 'the small sea') lived afamily of a father, mother, and two daughters,Katell and Cana.The Bretons preserve a strong provincial,or what may be more properly called a nationalspirit. They do not treat their Frenchneighbours as if they were the same people,but call them Gauls, and their language Gallic,while they denominate themselves Bretons.They never speak of France but as of a foreigncountry, and with their peculiar language theyhave preserved many peculiarities of their forefathers.In many districts, their costume hasundergone no change for hundreds of years,and there is the greatest unwillingness to introducenovelties, however useful or convenient.'' The family I have spoken of was, like toomany of the race, trained in all the prejudicesof the country, looking with suspicionVOL. II. M242 MINOR MORALS.on everything that was new or foreign, anddesirous of resisting all improvements that camefrom strangers.The father of the family was a small farmer.He gained a bare subsistence by thecultivation of a little tract of land that Msfather had bought during the revolution. Butagricultural improvements had been introduced,especially in the neighbourhood of the townsof Brittany. New instruments had foundtheir way, new produce was cultivated, thewhole face of the country was bettered, thevalue of land rose, but our farmer's affairsbecame more and more involved, in consequenceof the general improvement. Otherscould turn their lands to better account thanhe, and though the prices of corn and cattlefell, they could reap profit, while Jann, forthat was the farmer's name, found himselfunable to pay the charges of his family ; but heFILIAL AFFECTION. 243persisted in shutting his eyes to the real cause.*' He first began to borrow money at aheavy interest, giving a portion of his farm asasecurity. But this only made matters worse,and he was forced to borrow more in orderto pay the additional charge. He sank deeperand deeper in embarrassment. His wife andchildren had remarked a change in his manner.He had become silent and stern. The Sundaydress, which the Bretons preserve for generationafter generation, had been used for dailyservice. On several occasions, when he hadbeen asked for some small sum of money, tobuy garments for the girls, he answeredgloomily, ' Not now In the simple usagesof Brittany, a farmer's house generally provideswhat is wanting for the daily food of thefamily : coarse bread and cider, potatoes,salt, and now and then a little dried fish, laidin when the markets are well stocked. ' I244 MINOR MORAL$.wish said his wife to Jann one day, ' I wish,from my heart's centre, (a greiz va c^halouna very common expression in Brittany,)you would tell me if things are going on asusual. This morning, a man came and lookedin at the door of the farm, and walked aboutas if he had a right to know more of our circumstancesthan a stranger should inquireinto. What does it mean ? Is anythingwrong?' 'Silence,' said Jann, ' and troubleme not !' Nor could another word be forcedfrom him. He hung down his head, and leftthe room.If his wife had been anxious before, howmuch more anxious was she now ! On hisreturn, she intreated him to tell her what hadhappened, but in vain. He looked about him,sat down in silence, and when his two daughtersspoke he made signs that they should leavehim. In fact he was ruined. He had re-FILIAL AFFECTION. 245civet notice that he must surrender his farm,and he was penniless in the world."At this time one of the girls was thirteenand the other fifteen years old. Their motherhad not spoken to them of the anxietiesthat troubled her. She was afraid that theirfirst proposal would be to leave her andseek their fortunes in the world, and shecould not bear to think of being abandoned,or that her girls should be exposed to whatshe had heard (for from her own experienceshe knew little or nothing) of the temptationsand the corruptions of large toMTis. Nor,as I said, was she quite aware of the realstate of things — nor of the extent of herhusband's embarrassments, and the inevitabledistress to which they were to be subjected.But she told her daughters that she wassure some misfortune had happened to theirfather — that a storm was gathering somewhere.246 Minor MORALS.We must be prepared for affliction,' saidshe; 'and it will come but too soon.'The next day, Katell and Oana wentout together that they might talk over whatthey had heard. < Oana,' said Katell, ' haveyou not seen how unhappy our mother is,and how changed our father?'' That indeed have I,' answered Oana ; ' andof this I wanted to talk to you. When Isee our father and mother looking at oneanother (tdl ouc^h tal — or forehead to foreheadis the Breton expression) — there is so muchsadness in one, and so much mystery in theother, that 1 think we ought to be doingsomething.'' But what can we do ? — what service canwe render? — where can we get work? — howcan we find money? Do you know of anythingthat we can do ? '' We can do little, Katell ; but perhapsFILIAL AFFECTION. 247we can do something. I have thought that,if matters reached their extremity, we hadone little resource.'« What is it, Oana ? Is it yours, or mine,or could we both of us unite ? '' Yes, both of us ; and you even morethan I, for that beautiful hair of yours ismore valuable than ''* ' Nay, Oana — my locks I cannot ' buthere the poor girl blushed. She was indeedproud, as she might be, of her fine flaxenhair, and her pride resisted for a moment —but it was for a moment only. "Anything,anything, Oana; and whenever the time iscome, we will go together to Vannes, andmy hair shall be disposed of without a murmur;nay, more, with a cheerful, willingheart, pleased that I have something to offerin the day of tribulation.'The girls returned home together, happier248 MINOR MORALS.than they had been for many a day; for ifany frame of mind be happy it is that inwhich, after a struggle, a known sacrificehas been willingly made to virtue.Matters grew worse and worse. At lastJann could conceal from nobody the comingevil. He said to his wife and children —We are ruined ! We are houseless — we arepenniless — we are worse than penniless. Ourfarm we must leave; and that is not all. Iowe debts that I cannot pay. I have seenthe little stock of food consumed : I darednot say I could not replenish our store : itis almost exhausted. The order for our ejectmentis arrived. I know not whither to go.Poverty is come upon us " like one thattraveller, and want ars an armed man ! " 'There are no poor laws in France. Thereis no provision for sudden privation. Jann'sspirit was so humbled and broken, that heFILIAL AFFECTION. 249would willingly, for his family's sake, havesubmitted to the shame of asking for someshort supply of food and raiment — so utterand so hopeless was their destitution. Butsuch resource there was none. 'And tomorrow,'said he, ' we must go forth miserablebeggars in an inhospitable world ! *Katell whispered to her sister, ' The timeis come ! ' She left the house, and was followedby Oana. They walked together tothe town of Vannes."It was in the month of May — to younghearts the sweetest month of the year. Theysaw many flowers on the banks, but theygathered them not. They heard many songsof many birds, but they noticed them not.They scarcely opened their lips to one another,though in that moment they felt, eachof them, a stronger affection to the otherthan they had ever felt before. But as they250 MINOR MORALS.entered the town, Oana inquired of her sisterwhere they were to go.Katell looked at Oana, whose softand wavy hair fell in circling ringlets overher shoulders, and there was another instantof doubt and hesitation.The struggle was soon over. She tookOana's hand, and led her through thegates of the city to a narrow street, whereone of the itinerant purchasers of human hairhad taken up his usual temporary abode duringthe season in which the girls of Brittanyare used to bargain for their long tresses.Katell was the spokeswoman : and longwas the discussion between her and the hairmerchant. At last he agreed to give sevenfrancs for Oana's, and five for Katell's hair.He cut it off, — and while the operation wasperforming, some tears — natural tears— droppedfrom the sisters' eyes.FILIAL AFFECTION. 251Shorn of their beauty, they spent onefranc of the twelve to buy themselves caps, tohide their changed appearance. They turnedhomewards with feelings in which the approvingvoice of duty silenced many thoughtsof distress. Their absence had caused theirfather and mother much disquietude ; but theyno sooner entered, than their mother — formothers are always quick in discerning allthe movements of children's minds — perceivedwhat the girls had done, and broke out intoexclamations of sorrow.' Oh no, mother ! ' said Oana ; ' if you onlyknew the pleasure we have felt in doingsomething for ourselves and for you in amoment like this ! 'And Katell placed the eleven francs on thetable. Eleven francs in their then conditionwere no small treasure. ' And now let usdepart, for there is nothing but affliction left252 MINOR MORALS.to US here.' In fact the officers of justicewere then in possession of the place, andJann well knew that all it contained wouldbe insufficient to satisfy the warrants againsthim.They were allowed to take with them theirscanty wardrobe. It scarcely sufficed for achange. The worn-out garments had notbeen renewed. Even in better times theirsupply had been but scant, and now it bespokethe dreariness of poverty."They reached Quimper; and it was ata fortunate moment, when agricultural labourerswere required for carrying on somelarge experiments that were making in thedepartment of Finisterre, and Jann and hisfamily found no difficulty in obtaining anengagement. In new scenes old sufferingswere more easily forgotten; and necessityforced upon Jann much knowledge, which,FILIAL AFFECTION. 253of his own accord, he would never haveacquired. He spent four or five years inthe department of the Finisterre. He learntthe value of those improvements which hehad before despised, and he summoned upcourage enough to apply to the owner ofhis farm in the Morbihan, to be allowed tobecome a tenant. This request was granted,and in the strange vicissitudes of life, Jannis again become the possessor of the propertyhe had lost. Both Katell and Oana marriedprosperous men, who united to raise for Janna sum of money sufficient for him to redeemhis farm. He turned it to the best accounthe cultivated it with superior implementsand he has been able, not only to repaythe sums lent him by his sons-in-law, buthe is laying by enough to provide comfortsfor the old age of himself and his wife. Heoften says, that he should have sunk in despair254 MINOR MORALS.but for the timely succour wliicli his daughtersbrought him, in the moment of his severestdistress, by the sale of their hair.And often as he strokes the head of hisgrandchildren, of whom there are six or seven,he has been observed to wipe the fallingtears from his cheeks, and has been heardto say, ' God bless thee and thy beautifullocks'"SONGS OF THE PEOPLE.As the looking" for happiness," said MrHoward one day, " is the best of employments,and the finding it the best of goodfortune, I am always delighted, my children! when any new occasion offers for discoveringenjoyment. But very much dependson our own willingness to be pleased, andon our own susceptibility to pleasure. Someminds have a tendency to habitual gloom.In a flower they see nothing but the thornin the bee nothing but its sting — in thesky, but the thunder-storm — in the world, butits sorrows. Others, more happily trained,find that —In nature there is nothing' melancholy.'256 MINOR MORALS.It is Strange, that artists have been so muchoccupied with the representation of misery —so little with that of joy ! The other day,going to the famous museum of pictures atAntwerp, I observed that there was scarcely aface which did not express pain, annoyance,suffering, disgust. I heard one person say —I would rather visit a butchery ! for thepainters, illustrious as they were and are,seem to be thinking of nothing but humancalamity, cruel inflictions, frightful martyrdoms— all the horrible and miserable exhibitionsof violent death ! ' I confess I sharedin the universal sentiment. The representationswere so vivid as to be nearly approachingto reality, and to leave an impression notfar different from what would have been excitedby the scenes themselves ; and weariness sooncame over me."Among sources of pleasure, the songs ofSONGS OF THE PEOPLE. 257the people are prominent. Well do I rememberbeing roused from gloomy thoughtsby my muleteer, when skirting the Pyreneanmountains. There was an outbreak of spontaneousmusic, to which he had adaptedextempore verses. It was during the Peninsularwar, and we were travelling in someof those narrow defiles where sudden nightsometimes overtakes one, and the sunset isfollowed, almost without twilight, by gloomydarkness. And this was his song : —My horse is tired and so am I —How wearily we go !I wish the venta* now were nigh —The sun is sinking low.And through the box-wood tree I peep.The venta to discover :I fain would rest, I fain would sleep :The day is almost over.I know the venta from afar:A chestnut tree stands by it :The venta has an evening star;And soon I shall espy it.'Venta, a small inn.258 MINOR MORALS.Often have I heard the peasants of Spainsing songs like this, composed on the spurof the moment, and hummed to a monotonousbut characteristic tune.In all times, poetry has had great influencewith the people, and pleasant wouldbe the task to gather out of history examplesof what a German poet* calls the power —the might of song. There is a pretty taletold by Jusuf ben Harun el Arrayed, oneof the Arabic poets of Spain, in thefollowing words ; — ' I went forth after ourholy festival; and crossed the Cordova stream.I sought the beautiful gardens of Beni Mer-nan,and there I saw the loveliest of womenthe loveliest of women, a slave. Nothingso fair, nothing so graceful had I ever seenbefore. I bowed myself down before her,and she answered me with inconceivableSchiller. — Die Yacht des Ganges.SONGS OF THE PEOPLE. 259courtesy and readiness. Her voice was allsweetness ; it fell on my ears like musicit penetrated my very soul. Her person,tone, and language, wholly subdued me. " Inthe name of Allah, fair creature," said I toher, " art thou a sister or a mother ? " "Amother, if it please you," she graciously answered." But tell me then, I pray, thename thou dearest." " Halewa," she replied.And," rejoined I, " may the fates blessthee that gave thee so dulcet a name !" ' Andthe poet goes on in this style to the detailof all he suffered for the beautiful slave —what a long and perilous journey he undertookto borrow the money for her ransom; thathaving effected it, he found she had longbefore been pledged to another ; how theking was appealed to, who became enamouredin his turn, and then bribed the great oratorof the day to detain, by his eloquence, the260 MINOR MORALS.husband of the beautiful slave, in order thathe (the king) might pay his court to Halewa ;while the poet, for his portion, was condemnedto chains; and left to tell his miseries tothe walls of a prison. Such stories havebeen preserved through many generations.I have heard them in many lands ; livingthrough all vicissitudes. I have seen children,youths, and grown up people listening,with eager, beating hearts, and eyes intenselybright, to the narrator : for man is everywherethe same; interested in man's history;alive to man's suffering; and sympathisingin man's pleasures.Whenever I travel, it is one of myhabitual and favourite occupations to ascertainwhat is the poetry of the people: and whattheir proverbs, which are often condensedpoetry. There is poetry and beautiful poetryeverywhere. I remember once, when in theSONGS OF THE PEOPLE. 261woods of Finland, I heard a song, many-centuriesold, which described what song coulddo. Do you recollect, George, what is narratedby the classic poets of Orpheus?Ay, Papa ! that he stopped, by hismusic, the swiftest rivers ; made the mountainsdance ; and tamed the wild beasts of theforest: that he forced his way into the regionsof Pluto ; charmed the very furies ;and soothed the agonies of those who weresuffering torture there."And I have read, too," added Arthur,that the people of Thrace claimed the honorof possessing his tomb on Mount Libethrus,around which, they said, nightingales builttheir nests, and thus became the most melodiousof birds."The song I heard from the Flandersreminded me of the classical fable ; for ittold of the powers of the harp whose strings262 MINOR MORALS.were made of the tail of the wild horse, andits body from the oldest oak tree of thewoods. And it is said, that when played onby a mighty hand, the birds gathered roundthe musician ; the beasts crouched before him ;the fishes looked out of the ocean, and allthe auditory wept."Why," said Edith, " that is somethinglike the story of the eloquence of the Catholicsaint, of whom we saw a picture, inwhich he was preaching to all the beastson the earth, all the birds in the air, andall the fishes in the sea ; and they werelistening with unanimous attention."Yes," said Mr Howard, " the same sortof exaggeration prevails everywhere, and thefarther we go back, the more startling andincredible it is.The poetry of the people is one of themost delightful resources and comforts of na-songsOF THE PEOPLE. 263tons that have been subjugated by strangers.In it they often give expression to thoughts,which would otherwise find no vent."You may have heard of Rhigas, whowrote the national hymn of the Greeks, andwho was so cruelly put to death by theTurks, when he was returning homewards froma journey into Austria. A friend of mine,M. Laurel, mentions* an instance of theinfluence of Rhigas's poetry on his countrymen.A traveller in Macedonia was struck withthe intelligent expression of countenance ofa baker's boy. His person was a model ofgrace and beauty. He looked the travellerin the face, and said " Can you read ? " Beinganswered in the affirmative, he seized thetraveller by the arm, and led him into thecountry, where having discovered an enclosedspot, the young man desired his companionChants Populaires de la Grace Moderne, ii. 18, 19.264 MINOR MORALS.to sit down on a rock, and took from hisbosom a volume attached to a riband, whichhe wore round his neck. The volume wasa collection of Rhigas's songs — " Now read ;now read me this ! " said the young Greek.He began, . and the traveller perceived thatthe young Greek's eyes were inflamed — hisbosom was violently agitated — his lips trembled— his right hand was lifted up, and tearsrolled fast down his cheeks. " Did you neverhear it before ? " inquired the traveller. " Ohyes ! very often," was the answer. " I stopevery traveller, and endeavour to persuadethem to read me something or other fromthe book."