MINOR MORALSFORYOUNG PEOPLE.ILLUSTRATED IN TALES AND TRAVELS.BYJOHN Bowing.WITH ENGRAVINGS, BY GEORGE CRUIKSHANK ANDWILLIAM HEATH.LONDON:Whittier AND CO., AYE-MARIA LANE.MDCCCXXXiy.\ d. lie,C. AND W. REYNELL, Printers,16 Little Pulteney street.AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATEDTOMY WIFE AND CHILDREN,J. B.Westminster,January, 1834.CONTENTS.I.Anger . . Page 1 to 10II.Courage .11— 27III.Generosity28— 38lY.Intolerance39— 48Y.Advice-Giving .49— 58YLPresence of Mind .59— 73Vii.Humanity to Animals .74— 90Viii.Veracity . .91—103iX.Praise and Blame104 — 113X.Employment of Time114—125XI.Love of Flowers126 — 137XTI.Perseverance .138—157XIII.Good-nature158—169Xiv.Patience under Censure170 — 180XY.Mercy .181—195Xvi.nobility of Skin196 — 227Xvii.Order .228 — 243XYTTT.Justice244 — 253TransientTimes254—261LIST OF PLATES.By GEORGE CRUIKSHANK.Jayme the Robber and the Governor of Crevillente.To face Title.By WILLIAM HEATH.Arthur and the enraged Carter . . Page 2The Mushroom Gatherer and the Beggar Girl . 32The Monk shewing the Miraculous Crows . . 43Alexander and the Philosopher „ , 66The Footpad . . . . . 99The Itinerant Preacher , . . 104Mathilde at Pere la Chaise . . . 137Jacquard before Napoleon and Carnot , . 153PREFACE.Haying been engaged in the publicationof a work which is intended toestablish the principles of morality onwhat appears to me their only true andsure foundation, namely their influenceupon the happiness of mankind,it had often occurred to me that itwould be rendering" some service tothose whose opinions will be theopinions of the coming generations ifthe theory of genuine morals could beelucidated for the service of the young-^by the blending' of amusement and instruction.X Preface.And in the attempt to accomplishso important a purpose I felt encouragementfrom a frequently repeatedobservation of Mr Bentham's, thatnothing is wanting for the establishmentof sound opinions in all questionsof right and wrong, but the determinationto follow the consequences ofactions into the regions of pain andpleasure. No better guide for judgmenthas, I believe, been ever proposed; and my conviction is as strongas it can be, that it is impossible toadd to the stock of virtue withoutadding to that of felicity, or to increasethe amount of felicity without increasingthat of virtue.With the exception of those illus-preface.Xirationis which have been borrowedfrom history most of the facts referredto belong to my own observation andexperience; and I have the ratherchosen to draw on such sources fromthe conviction that the every-day wantsofhfe afford to every man ample scopefor the application of that standard ofmorality, whose universal recognitionwill as I behaves be the characteristicof a new and better era.This little volume is launched as anexperiment. If welcomed it will befollowed by others, in which theGreatest Happiness Principle will beapplied to a variety of-other topics.My wish is to cover the whole fieldof thought and action with seeds whichXll Preface.appear to promise so fair, so rich aharvest. Whether the husbandman isworthy of his labor I know not norknow I if the ground is ready for thescattering of the grain j but that it isdestined to fill future fields with productsof beauty and plenty I cannotdoubt ; and of the seeds I fling aroundme all will not assuredly fall in stonyplaces, or be choked with nettles andbriars. J. B.ANGER.*^ Oh ! see how that cruel fellow is beatinghis poor beast !'^ said Arthur Howard to hisfather and his brother George,, as they weregoing out for an early country walk. Arthur'sattention had been excited by a shabbily dressedman who was belaboring a rough-coatedfeeble and blind old horse, that was dragging,or rather attempting to drag, a cart with aheavy load of vegetables to market. Thepoor creature tried and tried, but could notget the wheels out of the rut in which theyhad stuck; and the driver, whose anger increasedwith the increased but vain attemptsof the horse to move onward, was dealing2 MINOR MORALS.out Ms blows most unmercifully about theanimals legs and bead, and swearing moreloudly, and laying on more violently at everystroke. ^^ What an abominable rascal !" exclaimedArthur again. ^^ Til — Iv — and awayhe scampered, almost as much in a passion asthe man whom he was going to reprimandand to punish.Now see' said his father to George, *' inwhat an unfit state Arthur is for doing ahumane thing. Ho intends to act kindly andgenerously, but he will most likely makematters worse. He will only exasperate theman the more ; and the poor beast will be thesufferer for his imprudence.^^'what do you mean, you worthless vagabondV' cried Arthur when, out of breath andhardly able to find words for his rage, hecame up to the carter. ^^ What— what doANGER, iiTou mean by treating the poor horse sowickedly ?'^ — " What do I mean, Mr Impertinent?There, — that's what I mean'' upon whichhe turned upon the silent and suffering creaturewith far greater violence than before, andsmote him so ferociously that every blow madeArthur's heart shudder within him.^* And now, young gentleman ! if you don'tmove off," said the man, "' mayhap I may tryhow you like the stick upon your own shoulders,by way of teaching you how to meddle withother peoples' concernedArthur was a- boy of humane and generousdispositions, and he could not immediately seethat he had done anything wrong by giving wayto what he had perhaps thought, as many otherswould have thought, a natural and proper sentimentof indignation ; yet he felt he must havemade some mistake, for he had failed in his4 MINOR MORALS.purpose ; and with a spirit somewhat brokenand subdued, he ran back to his father and hisbrother.'^ Well my boy V' were the first words heheard from his father ; ^' and what have yougot by throwing yourself into such a toweringpassions'' — " How could I help it, papa ! whenI saw that man^s frightful cruelty?" — '*^ Buthas your passion been of any service to you,Arthur? Did it help you to persuade thecruel man, or to rescue the suffering beast?You intended to do what was humane, I know ;but you set about it rashly. Your anger wasmore violent than your reason. You were morebent upon punishing than preventing an offence ;and, though you proposed to do good, you haveonly done evils'^^But tell us, papa'/^ said George, whosetemper was more sedate, and whose judgmentANGER. 5more cool tian his brother's, " is anger neverjustifiable — never commendable ? Must one seeall sorts of wicked and improper conduct, andnot be angry with it? I have often heardindignation called generous, and anger virtuous.Are they never so ?"Never, my son ! for what is anger ? Itis pain — pain inflicted on yourself; by whichyou are excited to inflict pain on another.It may be necessary to inflict pain on anotherfor that other's good, and for the good of society;but your being angry is just the way to preventyou from properly judging what pain, and howmuch pain it is right to inflict in order to producethat good. Now, if Arthur, instead of breakingout into a storm of passion, had first consideredwhat he really meant to do, which was toinduce that ignorant man to refrain from misusingthat unfortunate beast, he would have preventedb MINOR MORALS.three mischiefs — the mischief of being in a passion, with all its pains annoyances, and disappointments; the mischief to the animal, whichhas only suffered the more from his interference,and the mischief to the carter, whomhe has but exasperated the more, and, perhapsstrengthened in his vicious propensities'The lesson was borne in mind, and as is thecase with all good and useful lessons, an earlyopportunity was found of applying it to practice.The morning walk was continued. It was agreat delight for the lads to ramble into thefields with their father soon after break of day ;and such walks were the frequent rewards oftheir good behaviour the day before. On suchoccasions, Mr Howard was accustomed to talkto them on all the subjects of their studies, andto make it his invariable rule to tell them somethingthey had not heard before ; for he hadANGER, 7travelled much and studied mueli, and whatwas best of all his travels and his studies, andall his thoughts , had been always busied inmaking others happy.Of course he was universally loved ; for it isbut natural we should love those who do uskind services, and there is no service so kindas that of making us happy.He talked to his boys of the beauties ofnature that surrounded them, and showed themin what a wonderful variety of ways beauty isa source of pleasure. He bade them listen tothe songs of the birds, to the fall of thewaters, to the thousand sounds of the earthand air, — teaching them how each added somethingto the great account of living happiness.,When the wind blew in their faces, or the sunshone on their foreheads, or the frost bit theends of their fingers, he told them how each8 MINOR MORALS.administered to man^s enjoyment. If the airwas fragrant with the flowers of spring, or thesweet hay of summer, he explained to themhow the organs of smell were made subservientto the same great end ; and as they looked uponthe different tribes of busy creatures partakingof the various food presented to them by theirMakers munificence, he pointed out hownumerous their pleasures ; how perpetually renewed,how marvellously provided for, howinfinitely spread : ^' Sees said he, '^ the greatpurpose of Providence ; the general lesson ofcreation— happiness ?'And the thought again came over Arthur'smind, that anger never made anybody thehappier.They returned homeward. Their walk hadbeen long ; longer than usual. "Whom shouldthey meet, but the carman. who had excitedAnger. ySO much of Arthur's indignation a few hoursbefore 1 He had delivered his cart-load to themarket gardener, and was walking sulkily bythe side of his cart, every now and then givingthe poor horse a heavy stroke with his stick.The horse,, however, being now relieved ofhis burthen, moved on with something likeactivity. The man no sooner saw. Arthurapproaching, than, as if in pure spite and contradiction,he struck his beast a vehement blowupon his nose. But Arthur had learnt wisdom ;and his father was charmed to see that he wasstruggling to check the outbreak of his angerHe, however, went to the carter, who beganto scowl at him as he approached, expecting,no doubt another violent scolding. But Arthurhad found out his mistake. The man perceivedthe difference, and his own looks changed asArthur said to him, in a quiet and gentle tone10 MINOR MORALS.^^ I spoke to you improperly this morning ;I am sorry for it." The man did not give thehorse another blow ; and once or twice asGeorge and Arthur turned round to watchwhat was going on which they did very cautiouslyindeed they saw the carter kindlypatting his poor beast upon the back and heardhim singing, in the distance, a good-humoredsong.COURAGE.In the evening George and Arthur went intotheir father's library, to give an account of theschool business of the day. "I have beenreading," said George, such an interestingstory in Livy, where he tells of the courageand devotedness of the young Curtis. Whata fine example of patriotism papa V' ButArthur had not read the Roman historian, andGeorge was called upon to describe the event,which he did in the following words : — '^ It wasbetween three and four hundred years beforethe Christian era, when a large gap suddenlyopened in the forum at Rome. The peoplewere affrighted, and consulted the oracles asto the meaning of so alarming a catastrophe.12 MINOR MORALS.The oracles answered,, that the gap would notclose until the greatest treasures of Rome wereflung into it. Upon this a young Roman, whosename was Curtis, asked his countrymen whetherthey possessed any treasures so great as theirweapons and their courage. They acknowledgedthey had none, and the young Curtisclad himself in full armour, mounted his horse,plunged into the chasm, and perished. Thepeople gathered round, and poured offeringsof flowers and fruits after him into the void,which soon closed over him. But can the storybe true, papa?" — ^' The probability is, my boys,in this, as in other instances, where miraculousevents are spoken of by the classical historians,that a portion of truth* is the groundwork uponLivy has the candor to confess, that he sometimesrecords the expressions of a credulous age, and excuseshimself if, in speaking of the past, his mind is under theinfluences produced by the tone of ancient days, xliii. 15.COURAGE. 13which a fable has been raised ; but in this case,it does not seem very difficult to separate thefacts from the fictions. It appears to me mostlikely that Curtis was destroyed by one of thegreat earthquakes which have so frequentlyvisited Italy, and sometimes changed the characterof the surface of the country, Curtiswas perhaps some young man distinguished forhis rank and his virtues, who perished with hisarmour on, while assisting the citizens duringthe sufferings created by such an event. Hisname and deeds were kept alive in the memoryof generations till, in progress of time, theywere associated with that fabulous decorationwhich now accompanies them. Another historian(Festus) speaks of the place where the chasmwas, as having been covered with water, andbeing called the Curtis Lacus — and it isvery likely that a lake would be the result ofthe changes which an earthquake would produce.14 MINOR MORALS,Was it not, if true, a very brave and heroicaction, papa ? Was not his courage very praiseworthy? Do you think in these days so muchof self-devotion would be found ?^^ inquiredGeorge.^^ I say yes ! to all your questions, George,The action was courageous ; was praiseworthy ;and I believe, if needful, imitators would notnow be found wanting ; I do not think any realvirtue has diminished in the world, and I amsure some virtues have greatly increased.^^ I am glad,'^ continued Mr. Howard, " youhave introduced the subject, for I wished toshow yon that courage is not always a virtue,and therefore not always worthy your admirationor your applause. If it is not useful forsome good purpose, it has nothing in it todeserve approval. The courage of a bad ranmay be exceedingly vicious ; the timidity of agood man may be pre-eminently virtuous-courage.15Courage only enables a man to subdue difficulties; but the difficulties may be in the wayeither of his wisdom or his folly.*^' I will give you a few examples, and youshall tell me whether courage is always intitledto praise ; and you will try to distinguishbetween the courage that is virtuous and thatwhich is not so.'' During my travels in Spain, I fell in witha famous bandit chieftain, whose name wasJayme Alfonso 3 a man whose adventures werefar more romantic and marvellous than thoseof either the English freebooter, Robin Hood,,or the Scotch mountaineer, Rob Toy, Jaymewas brave, but not cruel : and I say this, becausesome writers have hastily and thoughtlessly said,that no brave man was ever cruel. But, myboys ! there have been many men very braveand very cruel. It happens that people get intotheir beads a notion that courage is a virtue — -16 MINOR MORALS.always a virtue; so, when they find mencommitting cruel acts, they deny these menescourage, though their courage is really asremarkable as their cruelty. This comes fromthe confused notions that the world is filledwith, as to what is virtue and what not.Jayme was one of the most courageous menI ever knew or heard of. He was dauntedby. no dangers. He seemed never to think ofhis privations. He lived, year after year, amidstthe rocks and the forests ; and sometimes, forwhole months, entered no human habitation.It was his custom to order his band to disperseat sunset, and he invariably fixed on someplacefor their meeting at break of day. Jayme,however, had many virtuous qualities; andwhen the remembrances of the past came overhim, when he thought of the days of his youthand his innocence, regrets and penitence sometimesbroke out in tears, I had, when in Spain,COURAGE. 17a muleteer for a servant, who told me that abrother of his, a boy who had wandered awayfrom Crevillente, the birth-place of Jayme,once saw a man sitting on a rock, hangingover a stream, weeping bitterly. He soonfound from his dress, appearance, and thenumber of weapons he wore, that it was Jaymethe robber, and, being much alarmed, took tohis heels and ran away. But Jayme summonedhim back, seized him by the hand, andinquiring his name, told him he knew hisfamily, and that they were honest people, andthat he hoped the boy would be honest too ;for 1/ he said, ^ am Jayme el Ladrone, andvery wretched am I indeed ! Yet I was onceas innocent and as happy as you'^ But I was about to tell you an instance ofJayme^s courage. The governor of Crevillentehad been long in search of Jayme and his band.They had done so many kind things to thec18 MINOR MORALS.peasantry; they had provided food for thenecessitous in the time of a dearth and hadso frequently relieved them with the moneythey had plundered from travellers, that Jaymewas popular throughout all the district, andnot a villager or cottager would betray him orhis companions. A regiment of soldiers hadbeen for years kept marching and counter-marchingin pursuit of Jayme, who had oftensurprised them, and had even carried away someof the officers to his mountain haunts ; and onone occasion, where a Lieutenant had beenwounded and left for dead in a skirmish withthe bandits, Jayme took him to some of thedeepest solitudes of the neighbourhood, curedhim of his wounds, and conducted him safelyto the main road which led to the town ofCrevillente. Jayme^s mother lived in thattown. She was a respectable person, independent,though not wealthy; and one dayCOURAGE. 19the Governor exasperated with Jayme'slong resistance, and weary of his own vainattempts to capture him, ordered Jayme^smother to be arrested, thrown into prisonand levied a heavy fine upon her, declaringshe should not have her liberty tillshe divulged the hiding place of her son. Shecould not have done this, if she would ; forJayme never communicated to her any ofhis proceedings ; so that the conduct of theGovernor was alike useless, unjust, and cruel.The next daw — it was before the sun had«arisen, a stern-faced man, with a rifle in hishand, and several pistols in his belt, his bare legsgirded with the chickweed sandals worn by theValencia peasantry, and clad in one of thosebutton covered vests whose arms hang overthe shoulders, and often entangle themselveswith the many colored ribands that float fromthe band of the sombrero (hat) ; a stern faced20 MINOE MORALS.man appeared at the gate of the Governor'sabode, and said he came on matters of extremeurgency, and must have an instant audience ofhis Excellency. His presence awed the guard;and supposing perhaps that he was a messengerof the government, he was allowed to enter,and without saying a word he marched straightto the Governor's bed room, who was stillasleep. Shutting the door he stood erect at thefoot of the bed, aroused the Governor, and saidin a loud voice : ^ I am Jayme the robber, andam answerable for my own deeds. You havetaken a poor old woman : she was helpless ;she is innocent. You have extorted moneyfrom her ; you have thrown her into prison.Now hear me : — the sun has not yet risen : ifbefore that sun sets, the money is not restored,and the prison doors opened, in, the grave Ihave ordered to be dug for you you shall beburied, I am Jayme the robber!' He leftCOURAGE. 21as he had entered, unmolested ; but the Governorknew so well the firmness and determinationof Jayme, that he ordered the moneyto be paid back, and the prisoner to be released;and the circumstances were relatedto me on the spot soon after they occurred."'^ This was indeed courage, papa V exclaimedArthur; *^^was it virtuous courage ?^^ — ''^Nodoubt it was, Arthur ; for it checked injustice,rescued innocence, and gave a lesson to theGovernor he would not soon forgets^^ And will you teach us, papa ! how wemay know when courage is really a virtue,and when it is not ?''''YesV' said Mr Howard. "I will firstgive you a rule for judging not only of couragebut of every other quality, whether or not theyare virtues ; and then I will mention anotherexample or two in illustration.'^1 have told you that a coward is not22 MINOR Morals.necessarily bad, nor a brave man necessarilygood. Courage, like other dispositions, maybeapplied to wicked purposes; it may beinjurious to the courageous person, and injuriousto others. If courage make men lesshappy, if it expose them to useless risks andannoyances, if it injure the comforts or destroythe property of others,— it is not a virtue, butavice. Guided by prudence and by benevolence,courage is virtuous; but if it isnot directed by these, it may be quite thecontrary.^^ Have you heard of Sebastian Cabot, oneof the earliest and most adventurous amongmaritime discoverers? In 1526, he sailed forSouth America. He had only two countrymenwith him; and the jealousy of the Spanishcaptains immediately under hin broke outinto open disaffection. A clamour was raisedamong the crews, which menaced not only hisCOURAGE. 23own life, but the safety of the whole expedition.Cabot was almost a stranger amongthem , disliked because a stranger, and not lessmisrepresented than disliked. Mended wassecond in authority • Rajas and Rodas two ofthe captains in command ; and these three menwere the leaders in that insubordination whichwas on the point of breaking out into mutiny.Cabot's energy and courage were equal to theoccasion. He seized on Rajas, placed him,with Mended and Rodas, in a boat which conveyedthem to shore. the eflPect,^ says thehistorian, ^ was instants Discord vanished, andfor five years of service through which theexpedition passed, full as they were of toil,privation, and peril, we hear not the slightestmurmur ; on the contrary, everything indicatesthe most harmonious action and the most devotedfidelity* Now this was an instanceMemoirs of Cabot ; p. 138-139.24 MINOR MORALS.of courage ; this was prudence ; this was virtue.And you will find a thousand such in thehistory of intrepid and virtuous men.*' There is , in some of the towns of Germany,an institution which exhibits the most exaltedcourage united with the most praiseworthybenevolence. At Hamburg, for example;, thereare certain men, chosen for their known in-rapidity whose office it is to rescue humanbeings from dangers. To be so chosen isdeemed one of the highest honors that can beconferred by their fellow-citizens. They weara peculiar uniform, are found in certain stationsof the city, and bear the name of Menschen-better,or men savers. In cases of fire, or flood,or other public calamities, it is their specialbusiness to rescue human beings from the perilsthat surround them. Others may be occupiedwith the preservation of property, their concernis with human life alone, and the instancesCOURAGE. 25of heroic self exposure which I have heard ofshow how much of courageous virtue there isin the world, and. what an extraordinary powerthe good opinion of our fellows has to exciteit. There is not one of these Menschenretterwho has not often exposed his own life, andoften saved others from destruction. Evenbefore the honorable title is conferred, many-arethe efforts of self-devotion to obtain it.They have been known to force their waythrough the raging flames, and to have rescuedinfants in the highest stories of houses whenthe roof was failing in, and after the staircaseshad been consumed. It is not long ago thatone of the most distinguished of the Menschen-better,a celebrated mathematical instrument-makerat Hamburg, made a desperate attemptto save a fellow-creature in a building thatwas being rapidly consumed by fire. He failedthe flames had made too much progress—26 MINOR MORALS.roof, beams all fell in : he was buried in theruins. His mutilated corpse was afterwardsfound ; it was exposed in the market place tothe grateful gaze of ten thousands of the people.It was remarked, that though the bodywas terribly mutilated, the features were scarcelychanged. They were calm and serene, as ifin sleep. The Menschenretter had often beenheard to say, ^ There are two ways, in eitherof which I desire to die : in the exerciseof my oflQce, or surrounded by my friends*Both wishes may be said to have been fulfilledin one, for multitudes of friends witnessed hisheroism and deplored his fate. All admired,all wept ; and they followed him with solemnhymns to his grave.Here, my boys, was courage ! Here wasbenevolence ! Here was virtue V'^ We understand, we understand' exclaimedArthur and George, at the same time. '* YouCOURAGE. 27need not tell us now what the courage is thatis not virtue !"'' Good night, lads ! Mamma and Edith willbe of our party tomorrow."Generosity,Mrs Howard returned the following day accompaniedby Miss Edith, and great was thejoy , and great the greeting on their arrival ;for Edith who was a special favorite and anonly sister, had been very ill, and was nowcome back from a visit to the sea shore, whereher health had been improved ; and she clappedher hands for very joy as she entered the doors,first clasping her papa and then her brothersround the neck, and then running about wildly,and then coming back again, and asking athousand questions, and leaping and dancing,and forgetting everything but her own happiness.And her parents looked at her withsmiles of pleasure, and the boys laughed aloudGENEROSITY. 29at her antics, till at last, tired out with enjoymentsshe sat herself clown on a stool at hermamma's feet. ^' O dear ! dear V' she said —What a nice thing it is to be at home again V'It was near the time for school. Mr Howardtook his hat and went out to his business, andthe two boys having again kissed their youngsister, tripped away light-hearted to theirlessons.^' You said, mamma ! that when we camehome, you would talk to me about that generouslittle girl who gave money to all the beggars,as we rode along. Was it not very kind andvery good ?"^' I dare say it seemed so to you, Edith ; andyet the money which that little girl so carelesslythrew away, might have been much better employed."Better employed, mamma ! I thought therecould be no better employment than charity'' '30 MINOR MORALS."By charity, I suppose you mean doinggoods love ! And what if the money so spentinstead of doing good does harm?'^^' Can that possibly be, mamma ! Can therebe harm in assisting the poor V'^ There can be no harm in assisting the poor,Edith, if you do them real services ; but theremay be much harm in acting without any considerationas to the consequences of whatyou do/^But are not the consequences the relief oftheir wants, mamma ? And is it not right torelieve them ; and ought not we to show pitytowards the distressed : and to help them asfar as we can ?"We ought, my dear, to do whatever we cantorelieve and remove distress ; but in order todoso we must always ask ourselves how we canrelieve it — most speedily and most effectually.And, that you may judge for yourself, andGENEROSITY. 31understand my meaning, I will tell you thedifference between the person who gives moneyprudently and usefully, and the person whodoes not. Money is given to the poor for therelief of some want ; but suppose it createsmore wants than it relieves ; or for the cureof some misfortune — now fancy that it producesmore misfortune than it cures? Certainly itwould be wrong to give the money. The wantof prudence and of providence among the poorcannot be provided against, unless they suffersomething for their neglect. It is often fortheir own interest that they should suffer. IfI punish you for a fault, it is not because I haveany pleasure in punishing you, and seeing yousuffer, but because I know, unless you are madeto suffer, you will not try to correct the fault.If a poor person were as well, or better off, byhis laziness or his drunkenness, than he wouldbe by his industry and his temperance he would32 MINOR MORALS.have a stronger motive to do wrong than todoright. You must always try to give to peoplereasons or motives for doing right. Supposeone boy works hard, very hard in the fields,and at the end of the weary day gets sixpencefor his labor, and there is another idle beggar-boywho gets a shilling without work, bymerely asking alms of travellers, the bad boywill be twice as well recompensed as thegood boy, and every penny you have giventhe bad boy is an encouragement to his idlenessand his beggary. I have seen a littlegirl who hunted for mushrooms all the daylong. She was then a pattern of neatness andindustry; she went into the fields and wasas diligent and as busy as could be; and, inthe evening, if she had earned two or threepenceby the sale of her mushrooms, she wasas pleased as possible. But, one evening, whenshe was coming home from her walks, andGENEROSITY. 33very tired indeed she was, lie saw a girl ofabout her own age who asked charity from alady in a fine carriage; and the lady threwher a shilling, and said to her in a very kindtone : — ' There, poor child ! ' Upon whichthe little girl who had been used to gatherup pennies, and two-pences, and three-pences,by her own industry, said to herself : — ^ Whydo I lead this weary life? Why do I gotrudging away through field and field, andafter all can only get a few halfpence for allmy toils and travels ? I will turn beggar tooAnd so she did ; and she lost her good habits,and took to bad ones. The clean and diligentchild was no longer to be seen hunting formushrooms in the field. She became a practisedbeggar, and at last an insolent one, andthen grew careless about right and wrong —and invented stories about her sufferings thatwere untrue, and ended by committing crimes,DS4 MINOR Morris.for which she was transported to a distantland; and sorrowful indeed it was, to recallthe time of her childhood, when she gatheredmushrooms in the green fields. Nowyou must not think that the lady who gavethe shilling to the beggar-girl intended to actamiss. She thought she did a generous thing,and it was generous to give a shilling to apoor child, but it was very mischievous ; andthus you see, that to be generous is not quitethe same as to be wise and goodsMay not money be sometimes generouslyand usefully given }'' asked Edith, who lookeda little perplexed, and who before her mamma-lessonbegan had been thinking that she wouldspend all her money among the poor beggarswho accosted her. Edith had indeed beenmuch fascinated by the smiles with which allthe beggars looked upon her generous youngcompanion and thought how very delightful itGENEROSITY. 36Twould he, if she could hear addressed to herselfthe same words which had been used to herfellow-traveller : " God bless you, sweet younglady ! A pleasant journey to you, and thankyour goodness '/' But her mother's conversationhad brought many new thoughts into her mind,and she therefore timidly inquired whethermoney might not sometimes be generouslyand usefully given,Yes indeed love V answered Mrs Howard,^' and to enable you to give it generously andusefully, you must give it prudently'"Nor was an occasion long wanting: forTvhile they were talking a servant came in andsaid that a sad accident had just happened infront of the house. A waggon-load of timberwas passing, and one of the beams, not havingbeen carefully fastened, had slipped off andhad fallen upon a crippled man who was crossingthe road, and was supposed to have done36 MINOR MORALS.Mm serious injury. Mrs Howard hastened tothe spot, and was followed by Edith. Theysoon found that the poor man's leg was broken :^^We must immediately send for a surgeon'said Mrs Howard to Edith. ^^You may begenerous now'And Edith saw at once that there had beenno fault on the part of the man and that shecould do no harm to him nor to anybody elseby her liberality : so she ran in and despatcheda servant for a surgeon , and she asked to beallowed to pay out of her own pocket moneythe expenses of the poor man's cure.Happy was the evening when the familywere all gathered together. Edith told herbrothers of the sights she had seen at the seaof the pleasure she had in playing with thewaves — how they rushed up the sloping shorebroke into white foam and then ran backagain to meet the advancing tide. She toldnGENEROSITY. 37them how the waters rolled the pebbles oneover another till all their sharp points weremade round — how she had seen the sea-gullsfloat on the surface — the ships with their whitesails in the distance, and the fishermen arrivingwith their boats full of mackerel, shining likebright silver and emeralds in the sun. Shetold them how high the waves rose at thetime of the full moon, and how low the neap-tidessank — how the sea-birds flew aloft in thecalm weather — and how , when the storms werecoming on they hovered close upon the topof the surges. '^''And the waves never restsshe said ; " but splash and splash, and rise andfall, all the night and all the day long, as ifthey could never be tired.'' But I must tell you, Arthur, of the accidentwe have had to-day.^^ And thoughArthur had heard it all from the servants, onhis return from school, he let the talkative38 MINOR MORALS.little girl rattle on, and recount, in her ownway, the story of the poor man whose leg hadbeen broken.She said nothing, however, of the part shehad taken in the business— nothing of her owngood deeds— nothing even of the conversationwith her mamma about liberality and charity.'sand don't you think, Edith' said MrsHoward to her, " that you could now explainthe difference between generosity and truegoodness ^ Edith blushed, and answered, — " Ihave been thinking, mamma, that generosityis very like the jack-daw in the fable, struttingabout in borrowed feathers, and making a greatclatter about merits that are not its own !"INTOLERANCE.'"^ There was a very droll dispute at schoolto-day, papa V said George : '^ one boy insistedthat a Latin verse was written one way in theoriginal another declared it was written anotherway : the quarrel became so hot that we expectedit would have ended in blows; whenone of the bigger boys recommended that eachshould bring his book ; and it was found thateach had quoted the passage correctly fromhis own copy, but they had different editions,and the text was diflferent.-'^It was' said Mr Howard, ^^ only a smalldisplay of that intolerance of which there aretoo many great exhibitions in the world.Each boy thought himself right, and had40 MINOR Moralsgood reason for thinking so; but there wasnot the same reason for thinking the otherwrong. He had seen his own book with hisown eyes, and had, therefore, very sufficientevidence for himself; but he could not knowwhat evidence the other had had. Hence thefolly of expecting everybody to think as wethink. They will think as we think, if thesame reasons are given to them, and if thosereasons influence them as they influence us.If* they have other reasons unknown to us, orif our reasons appear to them not to warrantour opinions, they cannot think as wethink : it is impossible, and there is no helpfor it.But what ought to be helped, and oidght tobe avoided, is our attempting to punish othersbecause they do not see as we see, . or thinkas we think. This is persecution.When I was in Lisbon, I was accompaniedINTOLERANCE. 41by a Monk to the cliurcli of St Anthony. Youhave heard, perhaps, that the armorial bearingsof that beautifully-situated city are a vesseldismasted, but guided through the waters bytwo crows, one seated on the prow and theother on the stern of the ship. The deviceis in honor of a miracle said to have beenwrought in favour of St Anthony, the patronsaint of the Tagus, who, when at sea, sailingon a mission to the heathen, fancied himselflost : for all the crew of the vessel in whichhe sailed had perished of plague, and he wasleft, wholly ignorant of navigation, to themercy of the waves. In his despair he kneltdown to pray, when he saw two black-pinionedbirds descend from heaven, one of which seizedthe rudder, and the other perched on the bowof the ship : by these he was safely conductedto Portugal. And among the majority of thePortuguese there is no more doubt of the42 MINOR MORALS.miracle than of the ordinary events of whichthey have been witnesses themselves'did you believe the story papa?" inquiredEdith.^'^By no means: and, though I never saidanything which should show that I felt contemptfor the credulity of the Portuguese, yetI have no doubt they considered me somewhatheretical."' Come said the Monk ; ' come with me tothe Tgreja de Sao Antonio, and I will give yousuch evidence as shall be irresistible Wewalked together under the magnificent archesof the church, — between avenues of pillars, onmany of which the miracles of the Saint wererecorded, and we reached a narrow staircase atthe foot of the tower. ' Follow mess said theMonk-i ^ and fear notes I ascended after him thelong, long-winding stone steps, the darkness ofthe way being only lighted by distant gleamsINTOLERANCE. 43which broke through the narrow intersticesleft in the thick walls, and on reaching thetop, the Monk pointed out a huge cage, itwas as large as an ordinary sized room, inwhich were two enormous black crows, gravely-seatedon a metal bar. ^ Look there, Seniorssaid the Monk, and bowed his head reverentlybefore the crows ; ^ those are the identical birdswhich brought St Anthony hither. And doyou doubt the miracle now ?'^'^ I doubted, and did not doubt the less inconsequenceof what I saw. And why did Idoubt, Edith }''T suppose, papa, because you did not thinkthey were the real crows that brought StAnthony to Lisbon.'^^^ Even so, my love ; and I did not believethat St Anthony had been brought to Lisbonby crows at all; and the attempt to convince44 MINOR MORALS.me that the two crows were still living, andhad lived for many hundreds of years, was onedifficulty more to believe, and not one difficultyless.^^The Menes reasoning was what logicianscall ' begging the questions He took forgranted, the very thing to be proved, that StAnthony had been escorted by the crows, andthen fancied that his telling me the crows Isaw were the real crows, was to weigh downall my experience of the habits of the animal,all my knowledge of natural history, and thevery natural reflection, that it was much morelikely there should be a succession of crowsprovided by the Monk and his brethren, as theold ones died, than that a perpetual miracleshould be wrought in order to prove the truthof a very improbable story. Besides, I sawthat the crows were richly and regularly fed,INTOLERANCE. 45and I might have asked him why, if the crowswere miraculously preserved, all the expensesof nourishing them were not saved ?"And did you not tell him, papa, that youcould look through the whole of the impostureV said George. ^' Did you not tell himthat he was a rogue, and that you were notto be duped by his roguery ?"Softly, my impatient boy ; that wouldneither have been prudent nor courteous; itwould have done neither me, nor him, noranybody any good. No good to me, for Ishould have been exposed to some danger : theMonk would have looked upon me with hatred,because my expression of incredulity wouldhave implied contempt for his opinions, ordistrust of his honesty and veracity ; it wouldhave done him no good, for it was his interestto persist in the fraud, and as to the fads ofthe case, he knew more about them than I46 MINOR MORALS.did ; and no good to anybody else, for nobodyelse was present. But it may do good nowto you and to others, for to others you maytell the story, as I may tell it to others.'^ My purpose in telling the story was notto excite your scorn or dislike towards theMonk, who, though h€ could not believe,against the knowledge he had, that those identicalcrows really escorted St Anthony up theTagus, may have believed that St Anthonyleas escorted by crows. I did not wish youto be angry with the Monk, or the Monk'stale, but I wished to ask you two questions.If I had really desired and tried to believethe story, coidd I have done so in spite ofmyself?^^'^ No, indeed, papa, that would have beenimpossible said all the children at once ;^' you would not have been so foolish."^' And if I could not have believed it, evenINTOLERANCE. 4?though I wished to believe it, could I do sobecause the Monk , or any other person, wishedme to believe it y^' Oh no ! no !" they all repeated again andagain.'swell then, my children, the lesson Iwished to teach you is this : — Never be angrywith any person, merely because his opinionis not your opinion ; never be angry becauseyou cannot persuade him to change his opinion;and above all, never do him an injury, orhesitate about doing him a good, because hisopinions and yours are different. Nobody canbelieve what he likes, however he may try todoso ; at all events, if he hears all that is tobe said on all sides of a question. Still lesscan anybody believe according to the likingsof others. Where you doubt, inquire. Inyour own opinions seek nothing but truth,because truth after all, is the great thing. In48 MINOR MORALS.your conduct to others , be guided by the rulethat you should never cause useless pain. Inthe minds of the best men there is, alwayshas been, and always, perhaps, will be, muchdifference of opinion as to what is true, buteverybody knows and feels what is Mnd ; andtruth itself is most likely to be found whenit is sought for by tolerance and benevolenceAdvice-GIVING,'^ I Canst understand Plato, papa ! His finewords are without meaning to my minds saidGeorge. " He says that all truth and scienceis in recollection ; but we can only recollectwhat we know. And you, papa, have alwaystaught us to observe, and to inquire, and togather up knowledge from all around us ; butPlato says all knowledge is in ourselves. Doyou think the ancient philosophers understoodthe science of morals as well as the moderns?"*^' Assuredly not,'^ answered Mr Howard :'*" we have the experience of many generationsto add to their experience. Plato lived at aperiod when it was the fashion to treat theE50 MINOR MORALS.great majority of human beings with contempt.He owns that his morality was not intendedfor universal use. It was too sublime for thosewhom he called the vulgar. But Christianityteaches us to regard all men as our brethren,and no system of morality can be really goodwhich is not fitted for mankind.'^ In those days the many were slaves to thefew,, and, as was natural, the few treated themany with scorn and insolence. They calledthem a base and unlettered herd, and seemedto consider them as belonging to a differentrace : they were, indeed, in many respects,worse off than the poor Blacks in the WestIndia Islands. Nothing gives a meaner notionof the doctrines of what is denominated theAcademic school, than their carelessness aboutthe happiness of all but themselves, and thecontumelious manner in which they put forththeir opinions.ADVICE-GIVING. 51"To give advice to others, prudently andbenevolently, is one of the lessons I wouldhave my children learn. On this subject thereare, among the distichs of Cato, some veryadmirable counsels, which I should like themto commit to their memory, and they will serveto illustrate what I have to say.Submit thy tongue to virtue's discipline.For well-judged silence is a gift divine'*Therefore do not intrude advice, unless youaire sure it will be useful. If it is likely toirritate, and do not improve the person towhom it is addressed, restrain yourself fromgiving it. Your silence in such case will bea' well-judged silence^' Give no advice which is injurious toyourself. This also is the counsel of Cato.' Virtute primam esse put, compeers lingua,Proxies ille Neo est, qui sit ratione facere.*52 MINOR MORALS.Injuring thyself, if others thou condemn,Well may they deem that thou wilt injure them'*And a serious injury to yourself it will be,if you give advice that is ill-timed, intrusive,or unbecoming. Advice-giving assumes superiority,and the right to give it must onlybe used where the good to be done is undoubted.If you give advice, give it benevolently.Do not mingle censure with it, for censurewill exasperate : speak always in the tones ofkindness, never of anger,—For ire brings hatred ,- concord nurtures love'sBesides, we must moderate oar accusationsof others, for we are not, ourselves, free fromblame.' Seme repugnant tibi tu contraries esse,Convenient nulli qui secum dissidet ipse.'t ' Ira odium general, concordia nntrit amorem.^ADVICE-GIVING. 53He "will be slow to censure others, whoFeels he is bare to others' censure too'*^^ And now, having given you so much ofmorals without a story, I will tell you a storyof which you shall find the moral."sin a country that had never been visitedby man, a stream broke forth from the mountainside, and ran dancing into the valley.At every step it sparkled with joy, and sang,delighted, a perpetual song to every flowerthat it passed, to every bush and every treethat grew near it. And the flowers breathedsweet odours above it, and the trees gratefullylowered their branches, and often the littlebirds, having bathed themselves in its sprightlywaters, sat on the shrubs which were closestto the current, and tried to excel one anotherin the boldness and the variety of their music.' Si vitam inspicias hominem, si denique mores,Cum culpes alios, nemo sine crime vivitJ54 MINOR MORALS.Over the stream the lark loved to soar, andto look down from the heavens, that he mightsee his reflection on the surface. The kingfishersbuilt their nests upon its banks, andlulled themselves to sleep with its dulcet murmurs.The place was like a little paradise,and had been so for ages. The stream could notremember that it had ever had cause to grieve ;it had seen ever-new generations of flowers,and, watered by its care, they constantlyincreased in number, and lost nothing inbeauty. The change of seasons did not interferewith its pleasures. The rain addedto its strength and usefulness, brought newsfrom the clouds, or from the neighboring hillswhence the rivulets came with their contributions; the sunshine brightened its face withsilvery light. In the day-time it talked withallthe living creatures that surrounded it.In the night the moon and stars would oftenADVICE-GIVING. 55visit it, and dance upon its dancing wavelets.In the storm it only lifted up its voice moreloudly, to keep harmony with the great concertaround. In truth, it was a happy stream, andseemed to have the art of diffusing happinessall about its neighborhood.^' One day, an unusual noise was heard.The stream looked up, and saw a large blackcreature hovering over it. ^ Who can this newvisitor be V whispered the stream to a blue-bellthat had been just singing the day-break houras it was wont to do, in order to wake abeautiful green lizard that slept in a bed ofmoss only a few steps away from the flower.Indeed, I don't know said the blue-bell ;^ but I will ring the louder, that I may rousemy neighbor and send him oflP to the kingfisherwho is more of a traveller than I, andwho can perhaps tell us something about thestrangers when the lizard woke, and had56 MINOR MORALS.washed himself as usual in the good-naturedstream, away he ran to the kingfisher abodeto ask what the black monster could be thathad come with his discordant voice to troublethe peace of the place. The kingfisher saidhe had seen in his journey black beetles, andblack crows, and black cats, and black whales;but which of these it was the lizard could nottell him, so he said he would come and lookfor himself. He put his gay feathers in order,which had been rather ruffled by the lizard'sintrusion, and then shot away, like an arrow,to the place where the monster was.'^ But before he arrived, he heard himcroaking in the most ill-natured and insolenttone, and abusing the favorite stream in a waythat seemed quite shocking to the poor kingfisher,who observed, as he went along, thatall the flowers were hanging their heads, orturning away from the black creatures s abuse.ADVICE-GIVING. 5?He S2LW, too, that the lark had flown up tothe clouds, in order to be out of hearings andthat there was a general commotion amidst allthe inhabitants of the happy region. Andwhen he listened these were the words heheard : —' Cease that noise thou everlasting babbler! Canst thou not stop tormenting us withthine incessant tongue ? Here, ever since Icame into the neighborhood, hast thou beentattling. Prate, prate ! Helter-skelter ! I wonderwhat use such a head-ache-giving intrudercan be ? Running down the slope of the hillthen over the valley, here and there one sideand another side, just as if all the land werethine own ! And then, impudent ! scamperingdown to the very sea. I should like to knowwho gave thee an invitation into other people scompany ; a pert little country jude, movinginto the great world without anybody asking58 MINOR MORALS.thee ? And here have I been for the lasthalf-hour, wearying myself with giving goodadvice, of which the insolent vagabond takesno notice. tis past endurance'^ Upon which the raven — for it was a ravendashed violently into the stream, and thestream, instead of losing its temper, merelywashed the dirt off the ravens wings.'^ But at this moment all the community setupsuch a shout of indignation, that the ravenwas very glad to betake himself to flight, andnever again did he appear in the land of thestreamsPresence OF MIND.Among the daily topics of conversation in MrTowards family were the interesting eventswhich the newspapers communicated. '' Whatan advantages remarked Mr Howard, ^'^wehave over past generations ! What a quantityof instruction is brought to us every day !What a perpetual contribution of valuabletopics for reflection does a newspaper bring !Of how many countries it speaks ; how manyoccurrences it records ; how far it travels insearch of information, and how far it communicatesthe information that it collects together !Think, how many thousands of persons havebeen concerned in the preparation of thatgreat sheet : it contains volumes of knowledge,60 MINOR MORALS.gathered together from innumerable sources.How much pleasure has been enjoyed how-muchpain has been suffered to afford materialsfor so much collected matter ! And, like itself,every newspaper that it quotes is dependent,too, on a vast establishment, with its correspondents,editors, compositors, printers, postmento circulate, and vehicles to convey it;and perhaps fifty such have been consulted,from all parts of the world, for the productionof that we are reading. More than ahundred thousand persons, I should think, aredirectly or indirectly connected with the publicationof a morning newspaper. Men haveadmired the manufacture of a watch, as amaster piece of human sagacity ; but what isthe manufacture of a watch to that of a newspaper? A few hands have been occupied indigging the metal, and transporting it to themelting-house, and conveying it to the work-presenceOF MIND. 61slip, and in moulding or shaping it into theexquisite finns required; but a newspapercontains the history of nations; shows themovement of the great and complicated machineof man ; bring into its columns all time. andall space; discusses all topics; exhibits allinterests ; exemplifies all vice and all virtues ;and pours out floods of instruction into theminds of its readers.^^To read newspapers with advantage, oneprinciple should always be present, that theonly useful and honorable object of humanexertion is to increase the sum of human happinessand to diminish that of human misery.Learn to estimate all events and all projectsby this sole standard. ' Forget the languageof praise or blame with which parties speakof one another, and inquire whether the conductin question is likely to remove pain oradd to enjoyment. If it be so, learn to think62 MINOR MORALS.of it with approval,, however harshly that conductmay be spoken of; if, on the contrary ^actions be praised which are unfriendly tohuman felicity, be no party to the praise.'^I read to-days continued Mr Howard,'^ an interesting example of presence of mind,which I thought you would like to hear ; forpresence of mind, though a gift of nature tosome, may be strengthened by habit and encouragedby example. It is prompt, prudentialcourage, providing the best safeguards in themoment of peril. It does not seek dangersunnecessarily, for that would be folly; butif dangers arrive, it is ready with the bestmeans for averting them. Timidity, that flieswithout inquiring what ought to be done, bothconfuses and debilitates the mind. I wouldnot have my children fool-hardy nor presumptuous,but I would have them considerate ;and presence of mind s one of the goodPRESENCE OF MIND. 63qualities in which I hope they will not bewanting."But I must give you the newspaperaccount : — ^ The life of the Right HonorableEdward Ellice, and perhaps of several other persons,was saved the other day by the presenceof mind displayed by his sen, a youth underage.A fire broke out and was making greatprogress ; it had nearly reached the apartmentsin which were Mr Ellice and his son ; in acloset close to the room was a large canisterof gunpowder sufficient to have blown up thewhole edifice. Without mentioning his intentionto anybody the young Ellice hastenedto the closet, got hold of the canister, andflung it out of window. A few moments ofdelay, or forgetfulness, might have led to thedestruction of the edifice and of every bodyin it.^ Now which of you, children, canremember an instance of presence of mind V64 MINOR MORALS.'soh, papas' said Edith, "I recollect thestory of the gentleman who was saved by hispresence of mind when the madman got holdof him in Bedlamite^' Well, then, let ns hear it ; for to repeat astory to others is the yQvj best way ofremembering it yourselfWell, papa, there was a party of gentlemenand ladies who went to visit Bedlam,and, as they Averse going through the wards,one of the gentlemen was accosted by aperson whom he supposed to be one of thekeepers, and who said to him in a whisper —^ Your friends are only going through the commonparts of the establishment, but if youwill come with me, I will show you theapartments which are not generally openedto strangers The man went off and beckonedto the gentleman, who stepped awayfrom his companions, to follow his new guide,PRESENCE OF MIND. 65who led lii through sundry passages to thetop of the building, and then out upon theleads. No sooner were they there than theman said to the gentleman — ^ Now, sir , jumpinto the street V You may suppose whatwere his feelings when he found himself inthe presence of a madman and knew that themadman's next step would probably be tothrow him off the building. But his presenceof mind suggested a means of escape, and hesaid to the madman — ^ Jump down ! Anybodycan jump down; but if you'll let me, I'll godown and jump up, which will be muchmore of a feats — The madman burst into alaugh — ^ Ha ! ha ! indeed it will ; march downand try.' — So the gentleman was allowed togo ; and, naturally, the first thing he did wasto inform the keepers of the narrow escapehe had had, and to urge them to be a littlemore careful in future that such a dangerous66 MINOR MORALS.lunatic should not be allowed to put people'slives in jeopardy. And now, George, let ushear your story."^^1 will tell you then, of an example ofpresence of mind which I have somewhereread of in ancient time. Do you rememberthe story of that Philosopher, when Alexanderof Macedonia had menaced with destruction acity of Asia that had refused to pay himtribute, who was sent forth to entreat theconqueror's clemency? He had been Alexander'stutor, and he was employed to interfere,in the earnest hope that, from his formerinfluence with the conqueror, he would notintercede in vain; but Alexander seeing himapproach, and knowing the object of his coming,called out — ' Don't trouble yourself orme,I vow to you, and I have sworn a solemnoath to all the gods that, I will never grantyour request.' — On which the Philosopher saidPRESENCE or MIND. 6?'I humbly entreat your majesty to reducethe city to ashes, and to let no one of itsinhabitants escape !^ Alexander perplexed, itis said, by the solemnity of his vow, desistedfrom injuring the city or punishing the citizens.Now, Arthur, it is your turn."'* I hardly know, papa," said Arthur, "whetherthe conduct of Herman Cortes when hedestroyed his whole fleet, which Robertsoncalls, san effort of magnanimity unparalleledin history should be considered as most remarkablefor courage or for presence of mind."Remarkable for both,^^ said Mr Howard ;and now let me hear what you recollect ofthe history .^^While Cortes was making arrangementsfor advancing the conquest of Mexico, bysending an envoy to Spain, in order to communicatewith the Spanish court on mattersof extreme urgency, a plot was formed to6S MINOE MORALS.seize one of the vessels, and to intercept themessenger on his way homewards, and thusto thwart all Cortes's plans, and supersede himin his command. One of the conspirators communicatedthe purpose to Cortes, a few hoursbefore the intended departure. Cortes instantlywent on board, and found the conspiratorsall assembled and about to sail. Intimidatedby his sudden appearance they neitherdenied nor attempted to justify their treason.They were all arrested, the leaders executed,the subordinates forgiven ; ' because says theSpanish historian, '' he was so careful of thelives of his men and mingled kindness withhis severest justice. Yet he felt that thisattempt to undermine his authority, was butasystem of feelings which might again breakout, and that he could not rely on the chancesof fortune in the discovery of any future plotsagainst him. He determined, with a readingOF MIND. 69ness and a boldness far beyond ordinary experience,to identify his followers with his ownfate, and to cut off all means of retreat andof return to Spain. He determined to sacrificethe whole of his fleet, leaving nothingto the choice of his comrades, but success orinevitable destruction. To a few of the mostfaithful of his friends he communicated hisplans ; the sailors were won over by presents andpromises to declare that the ships were nolonger sea worthy; the soldiers were inducedto believe, that the accession of the seamento their body would be a most important andvaluable addition to their forces. Cortesenergetic purpose carried him through hisbold design. The vessels were dismantledand sunk, and he now stood at the head ofhis band, with nothing before him but conquestor a grave, and he succeeded.''^Very wells said Mr Howard ; *■' bravely70 MINOR MORALS.told ; but it is not very likely any of us shouldhave an opportunity of showing presence ofmind on so grand an occasion. But occasionsare of frequent occurrence. I know a lady wellandyou know her — whose infant child had toundergo a dangerous and most painful operation.It was the removal of a great portion of thebaby's cheek, and she knew that her presencewould comfort the child as far as it could becomforted, and determined so to master hersympathies as to be most useful. Yet she wasremarkable for tenderness towards her children,and would not for the world have inflicted onthem a needless pain. I remember well thatthe surgeon looked at her with some surprise,but his doubts as to the propriety of herpresence were removed by the calmness andfirmness with which she insisted. She held thebabe during the operation, and if any thingwould have assuaged his terrors, or lightened hisPRESENCE OP MIND. 7lsufferings it would have been his motherswatchfulness and care. I am sure that at thecost of some present pain she purchased a storeof future pleasure for herself, and futuregratitude from her boy ; and that, as I have oftentold you is the arithmetic of virtue whichincreases happiness always ; or at leastdiminishes suffering.In very early life, I have seen presence ofmind exhibited, — usefully and thoughtfullyexhibited. I was once travelling in the mailcoach with a little boy, a very little boy, for acompanion, and, when we were getting into thevehicle, he asked me what would happen if wewere overturned. I told him that what wouldhappen I did not know ; perhaps we should getour bones broken ; but, at all events, the wayto run the least risk was to be calm and quiet,and to sit as firmly as possible in the seat. Itdid so chance that the mail was overturned : my72 MINOR MORALS.little man was as grave and as steady as aphilosopher, and when I had dragged him outof the window and set him upon his legs , hesaid, very solemnly — ^ Papa ! I have severalbones broken — but, happily, though severalpassengers were seriously bruised and injured,no mischief whatever befell the little thoughtfulboy.^' And now I think we have had examplesenough, both among the little and the great, ofthe virtue of presence of mind ; and you willnot forget that its value depends wholly on thegood which is done, or the suffering that isprevented by it. But as nobody knows whenthe opportunities for exercising it may happen,and as those opportunities may be of thegreatest importance, endeavor to form the habitof self-control. Be ready to do promptly whatis best to be done. In the calm hour when nointerruptions break in upon the thoughts, fancyPRESENCE OF MIND. '73circumstances that require a speedy decisionfrom you : if you hear of mistakes, or vexationsfrom the want of presence of mind in others,employ your own mind in thinking, how soitwould have prevented them. Make the errorsof others useful as beacons to warn you away,make their wisdom useful as magnets toattract and guide you/^HUMANITY TO ANIMALS.In the evenings Mr Howard was reading Shakspeareto the assembled circle ; and when hecame to that celebrated passage —And the poor beetle that we tread upon,In corporal suffering feels a pang as greatAs when a giant dies — 'Is that true papa V^ interrupted Arthur./^ Nos indeed answered Mr Howard puttingdown the book. ^' It is poetry and not truth ;it is the exaggeration of a benevolent feelingsstrongly and beautifully put ; but it will notbear a very close examination. "What, howeverought not to be forgotten isj that insects,however small and seemingly contemptible,have feelings both of pain and pleasure, andHUMANITY TO ANIMALS. 7^those feelings ought not to be thoughtlesslywounded ; —I would not number on my list of friendsWho heedlessly sets foot upon a worm ;'for though the worm's enjoyments and sufferingsmay be small compared to those of humanbeings , they are enjoyments they are sufferings,and, therefore, are very worthy of ourregard. To increase those enjoyments isvirtue ; to diminish them is vice : to lessenthose sufferings is virtue,, and it is vice toaugment them.Some people think of humanity to animalsas a sort of condescending virtue, for whichthe animals ought to be very much obliged.It is, however, to be judged of by the samerule as every other virtue, and depends uponthe pains and pleasures to which animals aresubject, and of which they are susceptible.Could they feel as much as human beings, they76 MINOR MORALS.would be intitled to just the same quantity ofour benevolence. They administer to our pleasuresand thus they have a hold upon ourgood will. Many of them can make a gratefulreturn for our kindness to them, and so againwe have a motive for using them kindly ; andwe may add to their happiness, and, as far aswe can do so, we exercise benevolence. Aman who treats the animals that depend uponhim with unnecessary harshness or cruelty, isa very bad moralist in practice. Thousandsof persons, especially among the poor, whocannot do much for the increase of the happinessof mankind, have beasts of burthen, orother animals, subjected to them, whose livesthey may make wretched by their severity,or comfortable by their friendly acts. In half-civilizedlife it often happens, that more ofbenevolence is exhibited to the brute creationthan among us. The affection of an Arab forHUMANITY TO ANIMALS. 77his horse has been often spoken of with admiration.He is his masters companion, hisprides and his best possession. His master'sfirst concern is to provide for his waits totake care of his health, to keep him clean, andto caparison him richly. A Laplander willtreat a rein deer almost like one of his family :give the useful animal his food even before hisown has been prepared, shelter him with kindnessalmost parental; and mourn over him whennecessity compels the sacrifice of his life as aneedful provision for a Lapland winter. Instancesof the mutual aflfectionbetween elephantsand their keepers have been again and againspoken of; and I confess that, in visiting thatstrange and gigantic animal the cameleopard,or giraffe, in the Garden of Plants, at Paris,I was nearly as much interested by the coal-blackNubian slave who waited upon him, asby the splendid creature himself. So attentive78 MINOR MORALS.did he seem to his charge ; so proud of itsmajesty — its docility — its beauty — its fame !He appeared to me a most important portionof the whole effect and created round the talland gentle creature a sort of natural anddomestic atmosphere. There was a realbrotherhood between them, and I thought, ifeither were to die, how lonely and desolate thesurvivor would be !'the greatest Philosopher of our days, — theman whose mind was beyond comparison themost exalted, and whose benevolent affections,the most expansive that I have ever beenprivileged to know, was himself a striking exampleof the powers of sympathy towards theanimal creation. He felt for all that hadfeeling, and was habitually showing, thoughnot intrusively, how much he felt. I haveknown the mice run up and down his legsas he was engaged in the profoundest studies ;HUMANITY TO ANIMALS. 7^making their way to a drawer under his desk,where he was accustomed to keep sundrycrumbs of bread; nor would he disturb, orallow them to be disturbed, till they got noisyand riotous, and then they were chased awayupon his own principle, that they annoyed himmore than they benefited themselves.There was a cat in the family who was avery important personage ; a stately, grave,reverend, and black-coated gentleman, who inthe latter part of his days, was advanced tohigh honors. His early history had been likethat of many of his race: he dwelt in thekitchen, but every now and then took predatoryexcursions into the garden, and came homequite unable to give a good, account of himself;in a word, it was generally thought he was nobetter than he should be ; but, as age came on,he grew steady and sober, and was often seenwith his eyes closed, engaged in deep mediusMINOR MORALS.nation, as if lie were recalling the events ofhis life and pondering over the errors of hisways. People said there were decided symptomsof reform ; and gradually he establishedsuch a reputation for steadiness and sobriety,that his master paid him marked attention.On one occasion, it was even reported that hewas observed giving moral lessons to some ofhis younger brethren, and reproving theirflighty and irregular habits. At last he becameso undoubtedly sage and prudent that he wasinstalled in ecclesiastical dignity, and calledthe Rev. John Blackman. Nothing couldexceed the propriety of his deportment — hisstep was solemn — and his every motion that ofa thoughtful philosopher. Having establishedhis claims to advancement, the diploma ofDoctor of Divinity was conferred upon him,and the Rev. Dr Blackman was introducedwith due solemnity to the guests who visitedHUMANITY TO ANIMALS. 81the Philosopher's hermitage. It was a goodly-sightto see with how much humility andgravity the Doctor bore his accumulateddignities. His merits were indeed so strikingand undoubted that it was thought he woulddo honour to the episcopacy, and there wasa serious intention of conferring on him abishop's rank. But he did not live to receivethis new mark of distinction from the stateauthorities : he died during the discussion , fullof years and was buried amidst the real regretsand respectful remembrances of all who hadhad the privilege of his acquaintance.^' Animals by no means occupy that place inour affection and our regards to which they areintitled. We hardly know how much theymight learn, if they were properly taught.They are far more improbable beings thanwe generally suppose them to be: and theywould, many of them, become apt and intelli-G82 MINOR MORALS.gent scholars, if trouble were taken to instructthem. Those which add most to man's enjoyments,and therefore obtain most of his attention,show great docility ; and by care andkindness, sometimes mingled with discipline,■ — for animals must be dealt with like men orchildren, and taught to refrain, or to act, bymeans of hopes and fears, of rewards andpunishments : those, I said, which man employsto do him services, have their characters mouldedby education. The racer and the courser, thesaddle, carriage, or dray horse, have each receivedinstruction fitted for the business inwhich they are to be engaged. The sheepdog,the coach-dog, and the house-dog — thesetter, pointer, spaniel, and terrier have allhad their natural qualities developed and improvedby education. You have heard, thatthere are people among the Hindoo, who trainthe most venomous serpents to prompt andHUMANITY TO ANIMALS. 83perfect obedience, and exercise over them anauthority which would hardly be credited, ifit were not told us on undoubted testimony.We have seen with our eyes, on Waterloobridge, a variety of animals in the same cage,all living together in perfect harmony, whosenatural instincts would appear to lead them toprey upon one another. I know not by whathappy art all the unfriendly propensities weregot rid of, and the friendly affections planted intheir stead ; but it was certainly the work ofeducation. In that abode of peace, and goodwill,the mouse might have been seen takingshelter under the hawk's wing, or seatedsportingly upon the back of the cat. Pussnever quarrelled with, his neighbor pug : andpug took care not to fright the linnets andthe goldfinches that sometimes hid their beaksin his rough coat, perched upon his tail, orfluttered about his ears. All these creatures84 MINOR MORALS.had been made moral by a judicious master ;and it is very likely tliat^ with a little trouble,we might make many a naughty little animalwell-behaved and virtuous.^^ I saw once, on the Boulevards at Paris, a,whole troop of little birds, (of many species,)taught to obey the order of their keeper. Theyplayed all sorts of antics ; and I could not fancythat they were not in some way tied, so thattheir master could guide their motions ; but no !they were all free, and they flew away , andreturned as they were bidden. They wouldclimb a ladder, walk or run, at command, — therewas one that shouldered a musket, and another,I think, professed to play on a fiddle : at agiven word they all lay down like dead .creatures,side by side, and at another they arose.All this was education; all this shows howmuch little birds were able to learn.'^ In the South of Europe, children frequentlyHUMANITY TO ANIMALS. 85tame lizards, play with them, and nurse themin their sleeves and their bosoms."^ I love the child that loves animals. Sometimeago, when I was on the banks of theGaronne, a little French boy ran to me with atumbler turned upside down on a plate, wherethere was some water and some fresh leaves,saying — ^ See what a pretty thing I have got totell me what the weather will be '/ It was avery small frog with a back as green asemeralds, a belly as yellow as gold, and eyesas bright as diamonds. ' I keep him heressaid the little boy ; ' and when it is going to bebad weather, he goes and hides himself in thewater under the leaves ; and. when it is goingto be fine, he comes out and clambers to thetop of the glass, and then I know I can go andplay in the fields ^'"Had the little boy taught him to do sospapa V^ inquired Edith.86 MINOR MORALS.No , my love, there is an almost universalinstinct among animals, by wliicli they areenabled to anticipate the changes of the seasons,and it enables them to make provision for thesechanges ; but I have heard of frogs that camewhen they were called : and I have heard ofchildren who had need to be taught even that.Now, what say you, young people, shallwe open a school for animals VOh, yes ! yes !" they all cried out together.Well, then,^^ said Mr Howard ; ^^ each oneshall choose a pupil, and tell us how it is to bebrought up.'^"Oh, V said Edith, "I will have a prettywhite mouse — such as I have seen the Savoyardboys showing about, with rose-colored eyes, andears and tail so transparent that you can almostsee through them ; and I will teach it to threadmy needles, and to do my errands : and it shallsit by the side of my plate at dinner, and onHUMANITY TO ANIMALS. S7my lap in the evenings when you, papa, aretelling us your pretty stories; and I will teachit to wake me in the morning, and it shall gowith me to my dancing lessons, and, then, whenI am alone, I can dance a duet with it."Upon which a loud laugh from all the reststopped the talkative little girl, and Georgesaid — ''^Oh, Edith, you began with a mouseand end with a hulL But now, what doesArthur say ?''"I should likes said Arthur, '^a lion'scub : for what a fine thing it would be to teachit, and to tame it, and, when it became a fullgrownlion, what a pride to be accompaniedby such a noble creature, and to go into thewoods to hunt with it !'^^^I am afraid," said Mr Howard, "thatArthur's first experiment is somewhat toodaring, and that he would be very soon desirousof changing his lion for a more docile pupil's88 MINOR MORALS.^' I should like papa I think' said George,^^ to try what I could do with a good-naturedhare : and then I would turn to account theexperience of the poet Cowper, who certainlydid manage to get the friendship of one hare,at least : and to get a friend, papa, is worth alittle trouble'"Now, suppose you were each of you lefton an uninhabited island, and were to chooseone animal for your companion, what shouldit be''^' A lamb for me'' said Edith; ^^that wouldbe the best companion, for it is never in apassion. We could enjoy ourselves togetherin the fields by day, and it would keep mewarm at night, and its wool would be so useful :and it would not be coaxed away to leave meby any wild creatures''I think I should choose," said Arthur, ^^ awell-trained falcon, for he would go forth andHUMANITY TO ANIMALS. 89catch me food, and find food for himself withoutany anxiety for me : and he might decoy othercreatures ; and there is something so cheerfulin the flight of a bird, that it would keep upmy spirits in solitude."'^ I/^ said George " hardly know what tofix upon ; but I vote for the llama of the Andes,which is strong enough to carry burthens,which would give me milk and wool, which Ishould learn to weave into garments. — Andwhat does mamma say?^^'' Mamma says,^^ Mrs Howard answered,that sie should prefer a dog for a companion ;because she knows more about its good qualities,and its docility, and its patience, and itscourage. A biography of dogs, and of theirvirtuous deeds, would fill many volumes. Theylive in all climates : and of all the companionsof man are the most attached and faithful. Idon't think I should dismiss mv old favorite for90 MINOR MORALS.the sake of a stranger, of whose excellencies Ishould not feel quite so sure.^^'^ Amen !" said Mr Howard : '' and now,children, away to your dreams'They went: and before sleep, George, Arthur,and Edith said to themselves, and to oneanother, that they had never liked animals sowell before, and never thought of all the usesthat might be made of them.Veracity.The Next day they all met at the breakfast-table,and the subject they talked about wastruth. George and Edith had a strong senseof its value but Arthur, now and then notbecause he meant to prevaricate or utter falsehood,but generally from mere precipitancyand carelessness, was used to speak with inaccuracyabout matters ; so it frequently happenedthat he underwent those cross-questioningswhich nobody ever thought of employing withEdith or George. If George erred, it wasby too much reserve ; while the error of Arthurwas on the side of inconsiderateness. LittleEdith was all ingenuousness and prattle; shenever thought of concealing anything, and the92 ^ MINOE MORALS.idea of misrepresentation never entered hermind. In fact, Mr and Mrs Howard wereso desirous of establishing habits of veracityamongst their children, that no known misstatementhad ever gone unpunished, and thefrank avowal even of a fault was sure to beaccepted as a peace-offering for half its ordinarypenalties.What led to the conversation was this :Mr Howard had inquired of George whatlessons they had to prepare for school, andGeorge answered, " Our Greek exercise, ourLatin verses, and our three problems in Euclid,papas' — '^ And are you ready ?^' — ^'^Yes,^^ repliedhe. Upon which Mr Howard said, Iwill hear you your Latin verses, and trust toyour word for the rest ; and George, repeatedthem perfectly well. Mr Howard soon aftermet Arthur, and, not telling him that he hadseen George, he asked him what were hisVERACITY. 93tasks for the clay. — Arthur hesitated, andsaid , " Latin verses and Euclid ;^^ for , in truth,he had not learnt his Greek lesson and wasafraid his father would inquire about it, andreprove him for his negligence. Upon whichhis father looked him full in the face, andsaid, '' Arthur, is that all ?" And Arthur'scheeks became red and fiery -, he felt he hadmeant to conceal a part of the truth, and bitterwere the self-reproaches he felt. His papaadmonished him, in gentle terms : — ■" Arthur,you have given yourself much pain, you havegiven me much pain; I trust what you sufferand I suffer will be enough to prevent youfrom giving way again to this sad infirmityof yours. '^Truth, then, was the breakfast-table topic,but Mr Howard made no reference whateverto Arthur s fault, hoping and believing thathe had suffered enough for present correction ;94 MINOR MORALS.and the art of punishment is to inflict no moremisery than is necessary to produce reformation.Arthur had suffered humiliation. His papawished to spare him the additional humiliationof having his weakness exposed to his mamma,his brother, and his sister. It would havegrieved all of them and Mr Howard wouldnot grieve them needlessly. It would havebeen as cruel for him to inflict useless sorrowto help a moral cure, as for the surgicaloperator to make an unnecessary incision inthe limbs of the patient he was endeavoringto heal.But Mr Howard thought the opportunityshould not be lost of enforcing the importanceof veracity. He read from the newspaper theaccount of the cross-examination of a prevaricatingwitness. ^' How sad it is,'^ he re-marked ^^that the solemnity and importanceof a judicial proceeding are not a sufficientVERACITY. 95security for the utterance of truth ! Now,George, tell me what you think of a storyI will relate to you.A well-known Portuguese courtier, DomDuarte Pereyra, being called upon to state hisage in a court of justice, swore he was fortyyears old. Ten years afterwards, in the samecourt and before the same judge, he againswore that his age was forty ; and when thejudge recalled to his mind that he had madethe same statement ten years before he answered— '^ Please your Highness, you cannothave a better proof of my veracity, for T alwayssay the same thing'' -"'' Indeed, papa, it seems an occasion veryill chosen for a display of wit and levity, atthe expense of truth. If the auditory laughedat the joke, they could have little respect forthe joker''true, George; and if Pereyra had not96 MINOR MORALS.been a courtier and a powerful man , theprobability is be would have been severelypunished for contempt of the courtsThere is a proverbs said George — " thattruth is not to be spoken at all times. Canyou give us some rules,, papa, by which wemay know when truth is to be spoken, andwhen not T^^'^The proverb you have quoted may bemade a mischievous one j it has a bad and agood meaning. Its bad meaning is, that falsehoodmay sometimes be spoken; its goodmeaning is, that it is not always incumbenton us to speak at all. The general rule is,that whatever is spoken should be true ; butit is not all truth that is useful. Useful truthsshould be spoken ; pernicious truths should besuppressed. You might annoy everybody youmeet by the utterance of truth ; but its beingtruth would be no justification. Truth, likeVERACITY. 97everything else, is a means to an end, andany one might make himself as vexatious bythe utterance of ill-timed truths, as by theutterance of the boldest falsehoods. I knewa man whose pride it was to tell people whathe called * the truth .^ That man was an absolutenuisance, and avoided by everybody.He scarcely ever opened his lips but to makeothers unhappy, and he thought this habitvery frank and meritorious. He would nothave told a lie for the world, but he producedmore unhappiness than many a liar. He wasalways on the look-out for occasions to saytrue and disagreeable things, the more truethe more disagreeable ; and he flattered himselfwith the thought that he was a fine exampleof moral courage aud virtue.'Tar different was the conduct of a trulybenevolent friend of mine. His rule, withvery rare exceptions, was, never to utter aH98 MINOR MORALS.word; never to do a deed which should givepain to another. If it were absolutely necessaryto say anything which caused pain , hemade the pain as little as possible by thegentleness and kindness of his manner. Heseldom uttered pain-giving truths; pain-givingfalsehoods never.'' Prudence and benevolence take veracityunder their care. To violate truth is to losereputation,, and this is imprudent. Wheneverby a violation of truths injury is done toothers, the virtue of benevolence is violated.No falsehood can be uttered without somemischief to the mind and the case whichwould justify falsehood by producing a resultof good is so rare that a man must be quitesure it will warrant the sacrifice of a portionof his reputation.There is no virtue which obtains for itspossessors a larger portion of good opinion inVERACITY. 99early life than the love of truth. Virtue mjchildren consists in the sacrifice of some presentenjoyment to a future greater good ; andtruth-telling often subjects us to great temporaryinconvenience, sometimes to considerablesuffering, which if we undergo for thesake of truth, is evidence of a virtuous disposition,and of a determination to acquire avirtuous habit.^'^ Three boys, John, Thomas and Henry,were playing in a field, and saw, withoutbeing perceived, a man who had been verykind to them, misuse and rob another man.They were not near enough to interfere, butthey were near enough to witness all thecircumstances of the case. The robber havingquitted his victim, passed close to theplace where the boys were, and at once discoveredthat they had been spectators of hiscrime, and that, perhaps, his life was in the100 MINOR MORALS.hands of those very boys whose benefactorhe had been. He was too much hurried tostop, but as he went on he said to the boys'you won betray me?' The man whohad been robbed having got assistance, therobber was arrested, and the three boys havingbeen found so near the scene of therobbery, were carried before the magistrateto be interrogated as to what they knew ofthe affair.'' They were separately examined. In John'smind the desire to save his friend and benefactormastered every other feeling. Hewould rather have told the truth, if he couldhave done so without danger to the robber,but while he was questioning his own mindas to what he ought to do, the robberswords rushed upon his thoughts — ' You willnot betray me — and he said to himself —^ No ! I will not betray you, come what willsVERACITY. 101Sos Then he was questioned, he denied allknowledge of the robbery — denied that hehad seen either the robber or the person robbed;and did this with a pertinacity, whichno doubt he thought heroic, and which wentfar in the mind of the magistrate to shakehis faith in the story of the robbed man."Thomas's struggle with himself was yetseverer. He could not determine to tell afalsehood, nor could he determine to giveevidence against his friend. He feared, too,in his anxiety not to appear a liar, on theone hand, or a ' betrayer' on the other, thathe might be caught in prevarication, or thathis statements might not be corroborated bythose of John and Henry. His first thoughtwas to escape and hide himself, but findingthis impossible, he feigned dumbness ; he preservedan obstinate silence, and nothing that102 MINOR MORALS.the magistrate was able to say could extorta word from him.Henry, too, had some difficulty in decidinghow to act, but the claims of truth,especially on so solemn an occasion, at lastgot the mastery. He weighed the consequencesas well as he was able, and hisconscience told him that his own honor, andthe good of society, ought* to outweigh theclaims of the robber upon his silence. Hestated the facts, simply, truly, though it wasobvious how much he suffered.^^ Tell me,^^ said Mr Howard, " which ofthe boys acted most meritoriously.^^ — They alldecided against John. George and Edith tookHenry's part, but Arthur seemed to thinkthat Thomas had, after all, behaved mostnobly, that he had not violated truth, andhad exhibited proper gratitude to his benefactor.VERACITY. 103^' No !" replied Mr Howard ; " the mischiefof falsehood may, on some occasions, be equallyproduced by insincerity in other shapes. Thedifference between John and Thomas wasmerely this : — that John was the more rashlyimprudent of the two. The claim of societyupon each of the boys, in a case where thejust laws of society had been so violently outraged,was stronger than any claim of gratitudecould be. In cases of doubt, decide infavor of veracity and sincerity ; for, as anancient writer has said of truth— ^ It enduresand is stronger than all things ^^PRAISE AND BLAME.As George and Arthur were returning homefrom school, they saw a crowd gathered rounda preacher, whose loud voice caused manypassengers to tarry and listen. He had madea pulpit of a chair, which he had borrowedat a neighboring house, and was exerting himselfviolently, in order to excite attention.Some persons stopped for curiosity, some outof respect for the preachers zeal, some tomake jokes, while others passed heedlesslyor scornfully by. George and Arthur fell inwith the crowd, and they were much struckby the variety of opinions they heard expressed.Gne person said — '^ He is very intemperate,but perhaps he is acting under a sensePRAISE AND BLAME. 105of religious duty' Another said — ^' Did youever see such an exhibition of fanaticism ?"while a poor woman whispered to a verysober-looking man, who was listening withgreat reverence and attention, — ^' He must beagood man to bear, with so much patience,the taunts of these worldly-minded sinnersThe preacher continued his discourseamidst all the annoyances and discouragementsaround. One person cried out — "Come down,old hypocrite ! from your preaching-tub /' — andhe was answered by another's reproof — '^ Howcan you be so profane V " The law ought tostop such superstitious frenzy' said one. — ■The law ought to protect him from suchimproper interruptions'' answered another. Allthis set the boys meditating on the differentjudgments formed of the same action, andthey told Mr Howard, when they came homehow much they had been entertained by the106 MINOR MORALS.dissimilarity of the opinions they had heard,and how much they were embarrassed by theopposing sentiments that had been expressed.'one of the most important lessons tolearn," said Mr. Howard, 'ais to judge ofthings apart from the language of praise orblame. There are three ways of speakingof every action of menes lives ; one in approval,one in disapproval, and one which conveysno opinion as to merit or demerit. Fewthings have done the world so much injuryas the custom of attaching words of reproach,or words of eulogy, to every thing said ordone by another. In this way, every eventbecomes distorted by prejudiced or passionatejudgment; the same act will be called, bydifferent persons, ' prudence ' economy,' ' parsimony,'or ' covetousness.' Another act will bedenominated by one man, ' desire of informationj' by another, ' inquisitiveness ;' by a third,PRAISE AND BLAME. 10?curiosity j' by a fourth, ' impertinence Whatone person calls laudable pride another willcall ' ostentation and a third ^ arrogance :^ sointhe case you have been mentioning, thepreachers conduct was subjected to every titlethat could be found for it, from piety and godlinesson the one side, to superstition, hypocrisy,and fanaticism on the other : the simple truthbeing only that he was preaching in the street :all the rest was the addition of despotic opinionssitting in judgment on his conduct.^' One of the great things then to learn is,to weigh the merit of an action apart from thephrases in which others speak of it. Theworst of actions are sometimes praised, the bestof actions are sometimes condemned. Accustomyourselves always to inquire into the consequencesof conduct, which you may study inthe pains and pleasures it produces ; never seekthe causes of conduct in motives which you108 MINOR MORALS.cannot discover, which nobody can discover : for,as Hudibras quaintly says : —Nature has made man's breast no windowsTo publish what he does within doors.'"All motives are the same in intention. Novoluntary action is done from any other thanfrom a desire to do it. A desire is created bythe presence, or the hope of pleasure, or bythe hope of escape from pain. A man robshis neighbor. He thinks he shall have morepleasure from the possession of the articles hesteals than he shall lose by the consequences ofthe robbery. Having the same opportunity,another man does not rob his neighbor.Why ? Because he would have less pleasurein robbing him than he has in refraining. Aman tells a lie. And wherefore ? , Becausehe thinks it is his interest to do so. Another,under the same circumstances tells the truth ;but solely because in his view of the case, itPRAISE AND BLAME. 109is his interest to tell the truth. The motive isthe same always. But the determination thatprompts to the virtuous action has made a wisecalculation of pleasure and the opposite determinationhas made a foolish calculation.'^''As you advance in life, you will often hearlanguage the effect of which, and often the intentionof which is, to conceal the true characterof actions. Intemperance will take the nameof ^ sociability or ' conviviality / 'antipathyof ' public spirit / 'maleficence of 'patriotismand wide-spreading mischief, of 'fame' andglory But, if you accustom yourselves to lookto the influence of actions upon human happiness,upon your own happiness and that ofothers, you never will be at a loss. No fictionsor fallacies will bewilder or betray you.Did you not observe, to-day, that thestrongest and most passionate language washeld by those who were most excited, and thus110 MINOR MORALS.the least able to judge? If there were anyin the crowd who looked on calmly, andexpressed their opinion quietly, I am sure youmust have thought them the most worthy ofbeing listened to. And so it is, and so it willever be in life. A serene state of mind is thebest fitted for honest judgment.Once, — it was a beautiful morning in spring,a light breeze rose from the depths of thewaters, and went wandering over the face ofthe earth. As it sped along a green andnarrow valley, the flowers were delighted withits approach, and welcomed it with a thousandgentle words. Violets perfumed it as it passed,cowslips danced in their family groups, daisiesand buttercups shook for very joy as the breezeglided over them. ^ Stays said they, ^ amongus, fair breeze of the morning, and gladden uswith your presence. Your gaiety makes usgay, and we all spring up at your comingsPRAISE AND BLAME. IllBut the breeze answered, ' I have a long journeybefore me I Avill visit you again someother day and away it hurried to the heathamong the ferns and the furzes. Great wastheir clamor when the breeze arrived. Thefurzes put forth all their thorns , and gave wayto the language of ill-humor and discontent.'What business have you here , in our territory,noisy and vulgar creature ? Why will you notrespect our golden ear-rings ? Who allowedyou to blow in our faces , and disarrange ourgreen garments ?^ And the ferns fluttered aboutin pride and vain glory, and said to thebreeze — ' Don't you see, you ill-bred adventurer,that you are treading on our toes, andshaking our treasures out of our pockets by yourcarelessness ?^ But the breeze assured the captiousinhabitants of the waste that it had onlycome to pay a visit of courtesy, with no intentionto offend : and away it hastened to a mountainsMINOR MORALS.stream every ripple of which kissed it as itpassed, and threw up living diamonds in honorof its coming. As it mounted the hill-side, itsaid, ' Good day!' to the echoes, and 'Good day'swas repeated back in cordial granulation. Thisgave notice to the forest that the breeze was athand, and great was the commotion with whichthey hailed its advent. It shouted loudly, as itglided through the trees : and the trees wavedtheir branches, and bowed their heads intriumph. Delighted with its excursion, thebreeze returned to the ocean, where it laiditself down to rest.^^ Do you see the moral of the fable, children?The breeze was not less kind, not less useful tothe rough ferns and prickly gorse, than tothe flowers of the valley and the trees of thewood j but they received its visit in a differentspirit. And so will it be in the world. Praiseand blame will not be apportioned according toPRAISE AND BLAME. 113the merit of actions, but according to thetempers of individuals. The virtuous are farmore willing to praise than to blame : they neverblame unnecessarily, and they delight to praise.Judge rightly, my children, wherever you can ;but always judge benevolently. You cannot besure that you will not fall into mistakes ; butyou may be sure that you will not fall into themistakes of malevolence, which are the worstof all.'^EMPLOYMENT OF TIME.I WILL give joxXy my children's said MrHoward, '' an account of a happy man : andwhat do you think was the principal cause ofhis happiness ? It was the wise employmentof his time. Time must be employed eitherin doing what is useful or what is not : for thetime that is not usefully is uselessly employed;and all the time employed uselessly is employedbadly. Did time ever hang heavy en yourhands ? If it did, you have much to learn inorder to be happy : for the wise man and thehappy man have no idle time. Time is thematerial out of which pleasure is made : and hewho makes most pleasures out of it is theman who employs it best.EMPLOYMENT OF TIME. 115'^ What are you thinking about, Arthur?"said Mr Howard , who observed that Arthur wasalmost bursting with a desire to speak.Nothing, papa," said Arthur. '^ Oh, yes !I was thinking that, if I had nothing to do butto look about for pleasures, I should be a veryhappy fellow."'^ Well, then, and how would you employyourself, Arthur ?"In the first place, I would have plenty ofholidays, and plenty of sport."^'And plenty of vexation, Arthur, from nothaving learnt as much as other boys of yourage."But I would buy myself all sorts of delicacies."And buy sickness and head-ashes withthem," said his father.So Arthur was a little abashed, and began toblush and said, " I was too hasty, papa ; and116 MINOR MORALS.before I run away after pleasures I will think 'a little more about it'And Edith said, ^^ I fancy T understand you,papa. Nobody can be happy unless he ispleased at something, but it is not every pleasurethat makes happiness."That is my meaning, love ! Happiness ismade up of pleasures ; but the best of pleasuresare those which do not bring any pain afterthem. It would be a bad bargain if you wereto borrow a penny to-day and have to pay ashilling tomorrow for the loan of it. Yet thatis exactly what people do who never think ofthe consequences of a pleasure. Do you recollect,when you were a little girl, how youate the twelfth cake in excess, and how yonsuffered for it— and took disagreeable medicine,—and felt so wretched, and made us all souncomfortable about you ? When you ate thecake, it was the pennyworth of pleasure, forEMPLOYMENT OF TIME. ll?which you were obliged to pay a shillingsworthof pain'*^I remember it well, papa: and I won'tmake so foolish a mistake against^' But I was going to show you how muchhappiness or how many pleasures rather, ofwhich happiness is made, depend upon thejudicious use of time. Time is our greattreasure and should be dealt with as a treasure :Part with it, as with money, sparing ; payNo moment but in purchase of its worth.'Except when you are suffering bodily or mentalpain, there is no moment that you may notmake useful or pleasurableBut tell us how, papa ?^ the children alldemanded.By employing it well. When you are nototherwise engaged, employ your time in happythoughts : everybody has time for thought ; andlis MINOR MORALS.as the mind is scarcely ever at rest, one greatsecret towards being happy is to have thethoughts occupied with pleasing objects. Plansfor acquiring knowledge — plans for givingknowledge to others — plans for innocent amusement—plans for doing good. You may not beable to execute all that you plan ; but yourthoughts, at all events, will be a source of muchpleasure to you*"The happy man that I was speaking toyou about, used to say — ^ There are two gatesinto the mind : through one misery enters, —through the other enjoyment. Keep the gateof misery shut— the gate of enjoyment open.Thoughts will come knocking at the gate wheremisery enters : do not let them in, if you canshut them out. When thoughts come, to thegate of enjoyment give them welcomesIn disposing of your time, and when youhave made the best of it in useful employment.EMPLOYMENT OF TIME. 119much will remain to be filled up. There areno engagements so constant as not to leaveunoccupied moments : and many engagementsmerely employ our hands or our feet withoutemploying our mind. Do not let painfulthoughts intrude upon such moments ; do notcall back the recollection of sufferings that arepassed ; do not indulge in vain regrets or uselessself-reproaches ; do not be fancying comingevils ; but instead of all these , crowd your mindwith thoughts of good : look out for what isbright and beautiful. Waste no time that youcan engage in the pursuit of some future comfort.Think of any way of relieving humanmisery : think of any way of increasing humanfelicity. You may do this in the moments thatwould otherwise be lost ; and nothing can bemore important to your happiness than thatyou should feel the value of that time which120 MINOR MORALS.slips away unemployed or at least unimprovedby those who have not learnt its importance.^^ ^ Take care of the moments and the hourswill take care of themselves You cannotemploy short periods wisely without the wiseemployment of long ones.'but my friends cares were not confinedalone to the encouragement of happy thoughtsin his own mind, or in the minds of others t hewas always occupied in some useful deed. Oneof his constant engagements was the spreadingthrough different parts of the world flowersfruit Sj plants and trees unknown before. Heintroduced into this country the sultana raisinfrom Turkey ; and of rarer fruits the hot-housesof his friends were crowded with specimenscollected by his care. When he had ascertainedthe habits of any useful vegetable greatwas the ardor with which he sought to spreadEMPLOYMENT OF TIME. 121the knowledge of it in the places where it waslikely to prosper. In this way it would not beeasy to calculate how much he added to humanenjoyment, nor the debt that future generationswill owe to his kind concern for his race. Hepreferred botany to all the other departments ofnatural philosophy, because its pleasures couldbe made so diffusive : and he valued plants ashevalued men — in proportion to the extent oftheir usefulness. ' You cannot he would say,multiply minerals, nor insects, nor animals, atwill : you cannot communicate to others thisspecies of your riches without self deprivation ;but of most vegetable productions you caneasily increase the number : you can enrichothers without impoverishing yourself Now,if you have time on your hands, only thinkin how many ways you may thus employ it inthe service of man !'another topics occupied his leisure hours.122 MINOR MORALS.He would think of human infirmities andhuman wants, and busy himself in alleviatingor removing them. The condition of themaniac, for example ; and he had correspondedwith many countries, in order to ascertain whatmeans had been found most efficient for coercionwithout violence, and with the smallestsuffering to the patient. He had thought ofvarious amusements and various employmentscompatible with the situation of the lunatic.So, for the blind, he had invented many pleasures: he had suggested several improvementswhich made instruction more easy and moreagreeable. For the deaf and dumb he hadalso shown a practical and useful sympathy,inventing many sources of happiness for them.He had thought of labors fitting for the lame,for the one-handed, and for the aged. ButI need not detail more. I have only mentionedthese as examples of what may be done withEMPLOYMENT OF TIME. 123time. I wish you to feel that with time everythingmay be done.And, while thus engaged in seeking solacefor human misery, do not think my friend wasunoccupied, in seeking to diminish the evilsof human crime. That pursuit, I may say,was the daily business of his life. He wasnot used to look upon a criminal with anyfeeling other than that of benevolence. Heknew how much poverty and ignorance hadto do with the offences which the laws proscribe.To punish, for the sake of punishment,for the sake of retaliation and revenge seemedto him folly and wickedness. His constantinquiry was, how the penalties of crime couldbe safely diminished; how the infliction of unnecessarypain could be avoided. He thoughtthe prisoner worthy of all the care and all theinstruction likely to amend him, and to relieve124 MINOR MORALS*society from the repetition of his offences.To employ the time of the prisoner hewould say, 'is of the most urgent necessity.If his mind be left unoccupied by you, it willbe occupied by himself — by his old thoughtsand habits. His mind cannot be long empty.He will fill it with bad projects, unless youfill it with better purposes and better prospects.Do this , and you will shut out as much evilas you can introduce of goods^^ In the same way, was he perpetually suggestingsomething which should diminish ignorance,and spread knowledge among thepeople. The child does not walk alone beforeits education is begun. Think how you canmake instruction pleasurable. What the elderhas' learnt, and found interesting, amusing,or instructive, let him communicate to theyounger; the younger to the younger still.EMPLOYMENT OF TIME. 125Every one, in turn, will thus be a teacher,and a teacher who will be loved and honored ;loved for kindness, honored for superiority.'^ Does this seem like a sermon, my children ?Never mind, I think you will find it worthyof your serious meditation, and I will giveyou a text out of which you shall make asermon for yourselves.Time can do wonders !' "LOVE OF FLOWERS.The next day, Edith said to her papa — '^ Praytell us something more about that good gentlemanwho was always employed in makingother people happy, papa ! Had he a gardenof his own, in which he cultivated the flowershe gave away so generously ?"'^ Yes, Edith, and a beautiful garden, too.It was the garden in which the great Miltonwalked ; and his house, overshadowed by alarge sycamore tree, still forms a part of thebuildings that inclose it. There is an inscription,scarcely visible through the leaves andbranches — 'Sacred to the Prince of PoetsHere it was that I listened to the instructionsLOVE OF FLOWERS, 127I am endeavoring to communicate to you; andhere I listened with a double reverence.*' We will talk of Milton some day or other.As yet you can hardly comprehend the venerationwith which I always think of himWhose voice was like the sea,Pure as the naked heavens, majestic, free ! 'And I think of him with a more profoundhomage when I remember the patience, thepiety, the greatness of mind he exhibited underthe taunts that insulted his blindness and hispoverty. ^ The Deity regards me he said,^ with more tenderness and compassion, in thatI am able to behold nothing but himself. * *The Divine Law not only shields me frominjury but almost renders me too sacred toattack; not indeed, so much from the privationof my sight as from the overshadowing of thoseheavenly winces which seem to have occasioned128 MINOR MORALS.this obscurity ; and which, when occasioned,he is wont to illuminate with an interior light,more precious and more pure It was herehe gave expression to ^ those deep and retiredthoughts which have winged their way throughthe world. In one of his works he introduces^a fair gardens and a gardener sowing allwholesome herbs and delightful flowers, accordingto every season — cutting his hedges,pruning his trees, looking to his tender slips,and plucking up the weeds that hindered theirgrowth '/ — ' laboring ever since the day-peepsand ' loving his own handy work'the love of flowers is intimately alliedto gentleness and virtue. How should aharsh and cruel spirit condescend to admireanything so humble and so beautiful as thosetransitory creatures that fade so soon aftertheir birth, that flatter no passions, assume noinfluence, do nothing but look charming, sendLOVE OF FLOWERS. 129forti perfumes, and die ? In many countriesflowers are associated with death , because theyare striking images of the transitoriness of life,and are so meek and lovely, and suited tothe melancholy thoughts of the grave. Oneof the sights that most struck me when I wasa boy, and travelling in Biscay, was the mannerin which the living children adorned, withsweet flowers, the bodies of the children thatwere about to be buried. They do not employacoffin for the corpse, but a few hours afterdeath it is laid out on a snow-white bier, andtheir the little hands of other children pileup nosegays of roses and lilies, and otherflowers, the fairest they can gather; so thatthe dead seems to sleep in a garden bower,and with many a wax-light, and many asolemn hymn, it is escorted to its narrowhouse'' One of the prettiest sights in Paris, andK130 MINOR MORALS.in the larger towns of France, is the Marcheaux Fleurs, the flower-market; and I knownot which is most attractive, the great varietyof plants and flowers, the taste with whichthey are exhibited, or the happy faces of thosewho come to admire or to purchase those richgems of the garden.^' There was a poor widow, the widow ofa soldier; her husband had long followed thefortunes of Napoleon, the renowned warrior,and had received from him that great objectof a Frenchman's ambition, the Cross of theLegion of Honor. He went with the grandarmy to the Russian campaign. No tidingswere ever heard of him, and it was supposedhe perished among the tens of thousands whodied in misery, and of whom no history tells.His poor wife was told of the ice and thesnow, and the freezing of the soldiers, andthe burning of towns, and the murders ofLOVE OF FLOWERS. 131the Cossacks. Lie heard that regiments hadperished, but of him, for whom she cared morethan for all the world besides, she could getno tidings. Yet she dared not think he haddied. She dreamed, and dreamed, and dreamedagain, that he had been preserved in the midstof the desolation. Often did he appear to herin her sleep, and often in the morning didshe say — perhaps he may come before theevening :^ but he came not. How should hecome ? He had been frozen to death on thesteppes of Russia.'^ So, by degrees, the soldiers widow beganto say to herself — ^ There is no hope. Never,never shall we meet again '/ She had onechild, whose name was Mathilde, and withher she was accustomed to talk of her father,and of the happy time when they lived together.The girl was eight years old, andrecollected little of her sire. She thought she132 MINOR MORALS.had seen some one in a smart blue dress,wearing a high cap, who used to smile uponher and kiss her ; but her remembrance wasindistinct, and she doubted whether she shouldknow him again were he to return. Yet sometimesshe had a faint memory of songs heused to sing, and she fancied that she shouldnever hear music so sweet till that voice againsounded in her ears. But now her mothertold her that she would not see the smile, orhear the song of her father, on which shewould drag a favorite wooden stool to hermother's, feet, and hide her face on her mother'slap, and sob aloud.'rebut what saddened her most of all was,that her mother seemed sick, sick at heart,and grew paler and paler, and every day shespoke fewer words, and those words she spokeseemed feebler to Mathilde. Her mother hadsupported them both by spinning flax, andLOVE OF FLOWERS. 133her distaff was in her hands from morningto night, and it was as much as she coulddo to support herself and Mathilde by herceaseless labor. INIathilde was already of someuse. She could go to the merchant and buythe flax, help to clean it, and when it wasspun, she could take it to the master-weaversfor sale ] but Mathilde had remarked, that forsome time the quantity which her mother spundiminished, and every week the little pittanceshe had to receive diminished too. She saidnothing to her mother, but thought, that forher mother's sake, she must make some effortto keep poverty away from the door.''^ Mathilde had often been to the Marcheaux Fleurs. She had watched the flower-sellers'€.•& they came to the market, and the flowerswhich were most readily disposed of. It waswhen camellias came into fashion ; and Mathildeobserved, that whenever one was offered at a134 MINOR MORALS.moderate price, a buyer was always found.And now said she, ' I think I can do somethingfor my mother and myself. I will traincamellias. I will bring them to the flower-market.If people will buy them of me Ishall be happy .^^' She had only a few sous, which had beengiven her at various times by the master weaverto whom she took her mother s flaxen thread,and who had been struck by the child's modestand amiable demeanor; but with these shewent to a nursery gardener, and said she shouldlike to buy some camellia plants, which shewished to rear till they grew into flower.The gardener was pleased with her appearance,and said — you shall have double the valueof the money you bring, and you shall repayme when you are abler He told her, too,how best to take care of the plants, when towater them, and in what temperature they bestLOVE OF FLOWERS. 135thrived. "With what delight did she convey-homethe pots in which her treasures were 1With what anxiety did she watch the growthof the flowers ! At last she saw them bud.One came forth like a carving of pure whitewax ; another, bright and glowing as a ruby.How her heart leaped as she carried them tothe Marche aux Fleurs ! She scarcely knewwhat price to set on them. A lady came,and inquired for how much she would sellthem. ' Twenty sous, madame said Mathilde,her cheeks blushing like the red camellia. ^ Itis far too little said the lady ; ' here are twofrancs, my child ! ' and, oh ! how her heartleaped as she danced homewards, to tell hermother how happy she had been, and to presentthe produce of her care. Her mothersmiled upon her; but Mathilde thought shehad never seen so sad a smile. Her motherwept; they were not tears of pain, but136 MINOR MORALS.Mathilde fancied her mother had never lookedso pale and wan.But Mathilde felt she must exert herselfthe more. She doubled her stock of camellias ;and when she went to the Marche aux Fleursher stand was remarked for the beauty andvariety of the specimens she brought. Hercourteous and attractive manners won her manya purchaser of her flowers; and those whobought once never failed to return again,and to recommend her to their friends andacquaintance.-' She would have been happy ; for her mothertoiled less at the spindle, and Mathilde wasable, from the profits of her little trade, tobring many comforts home ; but, day afterday , she perceived that her mother's voicegrew yet weaker ; her sight became dim ; andthe words of kindness which had every daybeen addressed to her when she came home.LOVE OF FLOWERS. 137were fewer and fewer till at last nothingwelcomed Mathilde but a grasp of the hand,and a kind look from eyes that had almostlost their light. Mathilde sought, and founda boy to take her flowers to market and gaveherself up to her sinking mother. She called inthe neighboring apothecary who told her thatno medical aid could save her mother, whoseframe was worn out, and who was now dyingin peace. In a few days she died, Mathildethrew the rarest of her camellias into the coffin,and planted over her grave, at Pere la Chaise,a specimen of singular beauty. Go there atthe hour of sunrise, and you will see herwatching the grave, or watering the beautifulflower. While Mathilde lives, people say itwill live; it will want no care, no kindness;and if it should die, she will replace it withanother."PERSEVERANCE.When you were showing us, papas saidGeorge, 'that a great many of the virtues,commonly so called, are not virtues unless theyare under the control of other virtues, I thoughtperseverance, too, might be sometimes a falsevirtue, — for that a man mihi persevere in doingwrong''that is most true, George, and I am gladthat you are learning how to distinguish betweenwhat are real virtues and what are not ;between what are virtues sometimes, and whatare virtues always. And as I remember twocases, one of vicious and another of virtuousperseverance, they will serve to explain whatis good and what is evil in persevering conduct.PERSEVERANCE. 139"A quarrel had taken place between twoclerks in a merchant's counting-house — Jonasand Jonathan. The quarrel was of little importancein itself, for it was merely as to thequantity of work that each had to do. Themerchant had given six letters to be copied :Jonas said that each should copy three; Jonathansaid that as they were not of the same length,one should copy four, and the other two. Theydisputed violently about it, and from wordscame to blows. Jonas beat Jonathan severely,and Jonathan vowed that he would be revenged.In this determination he persevered, and it wasa part of every dayes thoughts how he couldinjure Jonas.'' Jonas kept what is called the petty cash inthe merchant's counting house, that is, he wascharged with the payment of all the small sumsfor the ordinary expenses of the business, andwas settled with by the merchant every week.140 MINOR MORALS.on his producing the accounts and the vouchersfor payment when any receipts were given.Jonas was particularly careful to keep his documentsin order, and Jonathan, who knew Jonas'spride in having his cash-book right, determinedto do all that he could to embarrass and confusehim. Whenever Jonathan could lay his handsupon any voucher that Jonas wanted to showthat his payments were regular, Jonathantook the opportunity, when nobody was present,either to burn or otherwise destroy it.This made Jonas very miserable, who neverfancied that his companion could have beenso wicked ; but Jonas was bitterly distressed,when, on three following Saturdays, insteadof receiving the merchant's accustomed praise,he was reprimanded for negligence. Jonasprotested that he had been as careful as usual,but could not conceive how the documents haddisappeared. He determined, in future, toPERSEVERANCE. 141lock them iip^ instead of leaving them underthe leads of the desks,, as he had hitherto done.The next-week all Jonas^s^s accounts were ascorrect as usual, and all the vouchers in order,and his tranquillity returned.^' But it did not last long : for Jonathan,finding that he had not succeeded in his ill-naturedattempt, was resolved to injure Jonaseven more seriously ; and one day, when Jonashad gone to the Docks, and had by accidentleft the key in his desk, Jonathan took a five-poundnote out of the cash-box which Jonaskept there, and concealed it in another partof the desk. He did not dare to steal it ;he would have been afraid of detection ; buthe knew how much Jonas would suffer, andhe persevered in making him suffer.Jonas came home, and pat the keys inhis pocket ; he did not even recollect that hehad left them in the desk : but the next day,142 MINOR MORALS.when he opened his desk to count the moneyin the cash-box, a five-pound note was missing.This was, indeed a sad discovery ; he rackedhis brains to remember whether he had madeany payment that he had not entered. Heinquired of Jonathan whether he had seen himpay any money away. Jonathan professed tofeel for his distress , while, in fact, he wasrejoicing in it; and he was even much delighted(wicked lad !) when he heard the merchant,in his private room, severely reproachingJonas for his carelessness.'^ A few weeks after, Jonas having occasionto ransack his desk for some papers, foundthe five-pound note. It never occurred tohim that anybody could have been so spitefulas to hide it, in order to give him pain ; andhe supposed that he himself had, by accident,stowed it away with other papers. But hisjoy at finding it was even greater than hisPERSEVERANCE. 143distress at losing it. He ran to the merchant,and told him of his good fortune. The merchantrecommended more caution in future.Still Jonathan 'persevered in persecutingJonas ; and having been hitherto undetected,became bolder. It was Jonas^s^s duty to takethe letters to the post-ofSce. One day a letterof great importance, containing a bill of exchangefor a large amount, was missing. Themerchant had, as usual, intrusted the correspondenceto Jonas's care, and had left thecity for his country abode. Next day thefirst inquiry, when the merchant came, waswhether the letters had been despatched. Jonasburst into tears, and said that the letter withthe remittance was not to be found. ' What ?said the merchant, with extreme displeasure ;iliad letter missing ! ' And looking on theground, he saw the letter at Jonas's feet, wetand dirty, as if it had been trampled on.144 MINOR MORALS.This had been also Jonathan's doing. He hadconcealed the letter the night before. He hadflung it, unperceived — having himself troddenupon it — under Jonas^s^s desk.In this way many months passed. AllJonathan's conduct was the persevering annoyanceof Jonas, but he generally managed withso much cunning as to be undiscovered in hismalice; but things went on so ill, that themerchant dismissed them both,Years rolled by, in which they had littleintercourse with one another. Jonas and Jonathan,in the progress of time, became merchantsthemselves, but nothing could eradicate fromJonathan's mind the determination to injure,and, if possible, to ruin Jonas. And he atlast accomplished it, though his own ruin wasat hand. He undermined the credit of Jonasby persevering, indirect insinuations as to thestate of his affairs, by doubts and intends.Perseverance. 145and shrugs of the shoulder , by a succession ofunfounded reports, and malevolently expressedsuspicions,, Jonas's reputation as a merchantsuffered, and bankruptcy took place.Some of the statements by which Jonas hadbeen injured, were, however, traced to Jonathan;he was prosecuted for damages, convicted,and his own insolvency soon followed.But of perseverance — vicious perseverancehe was a striking example."It is not long ago, that I went to visitan interesting old man, who lives by the sideof the K-hone, at a short distance from Lyons,Have you ever heard of the Jacquard machine,one of the most ingenious of modern discoveries,by which the most complicated patternscan be woven with the same ease as theplainest ; a machine which enables an ordinaryweaver to produce all those many-coloredoriental shawls, fashionable silks, and varied146 MINOR MORALS.gated ribbons, which formerly required a dexterity,possessed only by a very few, and acontinuous labor that made them costly andinaccessible to any but the rich ? Now-a-dayssilk-stufFs, exquisitely tasteful and beautiful,can be purchased for a small sum of money,and are worn by hundreds of thousands ofthe classes whose garments were formerlymade of coarse wool or hemp. The old manI speak of, was Jacquard, and he was one ofthe great causes of this diffusion of enjoyment.As I happened to be near the place of hisabode, I determined to. visit him, and did so,accompanied by several friends.'^ It was a sunshiny day, I remember, andwe had a delightful walk along the marginof the rapid Pthone, a river renowned in history,and whose banks are still crowded withthe ruins of past time, calling to mind thedays when every feudal chief was obliged toPERSEVERANCE. 14?shut himself up in high and embattled towers,,built often upon dangerous crags, in orderto be secure from the attacks of some neighboringlord. The petty sovereigns andthe petty feuds have passed away together-everythingnow bears the face of security ;,of industry, of peace. Talking of the delightfulcontrast, and hoping that nations wouldone day harmonize, as the once contendingpeasantry of the Shone noir harmonize, wereached old Jacquard's abode.'^ He welcomed us with heartiness. ^ Butcome forth into my vineyards he said; letus get among the grapes and the sunshine 3'so he led the way with a tottering step.Hither hither,' he called out ; ' come withme to the arbor ¥/e followed him there.Let me sit in the centre, and let me tellyou how glad I am to see you, my friends ! ■*We sat down around him ; the clematis was148 MINOR MORALS.blended with the vine, and together theymade the roof and the walls of the quietretreat, where, every day, the venerable oldman was used to sit, and to recall the eventsof his much chequered life. Some of thoseevents you shall hear as he himself relatedthem, and you will see what perseverance,virtuous perseverance — is, and what virtuousperseverance can do.^^I told Jacquard that I was an Englishman,and as he had been one of the benefactorsof my country, I was come to thankhim. ' How proud I am,^ said he, ^ to bevisited by an Englishman. If I have everdone any good, I owe the very first suggestionto England. It was an English newspaperthat led me to occupy my thoughtswith mechanical improvements. But for that,perhaps, I should still have been a poor straw-hatmaker in an obscure street at Lyons,PERSEVERANCE. 149instead of the happy man you see me, honoredby my native town , recompensed by thegovernment (pointing to the red ribbon whichhe wore at his button-hole) and pensionedby the state.' 'But how I enquired 'didyou owe to England your first success ?' ^ Itwas he answered, during the peace ofAmiens, and we were accustomed to meet,in order to talk politics, at a friend's house, onthe quay. It was there a translated extractfrom an English newspaper met my eye,stating that a premium was offered by asociety in London, to any one who wouldapply machinery to the manufacture of nets.I meditated long upon the matter, and, aftermany attempts, I made a machine by whichnets could be produced. It was the first ofmy mechanical experiments, and I will tellyou, if you have the patience and the desireto hear me, how that trifling affair was the150 MINOR MORALS.beginning of my good fortune and my fameNothing; we assured him, could gratify usmore than to continue his history. ' Well,then said he, ' I contrived a machine andmade a net by it, and thought no more ofthe matter. I carried the net about in mypocket, and one day, meeting with a friendwho had heard the paragraph of the Englishpaper read, I threw it to him, saying, " Thereis the difficulty got over, and the net made ! '^And the matter passed out of my mind. Ihad persevered until I had succeeded, andthere was an end of it. Sometime afterwards,I was much surprised at getting an orderfrom the Prefect to appear at the Prefectpalace. I went, and the Prefect said he hadonly lately heard of my proficiency in the mechanicalarts. It was a great mystery to me ;I really did not comprehend his meaning,and I stammered out a sort of an apologyPERSEVERANCE. 151for not understanding him. My net and themachine that made it, had gone quite out ofmy head. The Prefect expressed surprise thatI should deny my own abilities, but at last heproduced the very net that I had made, andwhich to me had seemed a very trifling affair,as it was in reality. '^ I have orders from theEmperor to send the machine to Paris said thePrefect. ^^ From the Emperor ! That's strangeindeed; but you must give me time to makeit.-" So I set about it and in a few weeksI completed it, and trudged away with mymachine, and a half-manufactured net in it,to the Prefect. He was very impatient to seeit work, so I bid him count the number ofloops, and then strike the bar with his foot ;he did so, and another loop was added to thenumber. Great was the delight that he expressed,and he told me that no doubt I shouldhear from him again, I heard from him again,152 MINOR MORALS.in truth, very soon, and in a way that perplexedme not a little ; for his first greeting was — "Youmust go to Paris, M. Jacquard, by his Majesty'sorders' " To Paris, sir '. how can that be ?What have I done ? How can I leave my affairshere?" 'not only must you go to Paris, butyou must go to-day — you must go immediately !"These were not times in which there was anyresisting the orders of authority ; so I said, " Ifit must be so, it must ; I will go home andpack up my baggage, and I shall be ready toobey your commands' ^' No ! M. Jacquard !"said the Prefect, " you cannot go home ; a carriageis waiting to take you to Paris' " Notgo home ! Not say adieu to my wife ! Not makeupmy luggage for a journey of 150 leagues !"'^ I have orders," said the Prefect, " to dispatchyou instantly ; you may send to your wife ;you may tell her to give to my messengeranything you desire to take — I will providePERSEVERANCE. 153you with money 3 but there must be no delay'There was no arguing about the matter soI sent to my wife, got a small bundle of clothes ,jumped into the carriage and away ! away !we were off, full gallop towards Paris ! Whenwe reached the first station, I opened thedoor, and I found myself stopped by a gendarme,who said to me, ^^ Sir, if you please,you are not to go out of my sight /^ — I foundI was a prisoner, and escorted by militaryforce to the capital ; things were so managedat that time ; there was, however, no use incomplaining, so I made the best of my fate,and submitted in good humor.'^ ' I reached Paris for the first time in mylife, and strange was my introduction there.I was escorted to the Conservatory, and whomshould I see there but Napoleon and Carnot.Carnot said to me suddenly — ^''Are you theman that can do what Omnipotence cannot154 MINOR MORALS.do ? Can you tie a knot in a string on thestretch V' I was overwhelmed with, the presenceof the Emperor and the abruptness ofhis minister, and knew not what to answer.But Napoleon spoke very condescendingly tomeabout my discovery ; told me he wouldprotect me, and urged me to go on with mymechanical pursuits.^^ ' Materials were brought me, and I wasdirected to make a net-producing machine inthe Conservatory, which I did.^ At that time, a superb shawl was beingwoven for the Empress Josephine, and for itsproduction they were employing a very costlyand complicated loom ; a loom upon whichmore than twenty thousand francs had beenexpended. It appeared to me that the sameeffect might be produced by a less perplexingmachinery, and I recollected having seen amodel by Vaucauson, in which I thought aPERSEVERANCE. 155principle was developed-which I could applyto the desired purpose. Long thought andperseverance enabled me to produce the mechanismthat bears my name. When I hadsucceeded, the Emperor conferred this decorationupon me, and granted me a pensionof 1000 crowns.^^ ' But on returning to Lyons, far differentwas my destiny. When I endeavored to introducemy machine, the workmen broke outinto open revolt. I was everywhere denouncedas the enemy of the people, as the man whohad been scheming the destruction of theirtrade, and the starvation of themselves andtheir families. Three plots were laid to assassinateme, and twice I had great difficulty inescaping with my life. So strong was the tideof prejudice and indignation, that my machinewas ordered to be openly destroyed by thepublic authorities. It was broken to pieces156 MINOR MORALS.in the great square of the city. The ironwas sold for old iron ; the wood for fire-wood.Think what a shipwreck of all my hopes !'^ ^ I did not quite lose courage. The successfulcompetition of foreigners, and the consequentdecline of trade in France, led someintelligent manufacturers, a few years after,to. think of the man whose discovery might,perhaps, bring some relief to that depressionunder which they labored. They found strengthof mind to make another experiment. Itsucceeded. Silks of greater beauty were introduced,at a lower cost. There was a dawnof prosperity, and it has continued to shine.Of that machine which had been devoted toignominy and destruction, I have now seenthousands introduced, and there is now scarcelyany man so blind, or so ignorant, as not toacknowledge that its introduction has been agreat blessing. It has given labor to tens ofPERSEVERANCE. 157tliousauds^ and I have Lad a complete recompensefor all I have gone through'' We talked of these and other matters tillthe shades of coming twilight bid us depart.The happy old man is still in my memory ;a striking instance of virtuous perseverancecrowned with fit rewardsGOOD-nature.^^If good-nature is not a virtue it is at allevents a very agreeable companions said Arthurto George, as they were talking over the meritsand demerits of one of their school fellows.*^ Good-nature is called a virtue in mostbooks, I thinks answered George ; ^' and yetif nature gave a man the goodness, I do notquite see how it can be a virtue for which anymerit is due to him, — for a virtue, papa hasoften told us, is acquired by habit, and alwayssupposes that we make some sacrifice of presentpleasure. But we will talk about it to papaand mamma when we get homesAnd so they did ; and Mr Howard was muchgratified to find that his boys began nowGood-nature. 159habitually to discern the true characteristics ofvirtue ; for he knew that the practice of virtuewould be sure to follow the knowledge of it,^^ Good-natures' he said, ^' is indeed a mostattractive quality, but its title to the name ofvirtue depends, to a great extent, upon the constitutionalcharacter of the person who possessesit. It may be highly honorable to its owner,as where the influences of ill-nature have beensubduedjby severe and long-continued struggles.All the good-nature that is acquired is virtue —and very meritorious virtue too, — but its exhibitioncan only be in words or deeds of prudenceand benevolence. The result to human happinesswill be the same, whether prudence orgood-nature is the cause of right conduct ; yetthe merit of the same conduct may be verydifferent; for in one case there may be notemptation to do wrong, no disposition to misconduct,or ill-humor The disposition may160 MINOR MORALS.have been made so gentle by native temperamentas not to feel any desire to give pain. Inanother case the impulse may be to act amissand the stronger the impulse the greater willbe the virtue of conquering it. I think yourmamma can tell you a story in illustration ofwhat I say''^ I have known two little girls Grace andJulia' said Mrs Howard ; ^' the one was thegentlest creature that nature ever formed, evenfrom her earliest infancy, — the other as passionateand as untractable as a wolf's cub ; butby virtuous effort she at last subdued her naturaltemper, and as she grew older became one ofthe most amiable and delightful of women.They were not sisters, but companions, andI have often heard of Julia's rebellious disobedience,and of the plague she was to herfamily, to her governess, and her school-fellows.How it happened that Grace loved Julia so well, ♦Good-nature. 161I can scarcely tell ; for it seemed to me thatJulia was constantly acting the part of a tyrant,and exacting from Grace a thousand serviceswhich she had no right to expect. Julia hadher fits of generosity, and of affection, and theseperhaps had won over Grace, who bore withoutcomplaint and without reproach all Julia's ill-temper.Perhaps Grace knew more of Julia'sgood qualities than other people knew ; for ingeneral Julia was thought to be a very disagreeablegirl, whom nobody cared about 3 atall events, nobody cared about pleasing her.'^ On one occasion, Julia had been venting herill-humor, in the sitting-room, upon one of herjunior school-fellows. Something had put Juliaout of temper, which was very easily done, andso to gratify her spitefulness, she tried to snatcha book out of the hands of the younger girl,who, not surrendering it at once, was violentlypushed away, and fell on her forehead, whichM162 MINOR MORALS.was much bruised by the fall. The governessheard Julia scolding, and fancying that, asusual, she was playing the despot, came intothe room. Instead of apologising and expressingregret, Julia spoke impertinently toher mistress, and ran into the school-room,where she slapped the door, and locked it onthe inside, in absolute defiance. She not onlydid this, but she put the poker in the fire, andsaid to herself in the midst of her passion,'•liuonH be punished The governess cameto the door, and required Julia to open it ; sherefused at first, but being apprehensive the doormight be forced, she at last opened it, ran to thefire, drew out the red hot poker, which shebrandished, and told the governess to comenear her if she dared. You may fancy whatan effect such daring insubordination as thishad upon the governess. She left the schoolroomand Julia there, to reflect a little uponGood-nature. 163her violent and unladylike conduct ; and soondid Julianss conscience smite her, and she was aswretched as contrition and self-condemnationcould make her. She was severely punishedby exclusion from that school-room where hermisbehaviour had been so outrageous and intruth the school-girls were not sorry she waskept away. They loved their governess, andwere indignant at the manner in which Juliahad behaved towards her. They loved thelittle girl whom Julia had treated so unkindly,and when the time was expired during whichshe was banished from the school-room, theyfelt no willingness to make any advances, orto say or do anything that should alleviateJulia's suffering.Not so, however, Grace. At the firstmoment which her governess allowed her, sheflew to Julianss room, whom she found in tears,Grace wiped the tears away from her cheeks.r,164 MINOR MORALS.and they only streamed the more. Grace couldnot utter a word ^ but smiled ; and Julia sawthat her friend had been weeping too. Shefelt as if her stubbornness and ill-humor weremelting away from her mind; and, shakingGrace by the hand she said, ^ Oh, Grace !I will try — indeed I wills Grace kissed her,and led her to the school-room.It was a terrible struggle. Of all the girlsthere was not one that welcomed her. Shesaw some of them frowning, — others turnedaway from her, — several engaged in conversation,that they might appear not to noticeher. Julianss heart felt heavy. Twice or thriceshe was about to give way to her pride, andto say aloud that she did not care for one ofthem ; but, in the midst of her perturbation,the little girl whose book she had snatchedaway, came running to her, and said kindly,^I am glad to see you here again;' andGood-nature. 165Julia exclaimed « Have you pardoned me ? 'in a tone so novel and so imploring, thatmany of the girls were moved to pity. ' Oh, yes !yes V said the little girl ; ' I have thoughtabout you twenty and twenty times, and oftenhave Grace and I talked about you. I amsure we shall be friendsFrom that moment the seeds of self-controlbegan to spring up in Julia's mind. Everydaysome little conquest was made ; and howGrace rejoiced to find her friend graduallybecome all that she wished her to be ! ToGrace, Julia confided all her anxieties. Oftenand often, when she really meant to do right,when she was striving to obtain the masteryover her ill-humor, she was misunderstood;she did not get credit even for her resolutions,and for her exertions. She had been so longan object of dislike, that scarcely anybodywas willing to give her any further trial. She166 MINOR MORALS.had been judged so often and so often condemnedthat her companions were unwillingto think she could ever be worthy of theirregard. She had thus not only the difficultyof subduing her own vicious tendencies, butwhat appeared to her a greater difficulty, namely,to remove the prejudices against her whichexisted in the minds of others.^^ She was not without encouragement, however: for Grace, who always felt a remarkablepartiality for her — a partiality which had beenproof even against all Julianss defects — a partialitywhich had forgiven so much unkindness,Grace, I say, had become attached to Julia,with extraordinary affection. It is true, thatJulia had not been all that Grace fanciedshe should have liked in the friend of herbosom, but she now found her constantlyattempting to become a model of goodness;and, as Grace was disposed to do her moreGood-nature, IS?than justice,, towards Grace all Julia's virtueswere exhibited, because they were so muchappreciated, so kindly welcomed. And Gracewas Julia's perpetual advocate ; a favorite herself,she gradually insinuated her favorite intothe favor of others. The friendship betweenGrace and Julia seemed, if that were possible,to strengthen every day. Julia felt no smallportion of gratitude, mingled with her love ;for on no occasion had Grace forsaken her;in the perilous moment, in that crisis whenit seemed doubtful whether right or wrongwould have been her choice, it was Gracewho determined that the balance should inclineto the side of virtue ; and in the mind of Gracegentle and good as she was — there was,perhaps, a small portion of pride in that shehad been able to influence the self-willed Julia,and to make her so kind and amiable as shewas now become.168 MINOR MORALS.^^ Grace and Julia are grown to womanhood ;and it would not be easy to say which ofthem is the happier, or which the better. Eachis at the head of a family; each the objectof the most affectionate attachment from allaround them. Their mutual friendship hasnever subsided, never slackened; and it seemsas if it would descend to their children. Virtuouseffort has done for Julia everything thatnatural gentleness did for Grace. If you wereto speak to Grace of her own amiable temper,she would say that she had no merit at all ;for that she was born without violent passions,and deserved no credit for resisting what wasnever a temptation ; but she would break outin eloquent praises of Julia, and tell you thatyou might there study a specimen of virtue ;that you might there see the might of goodresolutions ; that you might there learn how aperfect character was to be formed in spite ofGood-nature. 169all the tendencies and trials of an infirmnature. Ask Julia how she managed to triumphover her infirmity. She will assure you themerit was not hers ; she will attribute all toGrace's gentleness and kindness. Both Graceand Julia, my children ! are objects fit forimitation. Grace vias virtuous — Juliatined to be linked together. These twentieswere registered, and seated on the ground inaline. A heavy chain was laid along, towhich twenty shorter chains were attached,and at the end of each of these was an ironcollar. Among the convicts was one whosedemeanor was wholly different from that of therest. He uttered no curses, he ventured uponno jokes, he said nothing to encourage or toinsult the timid, nothing to approve the brave.His appearance betokened him to have been aMERCY. 189soldier; there was an outward calmness undersuffering which was obviously endeavoring tosubdue the most cruel inward agony. Yet theexpression was such as makes an irresistibleclaim to attention. I for one, could not butinquire into his history. I did so of some ofthe turnkeys.'^ His history they knew not. All theyknew was, that his conduct in prison hadbeen most exemplary. Whatever the crimehad been for which he had been punished;they had seen nothing that looked like crime.He was docile, industrious, but most wretched.He had been well educated they were sure;he was superior in every respect to thosearound him. Their contamination had lefthim untouched. In fact, the keepers had representedhis meritorious conduct, in the hopethat his punishment might be commuted. Theyknew not why their representations had no1:90 MINOR MORALS.effect for generally, attention was paid tothem when the Commissaries of the prisonreported to the Minister of Justice instanceslike this.*^ I made my way to the convict : he wassitting in tears on the stone bench, where theparty who were to compose the chains wereseated in order before they were led out tothe middle of the yard to have the ironcollars ri wetted round their necks. On oneside was a criminal who was scoffing at whathe called his ^ hare-heartiness ;' on the otherside another was exciting him to be ^ a man.'Of his companions, there was one, only oneI observed, who looked on him with commiseration.From the rest, obloquy, insult,mockery, brutality, was his portion. ' Tellme something of your history, my friends Isaid to him. — ^ O, sir ! I would bear anythingbut this. I was born at Dijon j I belong toMERCY. 191a respectable family there. My parents, mybrothers and sisters are living there, and weareto be marched through Dijon ! O, sir !death were far better than this V — ' But whathas been your offence ?^— ^ I was a conscript ;I became intoxicated; I incurred a debt ofthirty sous at a cabaret ; in my senseless passionI refused to pay the landlord; I eveninsulted him : a report was made to the Ministerof War ; he ordered me to be deliveredover to the civil tribunal, with the expressionof a desire that, for the preservation of thediscipline of the army, my punishment shouldbe most severe. And so indeed it is.^ — Myfriend and I could not resist the desire totalk to the commissary of the prison, chargedwith the dispatch of the galley-slaves, aboutthe unfortunate young convict. The commissary• told us, that he himself had beeninterested about him, and had done all that192 MINOR MORALS,depended upon Mm to obtain some commutationof his sentence, but it had been impossible.Irregularities at the small wine-houseshad increased of late among the troops, andthere was a stern determination of the Ministerto visit them with exemplary punishment.While we were discussing the matter, theckaine were escorted to the rivetting place.One after another we saw the iron collarsfixed, the anvil was removed from convict toconvict by the assistants, and the executionerwith his sledge hammer rivetted the bolt. Itwould be too painful for me to describe, it ismiserably painful to recollect, how the frameof the convict was shaken, what suffering waspourtrayed in the countenance, while theiron cravat (as they called it in their levity,,was fixed round their necks. We saw themreach the young convict; whether a gleamof hope had shone upon his mind that theMERCY. 193interest we had expressed for him mightlead to a reprieve, whether the earnestness ofour appeals to the prison authorities which hehad witnessed afar oflP, was supposed by himto be exercised in his behalf, I know not, butI had seen his imploring looks, and now theanvil was fixed behind him, the iron collarwas passed over his head, and measured roundhis throat, he trembled like a broken twig.One heavy blow, another and another, andhis doom was sealed. He had hidden his facein his hands ; by and by, I. saw two streams oftears flowing down upon his breast.'^'^We did not relax in our efforts on hisbehalf, and strongly urged how extreme wasthe measure of punishment dealt out, for anoffence ordinarily visited by a very differentpenalty. We expressed our belief that mercywould be extended to the convict, were thefacts made known, that the first application of194 MINOR Morals,the severe regulations of the Minister hadfallen to the lot of one whom every circumstancerecommended to Lenient consideration.Our representations were seconded by severalother visitors who had been attracted by theirresistible impulse which prompts men to interferein cases of obvious harshness. At lastthe commissary appeared to give way — ' Willyou gentlemen, take upon you any of theresponsibility — sall the responsibility withwhich you can invest us. Will an applicationto yourself, signed by every one present,to defer— only to defer— the execution of thisyoung man^s sentence, be sufficient ? Will anengagement that the Minister, or the Kinghimself shall be spoken to tomorrow, tointerest their clemency ,• at least, to have thiscase reconsidered ?' — ^ Well then, so be it ; Iwill venture this muche — A document wasdrawn up hastily, and hastily signed. TheMERCY. 195chains was led out again. The anvil placederects the iron collar was broken, the youngman was led to a solitary bench. I dared notdescribe his agony when he was linked ashethought for ever, to degradation and despair.Shall I dare attempt to describe hispresent feelings ? Not I.The representations made were successful ;the case was thoroughly investigated ; circumstancesto mitigate the original offence cameout on a more rigid inquiry. The personalcharacter of the young man was discovered,except in this instance, to have been blameless.A slight punishment superseded that ofthe galleys, and merci assuredly never did amore honorable, or a more virtuous worksNOBILITY OF SKIN.^^I WAS dining once," said Mr Howard, inallusion to the discussion on West Indianslavery, which then occupied every bodiesthoughts, ^* at the table of a distinguished American,when I happened to mention the pleasureI had received from my intercourse with oneor two black men of Haiti, and the interestwith which I had read an ably-conducted controversyas to the best form of government,which had been carried on in that island duringthe war between King Henry and PresidentPotion, Curiosity was expressed to know,whether I had ever sat at table with Negroes,and when I averred that I had often done sooneportion of the company looked incredulity,and the other expressed surprise.NOBILITY OF SKIN. 197"And why not?^^ I answered. "Is an intelligentblack man less worthy of regard thanan intelligent white ?^^I could not hear it/^ said one of the ladiespresent. " Black people may do for servants,but it is a degradation to make them com-panions.^'So then ," I replied, "you have no objectionto use their services —-you will tolerate theirpresence while they labour for you, even toweariness— you will permit them to stand, butnot to sit down before you ?''"But you must allow, there is somethingnaturally disgusting about the African Blacks'said the boldest of the company. "In fact,they are a different race from ours, and havea disagreeable smell."The persecuted always smell disagreeablyto the persecutor," I said. " There are ahundred Catholic authors, who aver that Jews198 MINOR MORALS.and heretics stink by nature : and only a fewmonths ago a political writer endeavored toexcite the inhumanity of the people of Englandagainst the poor Bavarian girls who sell broomsin the street, by abusing them as ^ a stinkingrace Now , to me, the stench of persecutionis, of all stenches, the most offensively"^ But you cannot deny, that the African isreally a different animal from the European ;he has a skull of another shape ; the musclesof his legs are differently arrangedAnd suppose it were so ; does the highcheek bone of a Celt make him a fit objectof ill-usage from the round-checked Scandinavian?Or has the tall Biscay his hugelegs given him to kick his neighbors, theshort-legged inhabitants of the Landes ? Askany of them, whether their head ever aches,or their limbs get ever weary, and then talkwith disregard of their pleasures and theirNOBILITY OF SKIN. 199pains. If it be not benevolence to feel forwhat has feeling, I know not what benevolenceis/^It was in vain to reason ; it was in vainto give examples of virtues among the Africans ;to give examples of intelligence ; to quote booksthey had written, or pictures they had painted ;to mention instances of the display of all thequalities which we respect and honor amongthe whites. Prejudice is deaf, and will nothear. Pride is blind, and will not see. Butyou, my children, will listen to a story ortwo, such as I have gathered in my ownexperience.^^ A few years ago, a black African womanbrought me a letter from the Bishop of Blois.It was he who published a work on the literatureof the Africans, and who had collecteda considerable library of books, written by blackand woolly-haired men. He recommended200 MINOR Morals.the Negress to me as a woman thoroughlyinstructed, and whose tale could not but gratifyme. She came to me with a little boy, ofwhom she was the mother, and I will tellyou her history in her own words : —'' * I was born in a village not a great wayfrom the banks of the Congo river. My fatherwas a chief in the village. He had an enemywho was a chief in another village. I wasmy father's only child. I was seven years old.It was the spring time, and I went into thepease-garden, and was gathering some of thewhite flowers. My father's enemy kidnappedme. He beat me cruelly. He stopped mymouth, to prevent my crying from being heard.He carried me first to his own village, andthen to another village, and then to another.We travelled many days. I was very weary,but still we travelled. I was hungry andthirsty, but we always, always travelled. AtNOBILITY OF SKIN. 201last we came to a larger village than I hadever seen. And there he sold nee. He wentaway. But I saw another man give him somepieces of silver. I had heard of white peoplethat bought black people , and carried themover the great water, and used them verycruelly. And I thought that I was going tobe sold to the whites, and carried over thegreat water and used very cruelly too. Andso it was. But I was not alone. There weremore than twenty besides me. There was notone that spoke the language of my village,but there was one poor girl , a little olderthan I, who spoke something like me and Iunderstood her. She told me shocking things.I cried, and she cried too. Then the manwho had bought us flogged us both. He gaveus plenty of millet for food ; and the girl toldme it was that we might get fat and lookhealthy, and sell for more money to the wicked202 MINOR MORALS.white men. After some days we all weretied to one another. We walked and walked ;0, how tired we were ! At last from thetop of a hill we saw a river a wide river.On it was a great great boat, with many cordsand strings, and fine-colored flags that thewind was blowing about. I first thought itwas a comfort to see the river, for now, said1, our journey must end, and I felt as if Icould walk no farther. But, then, I thoughtagain, that the large boat must belong to thecruel white men, and was there to carry usover the great water. And I trembled. AndI said to my heart, ^ Never shall I see myfather ! never shall I see the village where Iwas born '/ We were led to the shore, andsoon there came several of the cruel whitemen to look at us. They pushed us fromone side to another ; turned us round : theywould not give the money that the blackNOBILITY OF SKIN. 203man asked. They made a great noise. Theylaughed aloud. It was a shocking laugh, whilewe were so wretched. I did not understand anythingthey said. The black man laughed too,and the white men laughed louder, and thechief of the white men shook a bag of silver,and there was another laugh ; and the blackmanheld up his ten fingers, and the whiteman shook his head, and he poured out thesever from his bag upon the sand. And hecalled more white men, who were his servants ;and they rolled four barrels out of the greatboat, and upon the four barrels they placedtwo muskets. But our black master againshook his head, and held up two fingers of hisleft hand, and pointed to the barrels, and thenheld up one finger, and pointed to the muskets.Then the white man nodded, and we wereall delivered to the white man, and many of204 MINOR MORALS.the white man^s servants came and made usgo into the vessel.' What a shocking place the vessel was !Yet, while it remained in the river, we couldbear it. We had food and plenty of water;and it was three weeks before we were readyto sail. Almost every day some other slavescame on board ; sometimes one, sometimes twoat a time, sometimes thirty or forty. Butwhen orders were given for our sailing, ourworst sufferings began. We were two hundredslaves on board. There were sixty men,forty women, and one hundred boys and girls.The men were ironed, two together. Thewomen and girls had a part of the vessel tothemselves. We could not sit upright. Therewas not length for us to lie down. You cannotthink how hot, how filthy, how stinking wasthe place. Many fell sick, many died. WhenNOBILITY OF SKIN. 205we had been twenty days at sea, the black men,many of whom had been dreadfully floggedby the captain, rose, and killed the mate andtwo of the crew. But the captain shot theleader with his own hand, and ran anotherslave through the body with a sword. Therest were frightened, and gave way. Five ofthem were hanged. We were all called outto see the execution. Some of us could notlook on. One girl, when she saw her fatherwith a rope around his neck, jumped overboard,and was drowned. We saw the deadbodies thrown, like dead dogs into the sea.I did not like to die, but I wished I wasdead. We were several weeks at sea. Wehad suffered agony from thirst. The latterdays we had only a quart of water betweensix of us. One day there was a hurricaneand violent rain. Some of it came into ourhatches. I saw the women lap it up from206 MINOR MORALS.the plank Sj that not a drop might be lost.I did the same. I was almost blind withpain.^^ ^ One hundred and thirty of us reached theend of the voyage. Water was brought onboard.There was a large tub full. Werushed to drink, and our heads were absolutelywedged in by our eagerness. Some brokethe jugs that were brought to them;, in theirfury and fear that they might be wrested fromtheir hands.'^ ^ The following day we landed. It was atGuadaloupe. I was bought for two hundreddollars, to be a domestic slave. I was calledhandsome. This saved me from the slaveryof the field. But I had much to endure froma cruel master and a drunken mistress. Theyoften quarrelled about me. If my masterpraised, my mistress was sure to punish me.If my mistress ever said a friendly word toNOBILITY OF SKIN. 20?me, which she did sometimes, my master kickedme, for attending more to my mistress thanto him. I lived-with them five or six years,every year more unhappily. But I learned tospeak French. I was much better off thanthose who worked at the plantations.^^ ' There was a Spanish lady at the Point aPitre, where I was, who one day saw me atmarket. She asked me my name, and whowas my master. I told her. She called thenext day, and said she had taken a fancy tome.She offered my master five hundreddollars for me. He could not resist the offer.I went to live with the lady. I was the happiestslave in the colony. The lady made meher companion. She taught me her language ;she taught me to read and write; she gaveme some books, and lent me many more. Neverheard from her an unkind word. She talkedto me of my native village. She made me208 MINOR MORALS.repeat all I remembered. She at last knewmy story as well as I knew it myself. Sheasked me if I should like to return to Africa.She said that I might be useful to my countrymen.She spoke of humane people inFrance and England who had been endeavoringto make the blacks happier at home. Shehad a large map of Africa, and she tried tofind out exactly where I was born, and throughwhat villages I had passed when I was stolen,and in what part of the river I was takenon board. Some of the names she mentionedseemed names I had heard in my childhood;mine was but a very confused memory ofthem. Four years I lived with the Spanishlady. But she was taken ill, and died. Sheemancipated me by her will, and left me fivehundred dollars. I think of her every day.I pray to her every night.(( ( Very soon after her death I married. MyNOBILITY OF SKIN. 209husband was a freed man of color, who carriedon a small trade at Basse-terre. We livedfor some time in tolerable comfort. He diedtwo years ago, and left me with the little boyyou see here. He is now seven years old.I have money to carry me to Africa. I amgoing to return. I shall find my way to myown village. I have learnt many things whichI shall teach my own countrymen. I havebeen showing my boy how he may be usefulto themesPoor woman I I heard that she had embarkedfor Sierra Leone, with the design ofpenetrating to the district of her birth. Mayher steps be guided thither in safety, and mayher dreams be realised ! In her history arelessons of patience and patriotism, of generosityand goodness, of prudence and philanthropy.And she was a Negro woman ! Shewas black as the wing of a raven.210 MINOR MORALS).^' I will now tell you a story of a red man.You have heard of the Arabian Indians?They are the subject of an epic poem, inSpanish, written by Ercilla. The Spaniardswere engaged with them in a long and bloodywar, during which they exhibited extraordinaryinstances of heroism. The speech of one oftheir leaders, Colocolo, who settled a disputeamong their chieftains for the supreme command,by conferring it on him who could liftthe heaviest block of wood, has been oftenspoken of with admiration. It is too long torepeat now, but I hope you will read it oneday or other in the original, because youwill find a great many Indian virtues describedin it."A French vessel was wrecked on thesouth western coast of America. Most of thecrew perished : among those who escaped wasa sailor of the name of Colline. He reachedNOBILITY OF Skin. 211the town of Santiago in a state of utter destitution.Having obtained some relief fromthe authorities, and finding no prospects ofemployment before him, he determined toexplore the interior of the country, and hejourneyed until he reached the foot of theAndes. He here fell in with some scatteredtribes of Indians, who received him kindly,and he fixed himself among them. Theirmode of life suited his adventurous spirit.Any wants that he experienced became bearable,because they were borne by others : and nothingso disposes the mind to patience and tocourage as the companionship and sympathyof our fellow-men. To Colin the kindnessof his red brethren was particularly welcome,for he had led a hard life at sea — a life-rt'hichhad been chequered with much suffering —and he was well content to exchange thehardly-earned fare and severe discipline of avessel for the wild and wandering life of a212 MINOR MORALS.South American Indian. Pie was able toinstruct them in many of the social arts.Things of common use in Europe were brilliantinventions on the mountains of America.ColHne, in the course of a few months , becameone of the principal personages of the Indiantribes. He was their counsellor in their disputeswith others and the arbiter in the questionswhich arose among themselves. Afterdwelling some time with the tribe (amongwhom his lot had first fallen) desire of farthertravels again took possession of Colline's mind,and , accompanied by one of the tribe, theypenetrated far into the interior of the country,and mounted high up the ridges of the Andes.^'^They made their way to the habitationof a distinguished Cacique, or Indian Chief.Collins fame had gone before him, and hemet with the most hearty reception : anddoubly hearty was it, because the Cacique wasill and fancied the white stranger might bringNobility OF SKIN. 213him relief. Colline, like most seamen knewsomething of the usual treatment for maladies:such simple prescriptions as perspiration incases of fever, gargles for sore throat, and soforth: the little he knew reckoned for muchwhere less was known. He had learned thatthe rapidity of the pulse, the color of thetongue were among the symptoms by whichdisease might be ascertained. He bad someordinary remedies for a burn, a cut, and thecommon accidents of life. He prescribed forthe Cacique, and had the good fortune toperceive a sensible improvement.'^ The Cacique was a man highly veneratedby the Indians : he was a descendant of thePeruvian Incas, and had been initiated by hisforefathers into many of their religious mysteries.He was also the depository of muchof their traditional history, and was lookedupon as a man destined by himself or his214 MINOR MORALS.descendants to recover for the red men theland of their ancestors, from those who hadviolently possessed themselves of it. Such aman exercised great influence over the widelybut thinly scattered remains of the old Peruvianpeople. He had visited most of the spotswhich they deemed sacred : he had preservedand diffused among them the names of theirancient kings, and priests and heroes: heknew where their battles had been fought,and where their altars and temples had beenraised. ,'^ A sense of gratitude for benefits received,awakened in the Cacique's mind the strongestaffection for Colline. And as soon as Colinhad sufficiently learnt the language, there wasthe completest communication of their thoughtsand feelings to one another. One day theCacique told Colline a most important secretthat he was the possessor of the Quipos, —NOBILITY OF SKIN. 215the famous historical records of the Peruviannation — records said to contain the annals ofthe ancient Incas for three thousand years,consisting of innumerable and curiously-coloredknots, which had been added by the initiatedfrom time to time, and for the reading of whichnone but the Incas possessed the key. In hisconfidence for CoUine, he exhibited to himthis precious treasure. They were in a largebox, on which were engraved divers allegoricalstories connected with the Quipos, representingmost prominently the ancient Temple of theSun, where the old Peruvians had carried ontheir mysterious and costly devotions. Thebox had been splendidly gilded in former times ;but its lustre was faded, and Colline, who hadlearned the art of gilding in Europe, undertookto restore it to its original beauty. Hedid this. Nothing could have been so acceptableto the Cacique, who watched the progress216 MINOR MORALS.of the work from day to day, and looked uponit with absolute ecstacy when it was completed.He then embraced Colline, and said, in themost enthusiastic language, ^ Friends for ever !I will be your father now : you shall marrymy daughter"The Cacique had two children, whomColline had seldom seen, though he had frequentlyheard among the tribe the praises ofthe daughter's beauty. The son was almosthabitually wandering : and when he camehome he always looked upon Colline with somuch jealousy and suspicion that his presencewas considered perilous. Even the Caciquesaw him without pleasure, for his ill-humorvented itself so frequently and so passionatelythat his father was afraid hospitality itselfwould be violated by him.The American Indians are as implacable intheir hatred as they are fervent in their friend-nobilityOF SKIN. 217slip , and no sooner had the Cacique's sonheard of his father's intention towards Cominesthan he endeavoured to persuade his sisterKanka to join with him in a plot for thestrangers destruction. Kanka appeared tolend a willing ear, but it was to save, and notto sacrifice Colline. She had conceived anaffection for her proposed husband. He hadbeen more in her company ever since theCacique had spoken of his purpose, and shewas full of admiration for his many, to hersplendid talents and acquirements. She listenedto his adventures with extreme delight. Whenhe told her of the world that was far off overthe seas — of its mighty cities — its fleets andarmies — its courts and gardens — its superbedifices — the bridges upon its rivers — it roads,and the carriages rolling over them — its cultivatedlands — its birds and cattle— the richdresses of its inhabitants — she looked around218 MINOR MORALS.her, thinking of the contrast between all thisand the bare Andean mountain where she wasborn. Then, sometimes the thought cameacross her, like a child's fancy, that Collinemight take her to see all those wondroussights, and bring her back again to her nativehome, to tell the Indians that she herself hadseen them, and that there was no fiction, nofalsehood in the story.'' The marriage took place, and with all thesolemnities which are usual among the Indians.Kanka was much loved, and as the descendantof the Cacique, himself descended from themost illustrious of the Inca race, nothing waswanting to give interest to the celebration."But the brother was absent, and he wasknown to be maturing his purposes of ill-will.He had not indeed concealed his evil disposition,and when he left his father's house,—it was in the season of spring, just before theNOBILITY OF SKIN. 219marriage, — lie publicly said : ^Tlie flowers areon the trees, before the fruits ripen, the enemyshall be placed from the stem Whither hewent nobody knew. He took with him twoyoung Indians as his companions, but did notsay farewell to his father or his sister, A fewdays before he left, he said to Kanka — ' 111 faresthe pure mountain stream that mingles witha foreign puddle'' To her he had been generallykind, and never had he uttered so severea reproach. Kanka answered, ^ More proudlyrolls the stream when it joins a current brighterand stronger than its own ;^ on which he lookedat her with a look of scorn, and silently quittedher presence.Colline did Kanka justice. She was so tractable,so teachable, so gifted with good-nature,yet, withal, so dignified and intelligent, thathe was well content to renounce the thoughtsof his European home, except when sometimes220 MINOR MORALS.Kanka said lie would accompany him thither ;that they would descend the mountains together,and find some ship to convey them tothe other world, and to bring them back againto the Cacique's abode. Kanka engaged Collineto adopt the Indian costume, in order thatshe might adorn it with her own diligenthands; and so he did, and the head-dress ofplumes he wore was the most beautiful thathad ever been seen among the Indian people.She winged his arrows with splendid feathers,and plaited the gay sandals which decoratedhis feet.'the autumnal season came, and themenace of the brother was perpetually ringingin Kanka's ear ; for the fruits were beginningto ripen, and she was sure that CoUine's lifewas exposed to peril. The Cacique had indeedcharged Kanka to watch her husbandwith particular attention, to accompany himNOBILITY OF SKIN. 221in his hunting expeditions, and to take everyprecaution against surprise. But precautionswere in vain against the determined and exasperatedhostility of the young Indian. Kankaeras told one day, when at a short distance fromhome, accompanied by Colline, that her brotherhad been seen in the neighborhood, and shesaid to her husband — 'let us return. I willseek my brother — I will tell him how happyI am. I am sure I shall teach him to loveyou ; for he loves me, and we shall all dwelltogether in peace.' Hardly had she said thisere an arrow passed by, and fixed itselfquivering in her husbands right arm. Hefell, — and Kanka shrieked for help. She withdrewthe arrow with difficulty ; she saw thatit was poisoned. Colline turned deathly pale ;and Kanka, hanging over him, sucked theblood from the wound. In this position shewas found by the old Cacique, who then, as he222 MINOR MORALS.frequently did, had followed their footstepsunseen. With some difficulty they lifted Collinefrom the ground, and conveyed him home.It was long doubtful whether he would recover ;but the prompt assistance of Kanka at themoment of attack, and her most assiduous caresand thoughtful attentions brought about hisconvalescence,, but added to the anxieties of all.In less than a month another attempt wasmade upon Collins life. The old Cacique,irritated by his son's misconduct, had declaredhe would disinherit him ; and this, as may wellbe supposed, added fuel to the flames of theyoung man's vengeful passions.'* One midnight the Cacique's habitationwas in a blaze. It had been set fire to by hisson, who did not purpose to destroy his fatherand his sister, who he fancied might easilyescape, while CoUine confined to his bed byhis wounds would probably be the only vie-nobilityor SKIN. 223tim. His calculations failed; they all escaped,and saved their most valuable treasures, theirQuipos and their antiquities. All that happenedwas to be exposed to the storm withouta habitation, until they could make theirway to a neighboring Indians choza, andset about rebuilding their own. But as theyhad now been involved in a common danger,they felt more closely united to one another.CoUine recovered but his existence wasmade miserable by the constant plots of theyoung Cacique, plots in which he had nowengaged other Indians, by representing tothem that Colline was one of the race thathad invaded, robbed, and ruined the Indiancountry, that had massacred their kings andpriests, and taken possession of the land oftheir fathers. The old Cacique had been remonstratedwith for harboring the intruder,and had been told, that unless Colline removed224 MINOR MORALS.he would inevitably be subjected to a crueland violent death. The Cacique only askeda few days to arrange matters and promisedthat CoUine should quietly depart. But heengaged them by a solemn vow that theywould not commit any act of outrage, andthat they would prevent any from being committedfor the three next suns, and with allthe courage and calmness he could muster,he sought Colline and Kanka, and spoke tothem thus :■ — ^' The old man's heart is sad, my children !and sad must be the words of his tongue.But the bitter thing must be uttered, and thebitter sorrow must be borne. If I loved Kankawell, no less have I loved Colline. He cameto me a stranger. I made him a son. Lovecould do no more. Now we must part, andoh ! that we could part as we met. It is vainto. talk about what must be, what must be inNOBILITY OF SKIN. 225Spite of all our talk. If CoUine stay lie isdoomed to die, and Kanka would not buy liesstaying here at the price of his life's Kandaharfallen on her husbands breast, utteringthat she would go too ; or that they would dietogether. But the Cacique continued : —'' ^ j\o ! that cannot be. Kanka must dwellin the abode of her fathers. If she go withColline it will be the destruction of both, orof all of us. The Indians will not hear ofher departure. We will go together to theboundaries of the land, and that before sunset ;for the hours are numbered on which I cananswer for CoUine's safety. I know not howto dismiss him. Once I had treasures, but Ihave none of value, save the records of mynation ; I cannot trust them to the keeping ofmy son; I will give them to Colline; heshall deposit them in a place of safety amongthe white people, and in some future timeQ226 MINOR MORALS.they-will be found again, Come my children! let us go forth^' Thus suddenly was the link broken, whichbound Colline to the Indian family. Hisspirit was sorrowful, but he saw there wasno choice, no escape. They rose together;they travelled through the night, each in turnbearing the Cacique treasure. They reachedthe boundary by the following evening; itwas twilight; Colline preceded his companionsonly a few steps ; he turned round ; they haddisappeared. No doubt the parting wordwas, as the old man had said, too bitter forutterance.'^^ Gloomily, and alone, Colline pursued hisjourney. The quito-box had been carefullyslung for the convenience of carrying, it. Hefound a basket of food, all the remains ofwhat they had brought from the Cacique'shome. After many days' travel, Colline reachedNOBILITY OF SKIN. 227the habitation of some Spanish South Americans; he there changed his Indian dress andmade his way to the capital of the Argentinerepublic. There he took up his abode , andthere, I believe,, he still remains.^^ The Peruvian records are now in England'sOEDEEOne morning there was considerable perplexity.Arthur's Latin exercise book wasmissing with his exercise in it. Nobody knewwhere it was. He did not know himself whetherhe had. left it at school or brought ithome. Sure it was that he could not hindits and sure too that he had the vexationof being forced to write his exercise over again,his brother having lent him his exercise bookto enable him to do so."And thus, Arthur's said Mr Howard,after half an hour had been wasted in thefruitless search, " and thus you have causedyourself a great annoyance, which might havebeen prevented by a very little caresORDER. 229In Mr Howard's family all such events werewont to lead to useful conversation on thevarious topics started. So it happened now.And order was the order of the day.^' I have seen many cases , where a wisearrangement of matters' said Mr Howard'has given to a man of inferior industry,inferior zeal, and inferior talent, great advantageover him who possessed all these qualitiesin a far superior degree. In ordinary affairs,a habit of order is a source of more comfortthan you would suppose could possibly dependupon, or be influenced by it. It doubles theusefulness of all the stores we possess by placingthem where they are immediately at hand.The possession which cannot be called into thefield when wanted, is of no more value thanan estate in the moon.'^A smaller portion of knowledge, wellordered and arranged in the mind, is more230 MINOR MORALS.valuable than a larger portion which is in astate of confusion. No matter how costly thetreasures you collect, unless they are accessiblethey are of little use : they may be evenan incumbrance. I remember, during the Peninsularwar, seeing some soldiers so overladenwith pillage as to impede their march so thatthey either lost their lives or fell into thehands of the enemy. ^ Knowledge my oldPhilosopher Friend used to say, ^ should,, likeany other material, be portable, without fatigue.If the workman is overburdened, no matterwhether it be with rubbish, or the most usefuland necessary things, — these become rubbishwhen they become unmanageable^' Marmaduke Method was a boy who madehis way through the world, and established agreat reputation, and died possessed of greatwealth; and he owed all his success to hishabits of regularity and order. He was notORDER. 231remarkable for talent, not even remarkablefor anything but this one circumstance ; butthe practice which he had adopted in earlylife, of putting everything straight as hecalled it, left much time on his hands, enabledhim to enjoy many pleasures more than hiscompanions, spared him many vexations, andbrought, at last, distinction and opulence tohimself and his children.^' Marmaduke was the child of very poorparents. They could afford him only a smallportion of instruction, so they paid for himtwopence a week at the parish school. Whenvery young, he was observed by his motherstanding on tip-toe, and endeavoring to drivea large nail into the wall with a stone hecould hardly lift. She found this was to hanghis hat upon, for he had been much distressedthe day before by seeing his father sit downon his hat, which he had incautiously left on232 MINOR MORALS.the chair. Prom that day, however, the hatwas always either on Marmaduke^s head, oron the nail, or in the appointed place at school.Soon after he found the means of getting twoother nails, on which he suspended his bestpair of shoes, and always took care that theyhung straight, for it is not more useful toput hera in their right places than to putthem there tidily and carefully. By and byhe got a little shelf, on which the two or threesmall books he had were kept nice and clean.They were not soiled with dirt, nor rumpledwith dogs-ears, but spoke for themselves infavor of the attentive little boy. His clotheswere coarse, but always neatly buttoned ; hiscommon shoes were old, but always clean andcarefully tied. He could not bear to see anythingwrong which a little trouble would putright, so that when he was seven years old hisschoolfellows gave him the nickname of MrOrder. 233Orders, a name which he well deserved. Helaughed at the boy who first called him so,and never felt an instants annoyance whenall the other boys took the hint, and calledhim Mr Orderly too.^' Before he was nine years old his motherdied and his father removed him from school,and obtained a place where he got sixpencea- day for cleaning knives and forks and shoes,and running such errands as were required.^' He became a favorite with the servants,since he did everything so cheerfully and well.Everybody knew where to find what Armaturehad put away, and all his doings appearedto the greatest advantage, from the order inwhich he left them. His knives and forkswere always arranged side by side, as brightand regular as attention could place them.If he cleaned the plate, it seemed to shinewith double lustre, as one piece reflected back234 MINOR MORALS.the polish of the next. If he was sent onmessages, he so arranged it as to go the leastdistance and to employ the least possible time,by taking them all in order, which was also^ putting everything straight He had, intruth, a love for right lines of all sorts, andreceived so much pleasure from the best arrangementof things, that order, and virtue,and happiness were very much alike to him.He had not read the poets, nor heard theverse which says that ^ Order is heaven's firstlaws He did not know by what wonderfulregulations suns and stars are kept in theirplaces, seasons return, night and day succeedone another, and generation follows generation.But he had a sense, a tact, which taught himthat order was beauty, and that order waswisdom, and the want of order was thereforediscordant to his mind. So he naturally soughtto put things straight,' and when he hadORDER. 235done so, he felt as if he had done a gooddeed, and one that brought with it instantrecompense.The lady of the house where Marmadukewas had occasion to go into the kitchen oneday, and saw how very nicely he had done hiswork. She spoke of it to her husband, whohad also marked with what neatness andorder Marmaduke arranged the shoes he hadblacked, and the clothes he had brushed.^' The gentleman recommended Marmaduketo a neighboring chemist, and that love oforder, which was quite a habit, and almost apassion with the boy, soon showed itself inthe chemist's shop. Marmaduke was verycareful not to disturb anything that was inplace, but his anxiety to have everythingstraight, soon enabled him to arrange mattersthat had been before neglected, and great wasthe comfort which his master found in the236 MINOR MORALS.humble services of the lad. The pins, whichwere before scattered on the floor, were nowinvariably collected on a pincushion ; the pens,which had been thrown about in differentplaces, were now always found in the inkstand;the empty vials were now constantlyplaced in order according to their sorts andsizes and the rags and bits of paper, whichwere before swept every evening out of theshop, were now collected by Marmaduke,and, by the chemist's consent, sold to the ragcollector at the end of the week for a fewpence, which served as pocket money forMarmaduke, and with which he began hislittle fortune. Every penny so collected heentered in an account book, and thus thevalue of money was habitually present to hismind, and as he also entered every farthinghe expended, the entry being in view wheneverhe opened his book, served as a checkORDER. 237upon any improper oatltiy. He thus learnedtoo by his own little affairs to keep accountscorrectly, and he was at last allowed to makeentries in the books of the chemist. Hishabits of neatness were such,, that though hewrote indifferently, his love for having * everythingstraight made his writing plain andclear. Time improved his hand, and he wassoon trusted to keep the journal and theledger of the trade.''^I need not tell you that a boy so orderlywas very attentive to his person. His coatsand trowsers lasted longer than those of mostboys of his age, because he was accustomedto be so careful of them. One thing he didwhich was of real use to the chemist. Hecopied into a book every prescription thatcame in, ^vith its date and cost, and madea complete index of all the articles it conesMINOR MORALS.gained and of the initials or signatures ofthe Physician that signed it. He thus gota great deal of medical knowledge and wasable at any time to refer to the medicine hehad prepared for a particular person. Oneday, when he heard of a young lady who^ had beck poisoned in consequence of a chemists\ boy having sold her oxalic acid instead of Epsomsalts, he had great pleasure on reflecting thatsince he came to the chemist s, no one mistakehad been made. If you had asked himhow he managed to be so fortunate, he wouldtell you it was by * keeping things all straightand so indeed it was.^^ Marmaduke grew to manhood, and he hadthe satisfaction of thinking that ever since theage of nine, he had provided for himself; henot only had been of no expense to his father,but he had saved thirty pounds, to which heORDER. 239was now able to add ten pounds a year more,so that lie now felt himself in a situation ofwhat seemed to him independence.But though the chemist had never toldMarmaduke how sensible he was of all the usehe had been to him, and though Marmadukenever took to himself any credit, because hebelieved he had been only doing his duty toa kind and considerate master, — Marmadukecould not but perceive that the tone in whichhe was spoken to was more and more friendly ;and the thought did sometimes pass throughhis mind, that he might become the master inthat very shop where he had entered so poorand young a servant. And if it were ever so, Iwould '' put things straighter he said to himself,and spend some money in improving the shop'sappearance, and making it more attractive tocustomers.'' One evening when the chemist was unwell.240 MINOR MORALS.and Marmaduke had been counselling him touse a prescription which had been very muchpraised by the customers of the shop forcuring the complaint under which he wassuffering, he said to Marmaduke ; 'Give meyour hand, boy I I have long intended to tellyou how well pleased I have been with yourconduct ever since you came to me. I havealways admired your love of order, yourthoughtfulness and prudence. You have beenobedient to me, and well behaved to my customers.Now I want a little rest, and I meanto give you a part of my business, and if youconduct it well, in a few years, perhaps, Ishall leave it wholly to you. You have improvedit already, and will, I dare say, improveit more. By my business I have been madecomfortable through life, and it has given memore means of comfort than I shall ever want.But it will be a great comfort, in addition, ifORDER. 241I live to see the business thrive under yourcare. At all events, I shall make the experiment.Marmaduke Methods name was soon addedto the firm , and inscribed in gold letters overthe door of the shop. I don't tell you A^ithhow much pride Marmaduke looked up to seethepainter changing the inscription ; but hispride had in it nothing that did him injury,or injured anybody else. It was realizing tohimself a dream in which he had once thoughtit presumptuous,, almost criminal, to indulge.But now that his orderly character, and wishto set ' all things straight had full play ; thechanges he introduced were such as excitedeverybody's attention, though nobody calledthem rash or improper. It was not long beforethe chemist's portion of profits of the businesswere really larger than when he had the managementof it, so that without any detrimentR242 MINOR MORALS.to himself he had done Marmaduke a mostimportant service. And this my children ! isoften the case with virtuous actions. Theybenefit the person served and that without anysacrifice to the virtuous person.^' At this time the infirmities of age grew upon]\^armaduke's father. He had been long dependentupon his son for much of his support,and he was now taken into the house, andmade of some use by ^ keeping things straight';.for these words did not go out of Marmaduke'smind in his prosperity. * I owe every thing tothis ,^ he would repeat to the lads of whomthere were now several who received theirorders from him, — ^ I don't give you manylessonS; but I say ^^ keep things straights' ■'"The rest of Mr Marmaduke Method'shistory may be soon told. He married; hadseveral children ; taught them the lesson thathe had found so useful; saw several of themORDER. 243happily settled ; and at last died full of richesand honors j and his will contained these remarkablewords : — ^ By attention to order I rosefrom poverty to opulence. By it I preventedloss j by it I amassed gain. After my death,let me be put into my coffin in an orderlyway ; let me be carried by six orderly poorpeople, and followed by my friends and familyin due order, to a clean, orderly, brick-walledgrave; and there let me be laid down andplaced straight waiting the orders of myMaker from above.' ''JUSTICE.^' Do you remember the question put forwardhj Mr Hume and which he says he wasnot able to solve ? A miner possesses aningot of silver; it comes into the possessionof a silversmith without any blame on hispart ; he doubles its value by making it intoa cup. To which of the two ought it tobelong V'"OhP' said Arthur, ^^they should sell thecup, and divide the proceeds between them'But that is not the question now. It iswhat does Justice require as between the twoparties, supposing one of them only was tohave the cup ?''^'1/' said Edith, '^ would give the cup toJUSTICE. 245the miner ; for he produced the metal, andwithout his labor the cup could never havebeen made at all ; he was the first cause ofits being made/^'• And I/^ said George, ^' would give it tothe silversmith, because the metal was worthnothing until it was turned to some use, andit was the silversmith s art and knowledgethat made it useful'''^ I rather agree with Edith,^^ said Arthur ;for the miner is the more important personto be protected ; the finding the material ismore useful to society, than the forming itinto shape. The silversmith could do nothingwithout the miner, but the miner suppliesmany trades besides the silversmith."Let us look a little closer into the matter,children !" said Mr Howard. " Justice, asfar as it is useful, is an instrument of happiness;all its value consists in this. It is to246 MINOR MORALS.prevent unhappiness that we seek to preventinjustice.^^ Now, which of the two would suffer leastpain by being deprived of the cup ? I thinkit would be the miner. And which wouldexperience most pleasure in having the cupawarded to him ? In my judgment it wouldbe the silversmith; and if it be so, the questionis solved.Justice requires rewards, when rewards arenecessary to increase happiness or to preventmisery. Justice requires punishment, whenpunishment would add to human happiness orlessen human suffering. Where there is nomischief, there should be no punishment;when punishment will not prevent mischiefor its consequences, there is no use in inflictingit. The less of punishment the better,because the less of pain the better. The ruleis always the same ; I repeat it to you, myJUSTICE. 247children, in a hundred ways. Judge of everythingby the happiness or misery which itproduces or removes. Your business in theworld is to change things that are evil intothings that are good, and in things that areevil to lessen the evil as much as possible.A rat got into a pantry, and was quietlydevouring a Cheshire cheese. He was discoveredby the butler who condemned the ratto die. ' How can you treat me so unjustly Vsaid the rat. * This house is as much mine asyour masters ; I was born in it and so weremy forefathers. You are the intruders, andtook possession against all right and justiceIt is not just to let me starve, and it is veryunjust indeed to punish me with death forindulging in a natural propensity, which isyours and your master's as well as mine''Now what could the butler say, in reply tothe rat''248 MINOR MORALS.^' Oh/^ said George, " the butler should havesaid that the cheese was his master's property,and that the rat was a robber, and deservedtransportation at least, if not hanging''the rat would have liked transportationvery well," said Arthur ; ^' but when ratsoffend, however small the offence, they aresure of capital conviction'Well now, papa," responded , Edith, ^^ Idon't think that is just. There should besome difference in the punishment of differentsins even in the case of a poor rat."*^I believe," answered Mr Howard, "thatif you get no other guide than what is calledjustice in the matter, the rat would have agood chance of escape; and could he give afee and a brief to a clever barrister, a prettystrong case of injustice could be made outagainst the butler. But the rat is here anintruder upon human enjoyment, and thereJUSTICE. 249would be a loss of no small sum of pleasureif he were not dealt with by summary judgment.All that benevolence can plead forhim is , that he shall be put out of existencewith the least possible pain.'^ A poor man owed a rich man a sum ofmoney. It was justly the rich man's due ,-but the poor man was unable to pay the debtat the moment when the rich man claimed it.The rich man arrested the poor man andjustice and the laws decided that the poor manshould be sent to prison, there to pay, bypersonal suffering, for his incapacity to dischargethe debt. The rich man exacted nothingbut what was strictly, ^i^s^, but his conductwas the opposite of virtuous,'^ There is a curious phrase sometimes madeuse of by lawyers. ' The greatest right thegreatest wrong ;^ which, when it means anything,means that law and justice may be the250 MINOR MORALS.causes of Imman misery, and that when theyare so, they ought to be set aside.'' One day I saw a man strike another manaviolent blow in the face. It would, perhaps,have been just to return the blow ; but wasit not more prudent, more benevolent, andhence more virtuous, to refrain ?'* Assuredly so, in the case in question. Theman who struck the blow was in a state ofextreme irritation ; he had lost the power ofjudgment by exasperation. The man whoreceived the blow had the wisdom to avoidasking, whether justice required him to retaliatein the same offensive and violent way. Heasked what duty, what virtue demanded, andfound that they demanded forbearance. Heforbore. The man who had injured him notonly relented, but was overcome with sorrow.He felt that the injustice was on his side.He felt that the man whom he had struckJUSTICE. 251might justly, and even with the work's approval,have used towards him similar orgreater violence. His hesitating to do so wonthe friendly affections of the wrong-doer. Inevery respect the injured man was a gainer;gainer in self-respect, on the ground of self-control; gainer in self-approval, by that recompensewhich prudence brings with it ; gainerin the good opinion of others, by the exerciseof benevolence towards the offender. Whetherhe acted jusfhj, or not, is a consideration oflittle importance. He acted wisely. He actedvirtuously.""A child, for a small fault, is punishedseverely ; and the severity of punishment leadsto the child's reformation. The injustice ofthe punishment is no reason for its not being-inflicted; because the punishment may be inthe highest degree jjnidentj as respects theparent, and beneficent as regards the child.252 MINOR MORALS.'justice, wherever it is an instrument ofhuman happiness, is an excellent thing ; butit is not because it is justice, but because itis an instrument of happinessThe young people expressed a desire toknow how they were to distinguish what isjust from what is virtuous ; and Mr Howardthus answered their inquiries : —^'The world calls its laws and its usagesjustice. For the most part, they are so : andin countries where instruction is spreading,they become more so every day. Wheneverthe object of laws is thoroughly understood,laws will be only a means to an end, and thatend will be happiness. Whenever any conductis, on the whole, useful to mankind, thequestion of its justice or injustice is a veryneedless one. For to say, that if it is justit cannot but be useful, is to make justiceand usefulness the same thing, as they ought,JUSTICE. 253indeed, to be. Never, therefore, set up, norallow any one to set up (as a rule of conductfor yourself) any standard of justice which isnot wholly in conformity with that conductwhich will lead to the greatest quantity ofhappiness. For of happiness everybody canjudge, but of justice there may be a hundreddissentient opinions.^^ANCIENT TIMES,"How comes it, papa! that there is generallysuch a respect for ancient times ?"inquired George one day, after reading aspeech in which respect for the wisdom ofancestors was made a reason for not alteringsome foolish usage.^' It is a sad prejudice* said Mr Howard ;I once heard a man say. he had no wishto appear wiser than his forefathers and peopleapplauded him j though had they reflectedthat nobody can have too much wisdom, andthat it is the best part of wisdom to add towisdom, they might have thought differently.A philosopher remarked, that the same peoplewho are most loud in praise of past time, areANCIENT TIMES. 255those "who are always insisting on the superiorityof old men over young ones. Now,ancient days are the youth of society, andthe farther you go back, the younger is thehuman race. If there is reason for deemingold men superior in knowledge to young men,there is the same reason why the presenttimes should be superior to the past. Thereis, indeed, more reason, for old men growdecrepit ; but not so the race of man. Individualsdecay, and their faculties are enfeebledas their experience increases, but nationscommunicate their experience from one generationin full mental vigor to another equallyso. In morals there is a great improvementboth in knowledge and practice. The effectof conduct upon human happiness is moreclosely watched and more accurately traced.Many actions, once held to be blameless, arenow prohibited by opinion ; many which were256 MINOR MORALS.deemed pernicious are now considered laudable.Never be astonished my children ! neverbe discouraged if you should fail to find inancient books what the ill-advised praises ofsome may have taught you to expect. Youwill hear those whose opinions are of weightin the world, talk with awe and reverencerespecting authors of antiquity and whenyou turn them over in order to discovertheir merits,, you may experience bitter disappointment.Do not despond j do not think,because you are unable to discover the extraordinaryexcellences that your own facultiesare necessarily in fault. It may be that theexcellence you seek for is not there. Donot check your own habit of thinking becauseyou cannot unravel the thoughts of others.Many a worthless idol has had its worshippers.Take courage even though you can-ancientTIMES. 257not understand the renowned authority. Perhapshe did not understand himself. Recollectwhat Epictetus said to the expositors ofChrysippuSj you plume yourselves uponyour meritorious labors. If Lysippus hadbeen able to tell us his own meaning, wouldhe have needed you ?^*' Journeying once in Andalusia, I reachedone of the refreshing streams which are sowelcome to the traveller, not only because theyserve to quench his thirst, but enable himto wash in their invigorating waters. Mymuleteer drank, and washed his hands; butno water did he convey to his cheeks or neck.I asked him the reason. He said, ' I don'tlike it: I deserted from the army, becausethey would make me wash my face every day.My forefathers never washed their faces '^The next day Mr Howard and Georgewalked together to a neighboring village. They258 MINOR MORALS.called at the house of one of the peasants, thedoor of which was opened by a string whichpassed through a hole, and communicated witha wooden latch inside. George inquired whythe neat and ordinary iron latch was not used?'Oh, sir V said the woman, 'ours is rather abad way, for the boys sometimes cut off thestring, and when we are all out, there is a greatfuss and trouble to open the door, and to getin ; but it was so in our grandfathers time,and we don't like to change it.^ The chimneywas smoking, and the room was full of blackdust. ' We have a shocking smoky chimney,sir, and it covers the plates, and the chairs,and the tables, with dirt.^ — 'But why don'tyou have it altered ?' inquired George.— ' Oh,sir, my husband and I often talk about it;but he says it was so when his father livedhere, and his father's father before him; andhe don't think himself wiser than his fathers.'/ANCIENT TIM 5^. 259During the conversation the cottager came in.He had across his arm a very odd-lookingand oddly-shaped sickle, which excited GeorgeHoward s curiosity. ^ Thomas said he, (forthat was the cottager's name) 'you have anancient tool there — ' That I have, sir. Ihave seen all sorts of changes and fancies,but I stick by the old friend — ■'^But surely,Thomas,, you cannot do so much work; youcannot reap so much corn, or get so muchmoney for yourself or your family, with sucha sickle as this '/ — ' Aj, sir, that's what ouryounker say ; but I don't set up to be wiserthan those that have gone before me.''*^ There," said Mr Howard, as they leftthe cottage, "you have another example ofthe wisdom of ancestors ; and yet in this poorman's case, there may be some excuse ; forhabit has made all these inconveniences almost260 M.rNOR MORALenjoyments. He is more pleased with his fancyabout resembling his forefathers than he wouldbe with the benefits which improvements wouldbring to him. To others he does but littlemischief : all you can say is, that he is a sillyand imprudent man. But when any one preventsimprovements which may benefit others,the mischief is as great as the value of theimprovement. The desire of something better,whether in art, or morals, or laws or happiness,is the source from which all that isgood comes forth'Conversations like these marked the happydays which the family of the Towards enjoyed;days made happy by the pursuit of knowledgeand the practice of virtue. Of a thousandother topics they talked ; and at some othertime my young readers shall hear how manyother questions of right and wrong were settled