MINOR MORALSFORYOUNG PEOPLE.ILLUSTRATED BY TALES AND TRAVELS,PARTICULARLY IN THE EAST.JOHN Bowing. 4f *WITH ILLUSTRATIONS BY GEORGE CRUIKSHAXK.PART m > >;'^^EDINBURGH:WILLIAM TAIT, 78 PRINCES STREET;Simpson, Marshall AND CO., LONDON;AND JOHN GUMMING, DUBLIN.MDCCCXXXIX,/f£, ^BxilUlvn.3J. ^2?'LONDON:PRINTED BY CHARLES Reveal,LITTLE PULTENEY STREET.My DEAR Lady Ponsonby,Was it in joke or in earnest that yousaid to me at Constantinople, " Will younot dedicate your next book to me ?"You will hardly remember how earnestlyI welcomed the honor you conferred : buthere is my little book, inscribed to yourLadyship (with many recollections of courteousand graceful hospitality) byYour faithful and obliged servant,J. B.London, January 1839.CONTENTS.I.TravelsPage I to 15II.The Sheriff of Mekka16—31III.The Nile32—42IV.Paris43—59V.The Prince of the Druses60—83VI.Treatment of Animals in theEast . 84 — 105VII.Vampires106— 118VIII.Mahomet AH Pacha.119— 139IX.Magicians140 — 164X,Infant Schools165 — 177XI.Djezzar Pacha178 — 185XII.Mohammedanism186 — 198XIII.DjiRS199 — 215XIV.Sincerity with Prudence216 — 228XV.Treasure-seeking in the Levant229 — 235XVI.Abu Abdallah236 — 249LIST OF PLATES.Divan of the Sheriff ^ . . To face page 25Crocodile Catcher . . . . . 40The Peri and the Tailor . . . .49Locust Destroyers . . . . . 92The Wandering Jew . . . . .96The Vampire . . . . . . 117PREFACE.I DO not pretend, in these littlevolumes, to give anything like a completepicture of Oriental manners,scenery, geography, or history. Myobject is to interest the young lessby elaborate descriptions than by suchslight sketches as would grow out ofthe unrestrained familiarity of happydomestic life. To subjects of an exclusivecharacter it is almost impossibleto keep alive the attention ofVI PREFACE.children. Impressionable as they are,the impression must be varied in orderto be attractive, perhaps even to beinstructive. In these rude pictures ofthe East there is no invention. Theyare the vivid recollections of men andthings, seen under circumstances favourableto the writer, and whichmade many objects accessible to himwhich are not accessible to the ordinarytraveller.As to the stories connected withOriental superstitions, I have recordedthem as I heard them, without addingor subtracting a single circumstance.They appeared to me well fitted togive some variety to the conversations,and to have the merit of illustratingPREFACE. VllEastern character. These form but asmall portion of the number I collected.I do not see how such narrativescan be injurious to the mindsof children, who may safely be trustedwith such tales of wonder and mysteryin these days, and in a countryso much emancipated from superstitionand credulity as our own (would theemancipation were complete !) Theymay exercise their minds in endeavouringto explain apparently supernaturalevents by ordinary causes. Anexplanation may no doubt be foundwhen tip exaggerations of ignoranceare cleared away.I have thought it desirable to carryout the plan I originally proposedVlll PREFACE.to myself in the earlier volumes ofMinor Morals, by introducing somevariety of subjects, in order to preventthe weariness of attention too lonof directedto the same topic*TRAVELS.*' O HOW I wish I could travel into foreigncountries !" exclaimed George one day, whohad been delighted with a promise of MrHoward that he would talk to them all abouthis journey into Oriental lands.I often dream about travelling," addedEdith, " and all sorts of places come into myhead, and I fancy I am there. I shouldlike to see them, and to compare my fancyof them with what they really are."But, as that cannot be," said Mr Howard,what an advantage it is to have bookswritten by intelligent people, who come andtell us what they have seen, and enable us,if VOL. III. B2 MINOR MORALS.without any difficulty or danger, to accompanythem in their long journies ; who show uswhat is most interesting, and do not wearyus with what is dull or disagreeable. Therewas a very amusing fellow at Florence whoused, in the Piazza of the Grand Duke, togather crowds about him by Its accounts ofdistant regions. ' Now we will go to Petersburg,'he would say, ' or, what is better,I will take you there ; for if you went yourselfit would cost you, a mint of money, and youmight be frozen among the snows, or breakyour neck on the corduroy roads, and wouldbe certainly cheated by the postillions andtormented by the police. But I will tell youabout the Winter Palace, and the MarblePalace, and the river Neva, and the statueof Peter the Great, and of the ice-hills, andthe sledges, and the long beards of the peasants,and the northern lights ; and when youTRAVELS. 3are tired of this I will convey you, witlioiitany fear of bandits, or of the fevers of thePontine marshes, to Rome — and I will showyou the Holy Father in the Vatican, andthe sublime Cathedral of St Peter, and theForum, and the Tarpeian rock ; and youshall neither be wearied nor annoyed all theway.' "I think," said George, " I should enjoythe weariness and annoyance of such interestingjournies, because I know one could nothave the journey without the annoyance ; andthen. Papa ! when the trouble is over, it isvery pleasant to recollect, and to be able totalk to our friends of the difficulties anddangers we have passed through."Well ! my boy," answered Mr Howard,I hope you will think so when the difficultiesand dangers really come. You will be allthe better for your determination, and you4 MINOR MORALS.will have, I dare say, in after life, manyand many an opportunity of using your courageousphilosophy."Did you ever suffer much from climate.Papa?" inquired Edith; "for even here ourhot summers melt us and our cold Vvdntersfreeze us, and we have much ado to keepourselves comfortable."There are inconveniences, my dear, manyand great ; but, considering how extremelyunlike the habitable regions of the earth areto one another, I often think with delightupon the facility with which the human beingsupports them all. The provisions of naturefor the maintenance of life are various andwonderful. Man, whose wants and curiosityinduce him to visit such different climates,is of all animals the best adapted to varioustemperatures, and finds the means of accommodatinghimself to great fluctuations of heatTRAVELS. 5and cold. You have heard of living personspassing in a hot oven, time enough to roast ajoint of meat. In Russia the peasants oftencome forth from their hot steam baths, androll themselves in the snow ; and I rememberto have heard Berzelius, the great Swedishchemist, remark that, of all the substanceshe had ever made experiments on, the humanskin was that which most easily, and withthe least alteration, accommodated itself to theaction of different temperatures. Animals, youknow, change much of their nature under theinfluence of climate ; the wool of the sheepbecomes hairy in the south, the hair of therat becomes woolly in the north. Seeds donot lose their germinating power under anynatural heat or cold. Not that seeds willgrow in all climates, but they may be preservedin them. Tropical seeds would notlose their power of reproduction by a voyage6 MINOR MORALS.to the north, nor would a visit to the equatordestroy those of the coldest regions."•" I have heard, Papa ! " said George, " thatthe vital principle is so vigorous that therehave been found in Herculaneum and Pompeii,closed up from the action of the air, grainsof corn, which have sprung forth when plantedin the appropriate place and season — grainswhose life would have been thought extinguishednearly eighteen hundred years ago."What an advantage," said Arthur, " thepresent time has over the past. A longjourney can now be accomplished far moreeasily than a short one in ancient days."Yes," said Mr Howard, " the progressof science is nowhere so visible as in theremoval of difficulties in the way of communication.In Saxon times, the merchant whohad undertaken three sea voyages for his ownaccount was admitted into the ranks of honour,TRAVELS. 7obtaining the title of Thane. A travellerinto remote countries was an object of admiration; and indeed, in all ages, he hasperhaps been the most valuable aid to humanhappiness. He has opened the way to theknowledge and the possession of ten thousandsources of enjoyment."Now, Papa ! you have travelled so much,tell me, after all, what is the most pleasantof all your travelling recollections ?"Indeed, Edith ! the most agreeable ofmy thoughts is this — that the whole universeis full of felicity ; that, if there are sufferingsand sorrows in the world, they are exceptionsto the general rule. We sometimes thinkthat the deprivation of pleasures such as wepossess must be accompanied by much annoyanceand wretchedness ; but our judgmentson such matters are generally erroneous. Iwill give you one or two examples from my8 MINOR MORALS.own experience, showing how the mind accommodatesitself to the circumstances thatsurround it.I went once into the hut of a Russianserf. It was made of logs of wood, and,though the winter was bitterly cold, the onlywindows were small square holes, throughwhich the snow was driven by the sharpwinds, and when the door was opened, inthere rushed showers of sleet and hoar-frost.Within was a smoky and suffocating heat,produced by the burning of damp wood in astove. The inhabitants were a boor, his wife,and three children, covered with dirt andvermin ; and the whole family were thevassals of a neighbouring nobleman. Theywere attached to the soil according to thefeudal usages — had no will of their own, theycould possess no property, and were almostwithout any legal right. AH they could gainTRAVELS. 9was claimed by and paid to their master, andof the produce of the fields they cultivatedno part came to their share but such a portionas enabled them to support existence. Theintolerableness of slavery we often hear of,and it is well that slavery should appearintolerable to the free. But when the slavecannot shake off his fetters, it is to him atleast a privilege to be contented with hisposition. I was curious to hear what notionsa Russian boor had of freedom, and of hisown condition. Peter Petrovich was sittingin his ragged sheep-skin garment on a blockof wood, carving (a common amusement ofthe peasant) ornaments out of the thigh boneof an ox. I sat down by him, and askedhow far he had ever travelled. — ' Never tenverses from where I was born,' said he.—Should not you like to see a great city ?'' I have heard of one, I don't know whatB 210 MINOR MORALS.was its name, from Ivan Carlovich, and that'senough for me.' — ' Can you read or write ?'' Not I ! what would be the use of readingor writing ? The priest reads to me, andsaves me the trouble ; and I have nobody towrite to, and nothing to write about.' — ' Shouldyou not like a better house ?' — ' I do notknow what I should do with it ; it would onlyadd to my trouble.' The love of independenceis often said to be an instinct of man, anatural, irrepressible feeling ; but when Iasked Peter Petrovich if he ever thought ofbuying his freedom, of endeavouring to becomehis own master, he looked surprised, and said :Am I a fool ? Do not I know when I amwell off ? Must not my lord provide for me ?How could I provide for myself?' It wasin vain I sought to touch a chord which issaid to vibrate on all minds — the love ofliberty. But liberty to him was to have toTRAVELS, 11take no care for himself j he fancied he shouldbe cumbered and perplexed about the meansof existence. ' No ! no ! ' said he, ^ my lordmust keep me from starvation, must give meahouse to live in, and garments if I v/antthem. I free ? who is to feed me, clotheme, shelter me, but my master ? ' — ' But surely,if you were to labour for yourself, and keepall the money you gain, you might havebetter food and garments, and a more comfortablehouse.' It was in vain to talk toPeter Petrovich. ' My master must providefor me !' was the burthen of his story. Hefelt like a child unaccustomed to walk alone,when the hand that guides it is about to bewithdrawn — or a boy unable to swim, whois menaced with being placed out of his depthin the water. And perhaps there will bemany a generation of Peter Petroviches before12 MINOR MORALS.any desire to change their condition will prevailamong the peasant serfs of Russia."- " Is it not a lamentable state of thingsthat they should be so deadened to all generousfeeling?" inquired George.It would be yet more lamentable if,without any chance of happy change, they weresensible of their degraded state ; but by andby commerce, and the silent spread of improvement,will produce uncomfortable feelings,and they will contrast their conditionwith that of happier nations ; and then, movedeither by the fears of their revolt, or by a morebenevolent principle, such as the desire to promotetheir improvement, their government willemancipate them by its own act, or they willobtain their emancipation by their united exertions.Such is the progress of intelligence,and it is impossible not to hope that it willTRAVELS. 13ultimately better the condition of every partof the human race.One of the happiest families I have seenwas that of a poor sailor settled on theshores of the Bay of Biscay. I was oncelanded at the small sea-port town where theydwelt. Theirs was a small cottage coveredwith vines, from which hung, at the time ofmy visit, huge bunches of grapes. It wasduring the Peninsular war that I was compelledto seek a landing-place on the stormy andrugged coast of Calabria. The sailor, whohad taken charge of me from an English shipof war, was at first an object of no smallanxiety to me, for I had a large sum of moneyin my possession, he was a perfect stranger,and I wholly in his power. His frank andobvious honesty, however, soon won all myconfidence, and I slept under his humblecovering with less distrust than had I been14 MINOR MORALS.beneath a palace roof. He brought me thewhite bread for which Spain is celebrated,and large bunches of fragrant Muscadel grapes.The best bed was made up for my reposingplace, and when I slept I was recommendedto the care of the Virgin, of whom an earthenwareimage was suspended with gay ribbonsabove my pillow. Yet those were terribletimes, for war had ravaged the country, andthere was on every side the track of devastation;one day tine French troops, anotherday the Spanish guerillas, set fire to the mostancient and remarkable edifices of the land.Whole villages were depopulated, and it hassometimes happened to me to arrive in desertedstreets and to find all the houses unroofed,and half of them wholly destroyed.Scenes of horror, recorded deeds of horror.Foreign invasion and civil war had each inturn made Spain a field of blood. The chas15cities of the human character were likely tobe invaded, if not destroyed, by those sufferingswhich were exhibited day by day ; buteven among those who suffered most therewere many who retained their kind and hospitablefeelings. I well remember, when I leftthe cottage of the Spanish sailor, that he providedfor me two stout young women, whocarried my luggage in perfect safety over themountains, on foot, and deposited it in thetown to which I was bound. It was not easyto travel in safety, but a long day's journeybrought them and me to the capital of theprovince. He would accept no pecuniaryrecompense. He seemed to consider himselfresponsible for my safety; and well mighthis spontaneous and unsought courtesies deeplyEffect my mind. ' Do you want nothing ?'I inquired on leaving him. — ' I want nothing.I will take nothing. The Virgin guide youon your way.' "THE SHERIFF OF MEKKA.The children took the earliest opportunityof finding their Papa disengaged, in orderto remind him that he had said he would letthem hear about Egypt and Palestine andTurkey and Greece, and other remote regions.'^ And tell us about those beautiful Mahometancountries and all the people," exclaimed Edith.But was not Mahomet a wicked imposter,Papa?" inquired Arthur; "and do not theMahometan call Christians dogs, and treatthem with much scorn and ill-will ?"It has been truly and wisely said," repliedMr Howard, " that there is a soul of goodnessin things evil ; and the false religions thathave made so much progress in the worldTHE SHERIFF OF MEKKA. 17never could have succeeded but for the minglingof truths with their errors, of virtueswith their defects, and of bright points contrastedwith their darkness."Are there not many good men amongMussulmanss ?" asked Edith.And even among Pagans ?" added Arthur.It is not likely that the Divine Beingshould have given to any portion of hiscreatures a monopoly of excellence, or thathe should have left a part of the race ofman without a capacity for virtue and happiness.And I have often found personsamong the Mussulmanss of whom Christiansmight well have been proud — men hospitable,beneficent, and tolerant in the highest degree.I remember an instance, which I will mentionto you, as showing how much even the loveof truth may exist in the mind of a Mahometan.When travelling in Egypt, I got into a consMINOR MORALS.traverse with a Turkish friend as to thesuperiority of the Christian over the Mahometanreligion. He had more than oncetold me it was a subject on which he didnot object to talk with me ; though he,and Mahometan generally, avoided all discussionswith Christians who began by treatingtheir Prophet with scorn and their Holy Bookwith irreverence. you may think Mahometnot to have been a Prophet, but you alwaysallow him to have been a wonderful man ;you may not admit that our Koran is divinelyinspired, but you acknowledge it has passagesof great poetical beauty, that some of itsdescriptions of God are eloquent and elevated,and that you have often turned over itspages with pleasure and sometimes with improvement.Well, now I will tell you whatI think of your religion and of your ChristianProphet (for you know the Mussulmanss allowTHE SHERIFF OF MEKKA. 19Jesus Christ, whom they call Issa, to havebeen a Prophet). I would willingly makeIssa the arbiter between you and me. Iwould tell him where I was born, how I wastaught, what passed in my mind — and askhim whether I could be other than what Iam, a conscientious Mussulman. Nay more :if you think there is no road to future happinessbut that in which you walk, and thatthe road in which I am walking leads to everlastingperdition, I should be willing that Issahimself should decide on my future condition.I would say to him : " I am travelling by onepath, and endeavouring to get into Paradise ;and my Christian opponent is travelling by another."Sure I am that he would stretch out hishand to both of us, and help us on our way ;and acknowledge that one of the faithfulMoslems might be entitled to his favours20 MINOR MORALS.equally with his own followers.' I felt thewords of the Turk were a noble testimonyto genuine Christianity, the religion of charity,and rejoiced to hope and to believe he hadnot mistaken the character of the founder ofour faith."I think I have observed, Papa ! that thosewho have travelled generally speak with morekindness of persons of different opinions thanthose who have never left their country,"said George.No doubt it is one of the advantages oftravel that it destroys petty prejudices, andmakes us better acquainted with the realityof things. By travel we are taught that othercountries, as well as our own, have much torecommend them, and their inhabitants haveoften qualities to love and to honour."But tell me, if travelling teach us toTHE SHERIFF OF MEKKA. 21love other countries more, does it not alsomake us love our own country less ? " askedEdith.By no means ; it is, on the contrary,on returning home from foreign lands thatthe love of our fatherland burns strongest inthe bosom. But I will tell you another storyof a Mussulman, which will interest you,because the subject of it is a very remarkableman."Pray do !" exclaimed all the children.I heard the early history of the lateSheriff of Mekka from Mahomet Ali Pashahimself. He was one of the direct descendantsof Mahomet, and the head of one of themost distinguished tribes of the desert — thetribe of On, which, more than any other,has sought to preserve all its patriarchalusages, and to keep itself pure from whatthey call the contamination of towns. The22 MINOR MORALS.wilderness is their home ; and, though manyof the tribe are called to hold office in theHoly City, they invariably send their childreninto the desert, to preserve them from theeffeminate influence of those who livewithin walls. The Sheriff is a man of atall and imposing presence — his eye brightand fierce as a lynx's — his skin perfectly black—his movements rapid, but easy — and hiswhole bearing impressive and stately. Hehad much distinguished himself in variousmilitary encounters, had received fourteen orfifteen wounds, and was considered, in a word,as the most illustrious warrior of the Hedjaz.On the application of the Pasha of Egyptto the Sultan of Turkey, the Sheriffdom ofthe Holy City — the highest Arabian dignitywas conferred upon him. But, as his newoffice brought new influence, he became anobject of apprehension to Mahomet Ali, whoTHE SHERIFF OF MEKKA. 23found it necessary to secure his person byan ingenious stratagem. On occasion of somefestivity, lie ordered one of his captains inthe Red Sea to invite the Sheriff and hisattendants to a repast on board his vessel,which was then laying at Edda. The Sheriffcame with his people, and when they wereall on board, and engaged in the enjoymentsof the table, the anchor was raised, thevessel set sail, and the Sheriff and his friendswere delivered over to the Governor of Suez,who escorted them safely to Cairo — where Ihad the pleasure of making the Sheriff'sacquaintance, and found him surrounded, ifnot with the splendours of independence, withmuch of the pomp and parade of Orientallife.The Sheriff is still living at Cairo, andI went with the English Consul-general topay him an evening visit. The sun had24 MINOR MORALS.but just set, and we found him engagedwith about forty persons in acts of devotion.They were repeating the ' Allah ilia Allah !Mahomet Resoul Allah !' * and bendingtheir foreheads to the dust in frequent prostrations— while, on rising, they sung religioushymns to the sound of the pipe and tabor.We remained at a distance until the servicewas over : we then approached, and wereReceived with great courtesy, and requestedto take our seats next to the Sheriff on thedivan, of which he occupied the corner. Hisson, an intelligent lad of about ten or twelveyears old, sat on his right hand ; the mostdistinguished of the guests took their places,more or less remote on the divan, accordingto their ranks ; and about thirty servants,* There is no god but God, and Mahomet isGod's Prophet ! '^::^fyiAa^n^ .6^ M^ i^i^^^^'THE SHERIFF OF MEKKA. 25Osmanlis, Egyptians, negro slaves, andeunuchs — clad in a great variety of costume,for the most part richly ornamented, stoodin a semicircle about the Divan,Handsome pipes, coffee, and sherbet, accordingto the Oriental custom, were introduced,and the conversation began to be veryinteresting and animated. As it became moregeneral, I observed that one of the gueststook a more prominent part than the rest,and that Diis opinions had much weight withthe company. He had been a great traveller,had visited Calcutta and many parts of BritishIndia, and he told the Sheriff that therewere some millions of faithful Mussulmanssin that part of the world. Upon which wesaid that it was the policy, as it was theduty, of the British government to protectthem in the full enjoyment of their religiousopinions and the exercise of their religiousVOL. III. c26 MINOR MORALS.rites. The Sheriff ordered his scribe to besent for, and to seat himself on the Divan.He came, bearing in his sash an inkstandgirdled with diamonds, from which he took abeautifully decorated reed ; and the Sheriff,while his eye glistened with delight, directedhim to record all that had been saidrespecting British India. ' We know somethingof Hindostan,* he added ; ' it suppliesMekka with almost all the articles we consume.We see a great many pilgrims from thatcountry. Your government does not interferewith them. That is just, that is right.'He made many inquiries about Europe.Was there not a very great warrior theresome years ago ?' — ' You mean NapoleonBuonaparte.' He had not heard his name,he said, but had heard of his deeds. ' Andwas he not conquered, and sent away to diein exile ?' — ' He was !' — ' But, if he was soTHE SHERIFF OF MEKKA. 27great a warrior, how came lie to be conquered ? '' Because there was a greater warrior tianlie !' — ' And what was that other warrior'sname ? ' — ' Wellington — ' Put that down, putthat down,' said the Sheriff to the scribe.' And what is the name of your King ? '' We have no King, we have a Queen.' —What, a woman ! Put that down, scribe !put that down. And what is your Queen'sname?' — 'Victoria Alexandrina.' — 'And whatis the meaning of her name ?' — ' Victoria isyour Nasal, a name given to celebrate thegreat victory of the great warrior we werespeaking of.' — ' Write that, scribe. But alexandrine,what is the meaning of that ?' Uponwhich we pointed out the relationship betweenthe Royal family of England and the Imperialfamily of Russia, and that it was in honourof an Emperor of the North that the nameof Alexandrina was given. But Arabs have28 MINOR MORALS.no notions of any latitude in name-giving,and we did not succeed in making thereasons clear to the Sheriff. It was tooremote an association of cause and effect ;and he said quietly, ' I do not understandthis : ' but he did not say to the scribe, ' Putthat down.'* But do your people ever see yourQueen ? Does she unveil her face ? ' — ' Indeedshe does, and a very pretty face it is !'' Mashallah ! Put it down, scribe.' Wehad just been reading in the papers anaccount of the city festival in honour of theQueen, and described it to the astonishedSheriff as well as we could — the unveiledQueen, the unveiled ladies of the court, theceremonials, the feasting, the procession, thespeechifying. ' Mashallah ! Mashallah ! Imust believe it, because you say it. Put itdown, scribe ! put it all down.'THE SHERIFF OF MEKKA. 29The children were amused with Mr Howard'sstory, and had quite forgotten theconversation that led to it. Little Edith sat,thrilling with pleasure, in her chair ; shewas so delighted, she clapped her hands ;but at last cried out, " Go on, go on, Papa !"The Mussulman traveller said a few wordsto the Sheriff, and the Sheriff inquired ofus whether it was true that in Europe thesea rose and the sea fell at stated seasons.As we, of course, answered in the affirmative,Inquire,' said the traveller, * what is thecause of the rise and fall of the sea ? ' Thescribe was directed to be attentive, and weanswered that it had been observed to followthe changes of the moon, but that our wisemen had not been able to explain the Theoryof the Tides. ' I have another question toask, which is to me a mystery : tell mewhy that which is secreted from the eyes30 MINOR MORALS.is salt, from the mouth is sweet, and fromthe ears is bitter ?' We child only referto the wonderful organization of the humanframe, and to the adaptation of all its partsto the purposes for which they were destined;but we could not explain the cause. ^ It isa mystery to you who are Christians, andto us who are Mahometan — it is a mysteryto all.' — ' Yes !' said one of the company ;but may not Christians and Mahometanagree in this, that the God wiio made the seatorise and fall, and who gave those differentcharacters to the secretions of the head ofman — may we not all say that he is thefather of us all, and that he is most great,most wise, and most good ? ' — ' Wallah ! Tayib ! 'exclaimed the Sheriff; and 'Tayib !' (Thatis well !) was echoed by every voice, andresounded through the room. Never was Imore delighted or more affected ; this wasTHE SHERIFF OF MEKKA. 31something like a triumph of religious truth,subduing, in that moment of honest enthusiasm,every thought of uncharitableness."THE NILE,Are not the Egyptians very proud of theircountry ?" asked George.The love of country," answered Mr Howard," is one of the strongest of humanpassions, but it ' has been thought to existless strongly in flat than in mountainouslands. Among the Egyptians, the attachmentis less to the soil than to the river — theriver Nile, which is in their eyes, as it wasin the eyes of their forefathers, a sort ofdivinity. They speak of their Nile withthe intensity of personal affections — it is theirdaily benefactor ; to it they owe their wealth,be that wealth great or small — the verdureTHE NILE. 33of their fields, their food, their drink, theirclothing — for it produces the vegetables andthe fish they eat ; it gives the water withwhich they quench their thirst and cooktheir victuals ; it causes the cotton tree togrow, of which they make their garments ;it supplies their flocks and herds. There isnot a woman on its banks who, from thetime at which she first is able to carry apitcher on her head or bear one in herhand, does not daily replenish it in thesacred and venerable stream. Its praise passesinto their proverbs, into their daily talk. Iremember travelling to the Bahr el Youssoufi*,and, having alighted, I gave my horse to apoor fellah woman ; when, on remounting,1 put a small coin into her hand, she said,May Allah bless thee as he blessed thecourse of the Nile !' A hundred times Ihave been told in Egypt : ' You will returnc 234 MINOR MORALS.hither. No one ever drank the waters ofthe Nile without being irresistibly impelledto drink them again.' And the water, thoughnot clear, is delicious and healthful. TheEgyptian Levantines have a saying, thatWhat Champagne is to other wines is theNile to other waters ;' and there is also anArabian proverb — ' Had Mahomet drank thewaters of the Nile he would have stayed onearth, and not have allowed himself to beconveyed to Paradise.' '*Is there much sailing on the Nile, Papa ?Will you tell us what sorts of boats areused ?" said Edith.There are between five and six thousandboats constantly in movement on the twobranches of the Nile, the Rosetta and Damiettabranches ; and, from the point of their union,up to Essouan. There is the first cataract,as it is called — but it is not a cataract, it isTHE NILE. 35merely a rapid, where the waters rush throughthe granite rocks — having, however, channelsso large that, during many months of theyear, the boats can be hauled through, andproceed to Wadi Haifa, the second cataract.Boats on the Nile are of all sizes, fromthe smallest punt to terms, which will convey200 tons of goods. They are for the mostpart of coarse construction, carrying enormouslylarge triangular sails, and are frequentlyoverturned by the sudden gusts onthe river. It has happened to me to besailing quietly up one bank of the Nile,and all of a sudden, without any notice, tofind my boat whirled away, and left highand dry on the opposite side. Accidentsare perpetually occurring ; so often thatthey excite little interest, and the Arabswill seldom interfere to succour the wrecked.36 MINOR MORALS.In December 183T I was sailing up the Nilein one of the Pacha's boats, and we saw inthe middle of the stream, keel upwards, anoverturned vessel, on whose sides were apilgrim and three or four other persons, whostretched out their hands towards us as wepassed, and cried, imploringly, for aid. Oursailors would not listen either to our requestsor to our menaces, requiring them to stop.They answered, there were other Teats behind ;and so there were'; two boats, with Englishtravellers, who, appealed to like ourselves, didall they could to induce their Arab sailors to helpthe shipwrecked people, but it was all in vain.They had a fine wind, they said, and would notbe delayed. Besides, why did not they swim ?though then the surface of the Nile wasrough as the stormy ocean, and he must havebeen a good swimmer indeed who would haveTHE NILE. 37trusted its waves. The Arabs might havedone so, for they are almost amphibious ; butthe poor pilgrim ! — "And what became of the poor pilgrim.Papa ?" asked Edith.Why, being invested with some authority,we applied to the governor of the next townwe reached (I think it was Manfalout), andhe despatched a boat in order to save theshipwrecked people. They had been able tocling to the keel of the vessel till succourarrived, and they were brought safe to shore,except one, whom the waves had washedaway from the vessel."Is not Manfalout the place where travellersbegin to see crocodiles on the Nile ?"inquired George, between whom and his Papathe following conversation took place :Yes ! but they sometimes come lower38 MINOR MORALS.down. However, it is only above Manfaloutthat they are seen in great numbers."." In great numbers, Papa ! How manyhave you seen at once ?'Perhaps forty or fifty, basking in thesun. I once counted fourteen close togetheron a very small sand-bank in the middle ofthe Nile."" Do they fly from travellers ?"Always, when they are awake."And is there any truth in the story thatthey have a little bird to attend them andgive them notice of danger ?"There is a bird on the Nile, found ingreat numbers in the places most frequentedby the crocodile, called by the Arabs theziczac, and by Europeans the monitor, whichalways rises with a sharp noise somewhatlike its Arabic name, and which is the birdTHE NILE. 39supposed to be the crocodile's guardian. Thestory had its origin, probably, in the simultaneousflight of the bird and of the crocodileon the approach of danger. An intelligentEnglish traveller, however, told me that hehad himself seen the monitor give notice tothe crocodile of the arrival of travellers."Does the crocodile often attack travellers?"O no ! it is really a timid animal, feedingprincipally on fish, and flying the neighbourhoodof man ; but if it can attack ahuman being without danger, it will not hesitateto do so. It is not an unfrequentthing, when a crocodile has been killed, tofind bracelets or other ornaments undigestedin its bowels."Are they easily caught ?"Not easily : but there are some of theArabs who are very dextrous in the pursuit40 MINOR MORALS.and capture of the crocodile. The Governorof Girgeh told me of a peasant who hadkilled in one day no less than seventeenlarge crocodiles. He was in the habit ofpresenting himself to the crocodile in thewater, with a heavy dagger in his hand, andof stabbing the animal in the mouth ^ orthroat ; but the crocodile is far more agilethan he is generally supposed to be, andturns round with great ease considering hisunwieldy size."Do they live to a great age ?"*' Frequently ! — in fact, even their personsget distinctly known ; and at FarshioutI heard of an immense old crocodile, withwhom all the fellahs were acquainted, andhad been so for two or three generations.He had a great reputation for cunning, nobodyhaving been able to get near enough to hurthim ; and the crocodile destroyers had quite■:5y%<:?-C<?-C:Uy^e^ - C^/.tcTHE NILE. 41abandoned the idea of entrapping him. ' Theold Timsah' was his name in his neighbourhood; and in his life he had devouredseveral children. Even to the present timethe Egyptians hold the crocodile in reverence,and you not unfrequently see a stuffed crocodilesuspended from their doors."I suppose travellers on the Nile oftenshoot at them in passing ? "Yes ! but they do not often wound themmortally, or even so seriously as to enablethem to capture one. At the sound of thegun, or the sight of the flash, they rushinto the water — where they do not swim,but walk about on the bottom, now and thenraising their heads to the surface in orderto take breath."Are there not hippopotami, also, in theNile ?"There are — but not in Egypt, or even42 MINOR MORALS.in Nubia. They are found beyond the UpperDelta, where the Nile is divided into itstwo great branches — the White and the BlueNUe."Paris.Now," said Mrs Howard to Mr Howardone evening, " will you not amuse us allby some fairy story wliicli you have heardin the East. The children will see thatthe Orientals are as romantic as ever, andthey may busy themselves in endeavouringto explain the mysteries of the tale."Well, then ! " responded Mr Howard ;the truth of the story I am about to tellwas vouched for to a European traveller (in1816) by the Pacha, the Distal Bey, theImaums of the four principal Mosques, theLeading Rabbi of the Jews, the principalArmenian merchants, and more than twenty44 MINOR MORALS.of the wealthiest inhabitants of Napoli diRomania, whose names I have before me.The traveller says that he himself visitedthe tailor who is the subject of the narrative,that he is at the head of his profession inthe place, and that he confirmed to him thestatement which he had heard before, to thefollowing purpose : —The tailor — a religious man and a devoutfollower of the Prophet — was living in singleblessedness, and, though not distinguished forthe grace or beauty of his person, a Peribecame enamoured of him, and they dwelttogether for three years in all the harmonyof domestic life. During the whole of thisperiod the tailor neither ate nor drank likeordinary mortals, and he confessed that hisPeri provided for him the most wholesomeand delicious repasts. There was only onedrawback on his happiness — that every nightParis. 45the Peri forced lii to ramble with her overmountain and valley, which at first causedhim much alarm ; but finding that no mischiefresulted to him, and that the Perialways treated him with the most affectionateattention, he submitted at last, without muchreluctance, to these midnight excursions.Napoli is a strongly fortified town, situatedon the sea-shore ; and its citadel, calledParamour, is built upon a high and ruggedprecipice. It was a work of the Venetians,and is fortified according to the rules ofart ; and, at the time of which wee arespeaking, the guard was mounted there withthe greatest regularity and strictness. Thegates of the town and of the citadel wereregularly closed at sunset, but the tailor wasoften seen within the walls of the citadel atmidnight. He frequently visited, long afterthe gates were shut, the Governor, and other46 MINOR MORALS.persons dwelling there. His union with thePeri, and the fact of her transporting himthrough the air at night, were so universallyknown that his presence excited no sort ofanxiety ; and the respect of the Turks forthe Peri race led them to consider the tailoras a most honoured and happy man, andthey were unwilling to interfere with thearrangements of his unearthly fair. It wasnot, however, of his being conveyed to thecitadel, where he had acquaintances and friends,that he complained. The Peri sometimestransported him to the top of a very highmountain, and left him, shivering in the cold,while she visited her own people or attendedto her own affairs ; after a short absence,however, she invariably returned, and escortedhim safely back to their abode at Napoli diRomania. No doubt it was somewhat distrustfulon the part of the Peri, but it wasPEi^is. 47the jealousy of love — and they say the loveof a Peri is particularly jealous. The tailor,after all, did not murmur much. He hadgiven up his business, as the Peri providedfor all his wants ; and, could he have beenspared the midnight travels, he would havebeen the happiest of tailors — no ! not oftailors, for he had quitted the board — butthe happiest of men.After three years had thus passed, thePeri came to him one day with a mournfulcountenance, followed by a Djin (or Genius),and told him that a war had broken outbetween the Peri race to which she belongedand another Peri nation ; and, as it was theusage among them for both sexes to takepart in the fray, she was about to join thelegions of her own people. She talked patheticallyof the bliss she had enjoyed in thelast three years of her existence ; and ' O ! my48 MINOR MORALS.love !' exclaimed lie, ' should I escape thedangers of war, I shall hasten back to theewith what delight shall I hasten back !But if (and here tears like pearls fell fromher bright black eyes) — if I am among thesacrificed, this Djin, my faithful servant, willbring thee my bloody garment, and thouart free to forget thy Peri and to wed withwhom thou wilt.' Great was the distress, andviolent the despair, of the tailor. He saidall that love could say — lu-get everythingthat prudence and fear could urge — pleadedentreated — nay ! it is said he wept : itwas all in vain. ' We are not to be judgedby the low standard of mortals,' said thePeri ; ' my purpose is not to be changed.'Then the tailor fell into an agony of grief,and entreated, as one last, one solitary favour,that he might be permitted to accompanyhis beloved, to battle at her side, to protectZTZct^ c^Paris. 49her person — to fight for her, to die for her —never was tailor more heroically eloquent.Upon which the Djin fixed upon the tailora look so terrible that he felt the earth wasshaking under him and the heavens above himand he hid himself trembling behind thePeri. • How then,' said she, with a sweetsmile, ' how then, wouldst thou, my beloved !meet a countless army, every one of whomis a thousand times more terrible than thisslave of mine — this miserable Djin?' 'Moreterrible ! ' exclaimed the affrighted tailor,more terrible ! dost thou say ? ' ' Could Iexpose thee — wouldst thou forgive me forexposing thee to beings whose very appearancewould strike thee blind — beings as subtleas air, as violent as whirlwinds, as swift asfalling stars, as wise as angels, and as strongas Gods — beings, the meanest of whom notall the united heroes of earth could wound —VOL. III. D50 MINOR MORALS.and any one of whom would destroy themightiest army that the mightiest sovereignamong men ever gathered together?' ' Heavenforfend,' said the tailor, pulling down over hisface the folds of his turban, « I ' — but here hisvoice failed him — and at that moment the Peripressed upon his lips the farewell kiss, andhe heard her gentle blessings descend uponhim as she winged her way through the air,accompanied by her mysterious attendant.Sadly changed was the lot of the tailor.No longer did unearthly fingers prepare hisfood, nor unearthly love provide for histhousand necessities. Yet a ray of hope wasleft— perhaps — perhaps the Peri might returnto him again, smiling and victorious. Thetailor hoped in vain. In a few days the Djinsuddenly entered his dwelling — he shook inthe tailor's face the bloody garment of thePeri. < Dead ! dead ! ' said the terrible mes-paris.51singer, in a low and mournful voice. ' Dead ! 're-echoed the tailor, hiding his face in hishands, in a tone far more low and moresepulchral — but he needed no further confirmation— he raised himself up, but the Djin wasdeparted.The tailor fell ill ; his life was despairedof — but he recovered. He was obliged toresume his ancient profession, which he fondlyhoped he had abandoned for ever, when hehad been wedded to something nobler thanroyalty — to something little less than angelic.But he languishes in widowhood — he has vowedhe will never be the husband of one of earthlyblood. You may see him now (or you mighthave done so before the Greek revolution),sitting in his shop with lack-lustre eye, andprecocious wrinkles. He will talk willinglywith you of his Peri-love — it is a theme, indeed,that he delights to dwell on, and he will52 MINOR MORALS.assure you, by the beard of the prophet, and bythe swords of all the faithful, that every word ofthis narrative is strictly, and to the letter, true.''^What a strange story ! " exclaimed Edith."And did the people really believe it?"No doubt," said Mr Howard, " as firmlyas our forefathers believed in the existence ofwitches, and the appearance of spirits."Do tell us another," said one, and thewhole of the company joined in the petition.The story I will now speak of I heard inthe same neighbourhood as the last. A Perihad become enamoured of a young Turk atNapoli di Romania, and loved him with themost earnest affection. On one occasion thePeri told him that she was forced to leave himin order to attend a meeting of all the genii ofthe town and neighbourhood, which was totake place that night in one of the principalpublic baths. The young man urgentlyParis. 53entreated to be allowed to accompany her,which she resisted, saying that she loved himtoo much to expose him to the dangers of suchan adventure. But he would hear of no refusalhe insisted on her granting his request —he said that her compliance would be thebest evidence of her affection — in fact, hisacquaintance with the Peri had made him boldand reckless. The Peri still endeavoured toinduce him to abandon his request. It wasin vain ; so saving: ' Well ! if it must be,' shevanished, and soon returned bringing a greensprig, which she put into his hands and toldhim to take special care not to let it fall, whileshe whispered into his ear the password toenable him to enter the bath. His eagercuriosity led him thither even before the sunwas down, but his Peri had preceded him,and she took him into a corner where shecovered him with a hasrah (a mat of palmsMINOR MORALS.leaves) and as the night came on a largecompany gathered together of Djins and Paris,till the baths were exceedingly crowded. Henoticed that there were many distinctions asto rank and power, and that his Peri occupieda very elevated place among the company.When the festivities began, a dog with yellowhair entered, and began to play all sorts oftricks for the amusement of the guests. Hewas accompanied by another animal somewhatresembling him. The yellow-haired dog waswell known to the young Turk, for he hadoften noticed him drinking blood and eating allsorts of filthiness near the butchers' shops inthe town— but now he took various shapes, andexhibited his antics for the amusement of theassembled genii. Long ere the sun was up thecompany dispersed, and the Turk, returningthrough the butchers' row, saw the yellow-haireddog, and thoughtlessly but involuntarilyParis. 55exclaimed, ' Scoundrel ! thou livest upon bloodhere, but what dost thou do elsewhere ?'Upon which the dog looked into his face,growled, and scampered away. Within anhour the Peri joined the young Turk. « Unhappyman !' said she, ' what hast thou done ?so little to be trusted — so careless aboutone whom he professes to love ' ; and then shetold him that the dog had been to complain tothe Prince of the Peris — that she had beentried and condemned — and the sentence wasthat she should be transformed into a serpent,and laid down at the door of the HunkiarDjiamisi (imperial mosque) before the conclusionof the morning prayer, as doubtlessthe Mussulmanss would immediately and easilydestroy the serpent, that being the time whenthe animal is torpid and helpless, until thebeams of the sun give it activity and energy.But thou may est save me, love !' said the56 MINOR MORALS.Peri, 'and surely thou wilt save me. Cometo the mosque at the morning prayer — be thelast to enter, the first to leave the mosque —seize on the serpent — my lips, which have sooften kissed thee, shall never do thee harm —convey me to thy chamber — but first providethyself with incense to break the spell (she putthe directions into his hand) — and I shall berestored to thee — thy own Peri love.' Andthe youth promised obedience. He went tothe mosque punctually, and placed himselfclose to the door, or rather to the cloth curtainwhich takes that name. Ere prayers whereended, an involuntary sleep came over him,from which he was aroused by violent andrepeated cries outside the mosque; he staggeredaffrighted out of the door, and inquired,in the greatest agitation, the cause of thetumult. Hundreds of voices answered, ' Aserpent, a great serpent — a serpent, at the veryParis. 57door of the mosque.* ' Where, where ? ' askedthe young man — ' where ? I will seize it — I amnot afraid.' ' Seize it ! ' the people cried —seize it ! stones and sticks enough have madethat needless — it is flung on the roof of theMedresseh' (a Mussulman school in the neighbourhood).It was piteous to see the youngman, for he cried bitterly, ran about like amaniac, and insisted on getting upon the roofof the school. Everybody supposed him tobe mad, and he was soon laid hold of andordered to be chained. ' But listen to me,' hesaid, ' listen' — and he told the people the storyof his love with the Peri, and what had beenher fate. They took pity upon him and hewas released; they even assisted him to geton the roof of the Medresseh — but no serpentwas there — no sign that any serpent had everbeen there ; the young man wrung his handsin despair, and flung himself down from theD 253 MINOR MORALS.roof into the street. It was believed he wouldbe found dead, but he luckily fell on a highpile of mud, which everybody knows is atthe foot of the Medresseh.The young man, my informant tells me,is still alive — moody, melancholy, and unmarried."It is," continued Mr Howard, " by nomeans uncommon to find in the Levant personswho, without any motive or any wish todeceive, narrate, with the utmost simplicity,stories of supernatural appearances they themselveshave witnessed. The conviction of theexistence of Peris and Djins and Afrits is souniversal that no reputation for veracity wouldbe diminished in the slightest degree bystatements that, to our ears, would seemwilful if not wicked inventions. A youngman who was in the service of the physicianof Hall Bey, of Zeitouni, used to describeParis 59the visits he received in his childhood fromPeris of heavenly beauty, clad in long robesof snowy whiteness, who kissed his lips andpatted his cheeks as we are wont to do witha lovely child. They came in large bodies,and on one occasion, when he behaved withimpropriety, he received (he said) a violentblow on his left cheek, which left a permanentmark through the remainder of his life.When he grew to manhood the Peris ceasedto visit him, though he declared he had onceseen a considerable number, clad in their whitegarments, and glancing about in the air. Itwas a subject on which he was unwilling tospeak, and it was only when his master stronglyurged him that he ever consented to give anyparticulars of what he had seen.THE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES.The next day our party met as usual, andEdith made her way to her father's knee, whileMrs Howard sat on the other side of the fireplace,and the boys drew their chairs near toMr Howard."Will you give us some more stories fromthe East, dear Papa?" said the little girl,while she patted his cheek.Very willingly," was Mr Howard's reply,and to-day our talk shall be about realpersonages.In the mountains of Lebanon, whose rangedivides a great portion of Syria and Palestineat about an equal distance from the sea and theTHE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES. 61desert, lives the Emir Bestir, the Prince of theDruses. This interesting people have a religionof which, hitherto, no one has been able tolearn anything precise, neither as to the beingthey worship, nor the religious rites they celebrate; nor in what respects their creed differsfrom, nor in what it agrees with, the MaroniteChristians who occupy Mount Lebanon to thenorth — the Mussulmanss, who are the mostnumerous body in the adjacent towns andcountry — or the various other Christian sectswho are scattered over the face of Palestinein great variety, and, I am sorry to say, inperpetual discord with one another."What ! in the Holy Land!" said George,in the spot where our Saviour lived, andtaught, and died?"Alas ! even there," answered Mr Howard ;"for in no part of the Christian world arereligious quarrels so universal as in Palestine ;62 MINOR MORALS.and in no part of Palestine so active as inJerusalem; and in no part of Jerusalem soviolent as in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.There the clergy, Catholic, Greek, andArmenian, may be often seen inflicting violentblows upon one another; even the Copts,though small in number, and despised by allthe others, do not fail to take a part in thedisgraceful rioting, and it frequently happensthat the Mahommedan soldiers are called in tosettle the squabbles of the turbulent Christiancombatants. So little is the spirit of Christianityunderstood — so little are its precepts ofmildness and forbearance and beneficence practisedon the very spot which witnessed thebenignant virtues and heard the divine lessonsof Jesus."And what do the Mussulmanss say to suchproceedings ? " asked Arthur.I once heard a very thoughtful and learnedTHE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES. 63Mussulman say that lie had no doubt therewere a great many honest Christians whowished to convert both Jews and Mahometan,but while Christians were so perpetuallyengaged in quarrelling with one another, andso completely disagreed as to what was Christianity,he must be excused from paying anyattention to them.""Was that talking like a sensible man,Papa?" inquired Edith.By no means ; for if a thousand mathematicianswere violently disputing about a mathematicalproblem, would that prove there is nosuch thing as sound mathematics ? And if anumber of travellers differed about the situationof a town, or the course of a river, or the heightof a mountain, would that show there was nosuch town, or river, or mountain, or no suchscience as geography ? But it is not the lesstrue that such contests, carried on with violence64 MINOR MORALS.and intemperance, naturally disgust the disinterestedand unimpassioned lookers-on. But wemust not forget the Emir Bestir."Is he the head of their religious faith aswell as their sovereign?" interrupted George."No ! he himself, contrary to Orientalusages, has only one wife, a Greek lady, whomhe does not even keep secluded from hisintimate friends; and in the village of BestEddein, where is his palace, there is, adornedwith some very tolerable paintings sent fromRome, a handsome Catholic church, in whichChristian service is daily celebrated in theancient Syriac tongue, which is understoodand read by many of the Maronites andDruses, but, I believe, is spoken by none."Did you ever meet with any of the priestsof the Druses, Papa ? " was Edith's question.Yes ! in the village of Council, in MountLebanon, at the foot of which are the coalTHE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES. 65mines worked by Ibrahim Pacha, we wereattended by an old man and his wife, and he,I was told, was one of the Sheikhs of theDruses. His wife was much younger thanhimself — she wore the high silver horn whichall the married women among the Druses arecrowned with at the wedding ceremony, andwhich they are said never to take off by dayor by night till the moment of their death.When they walk out, the horn, which is abouteighteen inches high, stands up erect, andwhen they enter the low doors of their housesthey bend it horizontally forward. From itstop is suspended a white or black veil, withwhich they cover their countenances whenany male stranger is present. They generallyturn their back when a person ispassing, though I have often watched theirbright eyes twinkling through the holes oftheir veils, and have more than once seen,06 MINOR MORALS.unobserved, their fine Oriental countenances.I recollect that, when we took our departure,and gave the accustomed bakshish to the Drusewoman at Council she allowed her veil to bedown so much as to show a very graceful and avery grateful smile. I endeavoured to learnsomething of their religion from the husband,who, if disposed, was able to gratify my curiosity.But he would not talk on the subject;he merely said that the Druses prayed in Arabic,but did not tell me to whom, and that theyhad their temple in the mountains, to whichthey were accustomed to repair. If you inquireof a Mussulman or a Christian, you are prettycertain to be told that the Druses are idolaters,and that they worship a brazen calf.The Europeans, in corroboration of this, saythat a rudely-wrought calf was foimd in oneof their temples, but I never heard anythingmore satisfactory than conjecture. They areTHE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES. 67a very laborious people, and strongly attachedto their mountain passes, which they cultivatewith extraordinary assiduity. Nothing can bemore beautiful than the succession of terraces,from the highest to the lowest cultivable spotson the mountain sides, and in the valleys ofLebanon, which the Druses inhabit. Theymuch resemble the people of Lucca in Italyin their manner of turning every square footof earth to account. Their farms, when Iwas among them, were green with the mulberrytree (their principal product), the pomegranate,the vine, and the olive. Beautifulwater-courses irrigated their grounds; men,women, and children were all busily engagedin the labour of their rocky fields — fieldsconquered even from the precipice and themountain.There is, perhaps, no man living who representsthe character, and supports the dignity68 MINOR MORALS.of what feudal princes were in the middle agesso well as the Emir Beshir. He is the ruleroyer about 7,000 families, or about 37,000 individuals,who pay him taxes and do him homage,while he recognizes the Pacha of Egypt ashis sovereign lord. His castle, at about distance from Deir el Tamar, is situatedon the top of one of the Lebanon mountains,overlooking a large extent of a countryof consummate beauty, watered by abundantstreams, and producing the richest harvests.It can only be reached by precipitous paths,which seem like huge natural staircases ofstone, up and down, broken into the greatestirregularities by perpetual convulsions. Oneof the fine streams, which feed the groves andplains and gardens of the Prince, I tracked,by the sides of the mountains for manyhours, through an artificial channel, a wonderfulwork of masonry, which conveys it inTHE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES, 69safety along the slanting bosoms of the hills,over deep valleys and through calcareousrocks, in the midst of which it is sometimesapparently lost. Proceeding through the town,you descend into a deep and broken dell,whence you mount again towards the palaceof the Emir, which you enter by a largegate, in which are crowds of attendants, forthe table of the princely occupier providesevery day for fourteen hundred servitors.The horses of travellers and visitors of allsorts are seen scattered about the outer courts,in which are many superb Arab steeds tiedby the leg, according to the Oriental custom,and having a small circle of their own, towhich they are confined by the rope. Thecourt was echoing the responses of one magnificentcharger to another when we entered;several servants soon appeared, who conductedus to apartments, ever ready for the travelsMINOR MORALS.her, and the inquiry was made, whether we jpreferred living in the Oriental or the Euro <pean style. Curious to see what notions fromthe far West had reached an Eastern prince,we chose to be served alia franca, and tablesand chairs were brought in, table-cloth andnapkins, knives, forks, and spoons, wine, turn Ibiers and glasses; and, but for the costumesof the attendants, and the deep and fresh impressionof " the pomps and circumstances "around us, we could have fancied ourselvestransported to the neighbourhood of our ownhouses, and receiving the hospitalities of oldfriends and kindred. Our first visit was tothe Emir Emir, the son of the Prince, whoreceived us in the Oriental way in his owndivan. He did not wear a turban, but a flow Jred silk handkerchief upon his head, androm his belt there hung a watch-chain glitteringwith diamonds. Pipes, coffee, andTHE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES. 71sherbet, were served, as usual, and conversationturned upon many things and many menhis travels, for the vicissitudes of fortunehad once banished his father and himself toEgypt^their eccentric, moon-struck neighbour.Lady S. ;— but he was particularlydesirous to hear something of Sir SydneySmith, whom then and often (both beforeand afterwards in Palestine) I heard spokenof in terms of the most grateful and rememberingaffection. (So be the names of ourcountrymen ever recorded in the minds ofstrangers !) He gave us many particulars ofthe culture and produce of Mount Lebanon,and after this first conversation, for we hadmany afterwards, desired an attendant toescort us to the baths (which are among themost costly and complete in the world — inlaidwith white and variegated marble, andwanting in nothing that taste or luxury could'72 MINOR MORALS.suggest) — these he ordered to be preparedfor us if we wished it — to the different apartmentsand courts of the palace — to the chapelwhich had been recently built — to the stores,where the products of the country were collectedin immense abundance — to the kitchen,where huge copper vessels were filled withsteaming food for the noon-tide meal of themultitudinous dependents. The Prince, hisfather, he told us, was indisposed, but wouldsee us at the rise of the morrow's sun. Handsomebeds, with superb coverings, were laidout for us on the floor, so that we did notunpack our own; and soon after we rose wereceived notice that the Prince was waitingto receive us in his own apartment."Did not Mahomet Ali," asked George,disarm all the Druses, even after he hadreceived the submission of the Emir Beshir?"Yes ! he did ; and I heard," replied MrTHE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES. 73Howard, "from one present, a very touchingaccount of what passed. Many thousandstand of arms — some of which were very ancient,richly adorned and costly, the heir-plooms of families, the very dearest of the possessionsof a warlike people-^ — were collected andbrought into the court-yard of the Prince'spalace ; there they were broken one by oneand my informant said that, at every crashhe saw fire in the old man's eye, and athrill in his frame. I heard that he let falla remark, and that the Egyptian officeranswered, ' He, the Prince, was not the masterthere.' It was a needless aggravation ofsufferings which, perhaps, it was necessaryto inflict for the repose of the country, andeven for the well-being of its warlike mountaineers.The words were reported to IbrahimPacha, and the officer who uttered themwas punished."VOL. III. E74 MINOR MORALS.Nay ! but, Papa, now tell us what happenedwhen the Prince received you," said Edith,for she was a little annoyed by her brother'shaving interrupted the course of the conversation.We entered," continued Mr Howard, " asmall room, richly painted and decorated; inthe remotest corner of the divan sat one ofthe most venerable looking" men that an artistever chose for ' a model. He was clad in thelong Syrian robes, wore a turban of themingled silk and muslin of Bagdad, veryfine white cotton gloves, and no other ornamentthan a small gold chain suspended fromhis neck, at the end of which hung a seal;which every now and then his secretary — havingknelt before him, kissed the hem of hisgarments, and consulted him as to the contentsof documents in his hand — appKed, inorder to give these documents the princelyTHE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES. 75authority. His long and silvery beard fell uponhis bosom; his demeanour was in the highestdegree princely, but gracious. We took ourseats beside him, and, our Dragoman havingmore than once bent his forehead to theground, a long conversation took place, whichwas only interrupted by the arrival of servantswith refreshments, and by the dispatchof business to which his attention was calledby various messengers who arrived.We had seen much in the palace tointerest us; some of the rooms were paintedin a style far superior to anything we hadbefore remarked in the East, for most ofthe pictorial works of the Turks and Arabsshow an entire ignorance of the laws of perspective;and cattle in a distant landscape, orships on a remote sea, are often larger thanthe houses or trees, or boats in the front-ground.You may sometimes see an enemy76 MINOR MORALS.in flight, of which the man who is farthestois will be larger, if he be a person of rank,than his pursuers, who are close at hand; aswallow in the clouds will be of greaterdimensions than an eagle, and a singlehorseman will be bigger than the bridgeover which a whole army is passing. Butthere was some taste and knowledge of artin the modern apartments of the Prince'spalace ; and if there was a little of Orientalgaudiness there was nothing offensive, even toa practised eye. We were struck with thelightning conductors on different parts of thebuildings, and expressed our surprise that oneof the most advanced of philosophical discoveriesshould have made its way to the mountainsof Syria. * I saw these iron rods, 'said the Prince, ' in a European vessel, onmy way to Egypt. I inquired whether theycould not he applied to buildings, for hereTHE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES. 77we have terrible lightning storms, and I foundthat in Franciscan (the Frank or Europeancountry) they were so employed. I orderedthem to be made, and they have completelysucceeded.' The Prince talked to us of railways,to which he regretted his mountainousregions were not adapted. He made manyinquiries as to the powers of steam, both byland and water. Perhaps nothing has everproduced so great an effect on the East as thepresence of our steam-boats. They serve asaperpetual lesson to the proud ignorance ofthe Levant; they have quietly, silently, butmost effectually and eloquently obtained forus much respect and consideration from themasses of the inhabitants of the towns theyhave approached ; and not only in the seaports,but on the banks of the various riversover which they have passed — such as the78 MINOR MORALS,Nile, the Danube, and the Euphrates — theyhave disposed the people to look upon us astheir superiors in many respects. It wouldnot be easy to convince them that theyare not our superiors in the arts of war orthe arts of life ; that they are not more brave,more civilized, more virtuous, more favouredby heaven; but the appearance of a poweramong them that masters the winds and thewaves — a power present to their observationand intelligible to their senses — a powercreated and directed by infidels, set many ofthem thinking ; and though at first the steamerswere considered the work of devils, theiradoption by Mussulman sovereigns has sweptaway all such theories, and left to their inventorsthe reputation of some superiority atleast.The conversation of the Emir Bestir wasTHE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES. 79on many subjects; he supported it with greatdignity, and showed far more acquaintancewith what is going on in the world thancould be expected from a Prince who hadpassed almost the whole of his life in the remoterecesses of the mountains of Lebanon.He smoked a very long pipe, from the bowlof which the tobacco rose like a pyramid,and we understood it was a boast of histhat no person in the East could fill a pipeso well as his Chiboukdgi, or pipe-bearer.He told us he had been in his youth a greatsportsman, and his love of the chase had notabandoned him in his age ; he still hunted thegazelles, which abound in those districts, andenjoyed the exhilarating freshness of themountain breezes. He praised the salubrityof the waters, which flowed in so many directionsthrough his territory — in fact, one thing80 MINOR MORALS.that struck us at the entrance into his divanwas an Arabic inscription over a fountain,of which the translation is :Drink this pure stream, — for, without question,'Tis excellent for safe digestion."He said that he looked upon England andEnglishmen with particular interest — thatgratitude ever mingled with his feelings.He spoke of Smith (Sir Sidney) withstrong expressions of regard, I inquired whyhe had not allowed one of his sons to visitEurope, as his great predecessor (Fezredin)had done, who made in his day no smallnoise in the world. Perhaps he thought thefate of that remarkable man (who was murderedby one of the Sultans ) was no great encouragementto seek for experience amongEuropeans, for he said, ' Inshallah, we are notlikely to go and see you, but you must let usTHE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES. 8Xhear from you whenever you can find anopportunity for writing.'When we spoke of the general prosperityof the district over which he ruled, of thenoble bearing of the peasantry, of the finecultivation of the ridges of the mountains,and of the valleys, he said — ' God hasgiven me power, and I have sought to useit for the benefit of those around me.'To say the truth, nothing could exhibit theoutward look of happiness more than thescenes about us. The waterfalls from thehills above, dashing down their clear currents,which make their way into the courts of thepalace, feeding the water-courses and supplyingthe fountains. All sorts of waterbirds were flapping their wings in the sunshineor revelling in the streams of thefountain showers. Strangers and attendants,in a hundred different costumes, were around282 MINOR MORALS.the court, reposing* on their carpets, smokingtheir chiboukhs, or their narghillehs, admiringthe tall and graceful columns which supportedthe roof of the palace, watching theArab steeds, welcoming new comers, or followingwith curious inquiry those who departed:for the moment was one of greatinterest, a portion of the Druses being in astate of insurrection against the governmentof Ibrahim Pacha. «We learnt that the Emir Beshir had threesons, and that his eldest son, Emir Emir,had five. If there be any place in theworld where is exhibited a generous, princelybut unostentatious hospitality, it is in themountains of Lebanon, in the palace of thePrince of the Druses.Are the attendants of the Prince idolaters,Papa?" asked Edith.I should think a great number of themTHE PRINCE OF THE DRUSES. 83must be Catholic Christians, for they were veryanxious to take us to their church; and oneof them, who spoke a little Italian, whisperedto me, ' Siam sigh della Chest ! 'We are sons of the church."TREATMENT OF ANIMALSIN THE EAST.In Eastern countries are animals eatenwliicli are not used for food in Europe ?"was Arthur's inquiry when the family nextmet.Yes ! the Arabs eat the young eames,whose flesh somewhat resembles veal ; thewhite gazelle of the desert, but very rarelythe red gazelle of the mountains; the porcupine,and the land tortoise, are often seenin the markets of Syria ; the locust, whichwas formerly frequently salted, but now isusually fried in oil — it has not an agreeableflavour, but might well supply the absenceTREATMENT OF ANIMALS IN THE EAST. 85of other food to a hungry person — the largesnail, and many other animals. But, generally,the fare of the Orientals is simple,and consists of bread and vegetables, sourmilk and curds — while water is the almostuniversal beverage."But is it not disgusting to eat snails andtortoises ?" asked Edith."Why?" asked Mr Howard. "There isin the world a vast deal of fanciful prejudiceon the subject of food ; and nothing can bewiser than the Christian maxim, to callnothing common or unclean,' but to employin our repasts whatever is agreeable and nutritious.There are, indeed, examples of adisgusting character. Devotees in the Eastsometimes make it a point of religious distinctionto devour putrid animals ; and oneChristian monk got great reputation as adevourer of vermin."88 . MINOR MORALS.How shocking !" said Edith.True !" rejoined Mr Howard ; " but thisspecies of religious fanaticism is far less perniciousthan that which is the cause of miseryof our own fellow-men. Self-inflictions aremore pardonable than persecution of others —though both exhibit a sad ignorance of thegenuine principles of the Bible."I have heard that Mussulmanss are veryhumane to animals," said George.They are ; and they push their humanityto an excess which is equally annoying totravellers and dangerous to the public health.In the streets of Constantinople, and inalmost every town and village in the East,are immense numbers of dogs — who have nomasters," but who seem as much owners ofthe district in which they dwell as theother inhabitants. Nay ! so complete is theirpossession, and so accurate their knowledge,TREATMENT OF ANIMALS IN THE EAST. 87of long recognized and undisturbed rights,that I have seen a poor hound, that hadwandered beyond the limits of his tribe,attacked by a neighbouring band and escortedinto his native locality — where the dogs thatescorted him were attacked in their turn,repulsed as invaders, and compelled to scamperback to their own territory. A gentlemanconnected with the police at Constantinople,and who was very desirous of removing thenuisances from the streets — and the dogs withthem, who are in themselves nuisances andthe causes of other nuisances, for they livemostly on the dead bodies of animals andother putrid substances, and very often attackpassengers — told me that the police had notbeen able to overcome the prejudices of thepeople so far as to legislate for the dispersionof the race ; but, as a step thereto, theywere discussing the possibility of separating88 MINOR MORALS.the males from the females, and beginningreform by introducing a sort of marriage lawfor the whole canine community — so that nodog's wedding should take place without licence.It is a great charm in the East tofind the wild-fowl so approachable. In theBosphorus the sea-gulls are often seen swimmingtranquilly, so close to the barques thatthe dripping of the oars falls on their whiteplumage. Tens of thousands of stormy petrelsare constantly seen flying, in everlastingmotion, from the Euxine to the Propontis,from the Black to the White Sea (as theyare called by the Turks), and they are nevermolested."Is there not some superstition aboutthese birds?" interrupted Arthur."They are called by the French ' Amesdamned,' and are believed, in the Levant,to be souls in purgatory who are condemnedTREATMENT OF ANIMALS IN THE EAST. 89to know no repose, to find no place of restuntil the day of judgment. Tens of thousandsof these birds are seen passing inrapid flight up and down the Bosphorusfrom south to north, and north to south;they just touch the water as they hurry by,and, with strong and untired wing, they continue,like the Wandering Jew, in unceasingrestlessness. No doubt the fancy which hasassociated these agitated creatures with thespirits of immortal men has obtained protectionfor them by giving them a mysteriouscharacter of sanctity.""So ignorance and superstition may havetheir uses. Papa ! " exclaimed Edith.There are superstitions growing out ofthe best affections and tendencies of our nature,"said Mr Howard.O yes ! " said Edith, " I dare say thesuperstition about the red-breast has saved90 MINOR MORALS.many a one from destruction. But tell usmore of all the birds in the air and all thefishes in the sea. Papa ! " added Edith.Of fishes, the most remarkable in theBosphorus are the porpoises, which approachclose to the boats. You know they are thedolphins of fable, and are often seen risingcompletely out of the water, and seem tolive a most joyous life among and upon thewaves. It was proposed the other day toestablish a porpoise-fishery for the sake oftheir oil, as they might be captured withgreat ease in the narrow channels of theBosphorus, but partly from vague superstitionand partly from ignorant miscalcidation,permission could not be obtained from theTurkish Government, and the porpoises arestill likely to roll about in safety in theTurkish seas. It was, however, rather anodd answer which the Turk gave to theTREATMENT OF ANIMALS IN THE EAST. 91American who wanted to catch the porpoises' They cause the smaller fish to cometo us"Ha ! ha ! " said the children, laughingly."Do not they live upon the smaller fishes?"To be sure ! " said Mr Howard.The children laughed again more loudlythan before.I thought the locust eaten by John theBaptist was a vegetable, the fruit of thelocust tree," said Arthur.Some commentators, unacquainted withthe East, have supposed so; but nobodycould have doubted what the Baptist atewho had been in Palestine, and seen theimmense number of locusts on the banks ofthe Jordan. They sometimes almost darkenthe air, and destroy all vegetation. I haveseen a cloud of locusts settle on a greenfield,and in a few minutes not a blade of92 MINOR MORALS.grass was left standing. In 1835 they committedsuch terrible ravages that the army of IbrahimPacha was employed for their destruction,and they collected together, in a short time, noless than 65,000 ardebs, or 325,000 bushels ofdead locusts. Twice I have seen the wholepopulation of a district in motion, making wearupon the locusts. Once on Mount Lebanon,when reaching the top of one of its many summits,we observed a large gathering in the valleybelow. There were the Sheikh and theauthorities on horseback, armed cap-a-pee,galloping about in all directions, and multitudesof people — men, women, and children,bearing branches of trees, with which theywere beating about the air, and driving theyoung locusts towards pits which had beenprepared for them. Great shouts and noisesand clamour of all sorts — every person encouragingthe rest to exertion — the whole^oi:>(.6^/'- a^eJ-^t^z/y&'ty^ .TREATMENT OF ANIMALS IN THE EAST. 93scene looked like the pell-mell of a bloodyfray, and our first impression was that therehad been an irruption of foreign invaders, ormountain robbers, that the whole populationhad turned out in self-defence. On anotheroccasion, in the neighbourhood of Beyrout,we were stopped on our journey by largefires and deep excavations in the main road.We saw on an elevated spot some persons inauthority giving the word of command to alarge body of peasants, who looked like amoving forest. They approached a placewhere millions of young locusts, scarcely aslarge as grasshoppers, had covered the earth,which was as black as if a funeral pall hadbeen spread over it. By a general onsetthey were driven into the flames or sweptinto the pits; armies were indeed destroyed,but armies escaped —escaped to ravage thecountry in the coming year."94 MINOR MORALS.But if they are used for food, Papa !may not their presence be as much a goodas an evil?"They are not so generally nor so muchliked now, as to make their presence otherthan a plague and a scourge ; and whilebetter food is accessible they will never begreatly in demand for the table. In UpperEgypt, the peasantry have often brought tomeskewers with-twenty or thirty live locustsstuck upon them, and wherever it has happenedto me to request a dish to be cookedI found the peasant well acquainted with themanner of cooking. I have never seen themintroduced at the tables of the opulent."But," said Edith, who had more thanonce sought to be heard while Mr Howardwas speaking, " I am glad you have told usabout the locusts, but you mentioned thatthe stormy petrels were as restless as theTREATMENT OF ANIMALS IN THE EAST. 95Wandering Jew. Now I have heard of theWandering Jew, but never knew what itmeant. Pray tell us something about theWandering Jew ; who was he, and where didhe wander ? "It is an old Oriental legend," said MrHoward ; " the Jew is still wandering overthe world, they say, and is doomed to wanderwithout respite or rest till the judgmentday.""And why?" asked Edith.The legend says that when Jesus wascarrying his cross to Calvary, he stopped atthe door of the Wandering Jew, and, weariedwith his heavy burden, asked for permissionto rest, upon which the Jew insulted andabused him, and answered, ' Move on, moveon;' he had hardly uttered the words erea whirlwind carried him away, and he heard,in a voice of thunder, the words, ' Move on.96 MINOR MORALS.move on.' The privilege of dying was takenfrom him, and he was condemned to wanderthrough the world as long as the world lasts;always weary, always longing for rest, butwhenever he stops the whirlwind seizes him,and the horrible words, ' Move on, move on,'are sounded in his ears. The old story istold in a ballad, which is very well knownon the Continent, and of which I will readyou a translation —THE WANDERING JEW,Of all the miseriesThat ever mortals knew.The greatest and the worstIs of the Wandering Jew.O! sad and desolateIs that poor wanderer's fate.In Brabant, near the townOf Brussels, as he walked.Some friendly citizensWith the poor wanderer talked.There ne'er had passed that wayA beard so long and grey;Wffx e>-vM,ics'WK>^^■e^ //(^ii'^yi^is^'u^Tz.y^ /k^??y'-.TREATMENT OF ANIMALS IN THE EAST. 97His clothes were bare and torn,Odd-fashioned, as if heFrom distant lands had come —And come in misery ;And covering him aforeAn apron dark he wore.Good day ! ' the people said,Stop ! tell us whence you come,Stop ! tell us where you go,Stop ! tell us why you roam.Old man, we wish to knowWhy you are wandering so ?'r cannot stop,' he said —I cannot stop ; my lotIs ever to move on ;To move, and tarry not %I wander night and day —I cannot, dare not stay.''■ Come with us to the inn.Old *man ! and rest you there ;Come and partake with usA pot of strengthening beer ;We'll welcome you, old man !As warmly as we can.'VOL. III. F98 MINOR MORALS.Fain would I drink with you,But there's a high command ;I dare not sit and rest,I am condemned to stand.Your kindness, courteous men II can but thank again.''But tell us, ancient man!For we would fain be told.How old you are? — in truthYou must be very old ;A century, we should guess,You surely are not less.'Yes, eighteen hundred * yearsAnd more have on me roll'd ;I feel the weight of age,For I was twelve years old"When Jesus Christ was born ;Mine is an age forlorn.'Then, surely history' tellsA tale of truth, and youMust be the very man —Isaac, the Wandering Jew.I have adapted the ag-e to the present time.TREATMENT OF ANIMALS IN THE EAST. 99Now tell us, tell us true,Are you the Wandering Jew ? 'Yes ! Isaac Equidem,That is my name, I own ;Born in Jerusalem,The city of renown.Too true ! my friends, too true !I am the Wandering Jew.The Wandering Jew — I tread.Wearied, from clime to clime,I roam round the world —'Tis now the fifth sad time.While generations dieI live — O hapless I!I cross the stormy seas.The rivers, and the rills.The wastes, the wilds, the woods,The mountains and the hills,The valley and the plain —'Tis all one restless pain,I've travelled Europe o'er,I've been through Asia all,I've heard the battle roar,I've seen the warriors fall :100 MINOR MORALS.But sabre, shell, or shot,My misery ended not.I've seen America,All Africa's known to me,I've watched the frightful marchOf man's mortality;But I can find no easeFrom death or plague-disease,And nought can I possess ;Nor house, nor land, nor gold,Two pennies in my purse.And then my all is told.Wandering from door to door —So much, but never more.'We did not believe the tale.We thought it was a lie.As other lies that comeTo cheat credulity ;But now we see 'tis true-^ —Forgive us, Wandering Jew !But tell us, tell us, whatYour grievous crime could beSo visited by GodWith such great misery ;TREATMENT OF Animals IN THE EAST. 101Great surely was the offence,That brought such recompense.'*It was my hardihood,My recklessness and sin —mercy! if I couldBut wash my conscience clean ;My sin, my shame, is this —1 used my Lord amiss.I met him with his crossOn Calvary's weary hill;He said, with gentle smile(I see him smiling still),Here let the Saviour rest —He's weary and distrest."But, cold and brutal, ISaid, " Culprit ! — No I be gone,And trouble not my door;Move on, I say, move on.Thy presence wearies me,So off— so off with thee."He turned on me his eye,A cloud came o'er his brow.And answered, with a sigh,Thou shalt move on — yes, thou !102 MINOR MORALS.A thousand thousand years,Till judgment day appears."That very day I leftMy home, and from that dayI wander through the worldMy weary, weary way ;No rest, no sleep I know —By day by night 'tis so.I cannot wait — farewell !I thank your courtesy,But while I wait a hellOf torment presses me ;I cannot sit, nor stay,But must away, away.' "The children were much pleased with theballad, and, while they expressed great horrorat the Jew's brutality, they all agreedthat the infliction was too severe, and notconsistent with His character, who taught usto forgive even our enemies, and who askedpardon, not punishment, for those who persecutedhim.TREATMENT OF ANIMALS IN THE EAST. 103But the subject is a fine one for poetry,"said Mr Howard, "and you shall hear how ithas been treated by a true poet, Stranger,though the verses as translated into Englishare far inferior to the original French : — •One glass of water, Christian true 1To him that's weary — gracious HeavenReward thee — Pm the Wandering Jew,By the eternal whirlwind driven jBy years not worn, but sore opprest,And longing for the judgment day,Praying for rest, to find no rest,Cursing each morn's returning ray.Ever— everEarth revolves, I rest me never—Ever wandering — ever, ever.And eighteen centuries now have spedOn the dark wrecks of Rome and Greece ;I have seen the ashes scatteredOf thousand shifting dynasties ;Seen good, unfruitful good, and illProlific, while the tempest rolled ;Seen two new worlds the circle fillWhich one world occupied of old.Ever, ever.Earth revolves — I rest me never.104 MINOR MORALS.The ceaseless change is Heaven's decree —On dying things I fix my heart,And scarce I love them ardentlyEre the wild whirlwind cries, ' Depart f ^The poor man asks relief — my handIs stretched the debt of love to pay —But ere sweet charity's demandIs granted, I am whirl'd away —Ever, ever.On the soft grass, in flowerets drest,Near the fresh stream beneath the tree,If from my misers I would rest,The whirlwind howls and summons me.O why should angry Heaven denyOne moment — one of sweet repose ?For were the grave eternity.It would not rest me from my woes —Ever, ever.Those laughing girls, those sporting boys.Remind me of mine own at play ;My heart would revel in their joys —The whirlwind hurries me away.Ye old, who die, O envy notMy miserable fate forlorn ;For I must tread upon the spotWhere yet shall sleep the child unborn—Ever, ever.TREATMENT OF ANIMALS IN THE EAST. 105I seek the venerable wallsWhich in ray early youth I knew —I stop — the eternal whirlwind calls,Tyrannic, ' Onwards, onwards, Jew !Onwards ! Exist while all aroundIs perishing; in this thy home —"Where all thy forefathers have foundA tomb — for thee there is no tomb ;*Ever, ever.A cruel smile of scorn and hateI at the godlike Jesus threw.The earth is shaking *neath my feet,The whirlwind drives me on — adieu !Ye pitiless, O tremble whenYe think of me — the wretched me ;God in my fate avenges menBut not his own divinity —Ever, ever.Earth revolves, I rest me never —Ever wandering — ever, ever.r 2VAMPIRES.When will you tell us, Papa ! some morestories about Fairies or Ghosts, for a littlevariety, you know, is so pleasing ?" saidEdith to Mr Howard, as the time for theirevening conversation approached.Why, wee will take the opinion of themajority, Edith !" replied her father. " Whatsays Mamma ?""O Mamma !" exclaimed one of the boys;I am sure Mamma will let us support Edith'smotion to-day, and Papa will give us somethingsupernatural.So be it, children !" said Mrs Howard,VAMPIRES. 107consentingly, " and we will be unanimous inour petitions to Papa."Agreed ! " responded Mr Howard ; '" andI think I will give you some account of theVampires, of which I dare say you haveoften heard. And no Oriental superstitionis more general or more disgusting than thebelief in Shades, or Vampires. A dead bodywill become a Vampire, it is said — if, for thefirst week after death, it is exposed to theaction of the sun's rays ; and, if forty daysare allowed to pass without the removal ofthe corpse from such a situation, it is nolonger to be found among the dead, butreceives its horrible mission to torment andto alarm the living.Some of the proceedings of the Vampiresare more mischievous than wicked. Theypour vinegar into wine, mix honey and mealtogether, salt with sugar, oil with butter ; but108 MINOR MORALS.they also beat, and sometimes are said tomurder, their old acquaintances. They appeareither in the character they had while alive,or assume the shape of an animal, or evenwander about invisible upon the earth.So little doubt attaches to the existenceof Vampires that the Cadi of a district isfrequently applied to for an Islam, or authority,to enable a Chadedgi or Vampirdgi(Vampire-hunter)' to visit burial-places, toexamine graves, and to take any other measuresto discover and to defeat the machinations ofVampires. These men profess to be gifted,by means of certain herbs, with the powerof tracking a Vampire even when he is invisibleto others. They act gratuitously,refusing all recompense ; but are bound notto communicate their unknown secrets to anybut their hereditary descendants. The opiniongenerally maintained is, that the Chadedgi areVAMPIRES. 109themselves descended from Vampires on thepaternal side ; and it is an undoubted factthat, in the districts where the Vampires aremost common, the Vampirdgis are to be foundin the greatest numbers. The remedy growswith the growth of the evil.Having obtained, then, authority fromthe Cadi, the Vampirdgi sets out on a visitto all the tombs in the neighbourhood, andsometimes undertakes a journey of manyleagues. He discovers, by arts unknown, thetomb of the Vampire ; and on the followingSaturday (for it is only on Saturday thatthe Vampires are at home) the Vampirdgi,the local authorities, and crowds of peoplehasten to the place, which is surrounded bymen on horseback, each with a drawn sabrein his hand. Nobody can tell why thereare so many guards — but so it is ; and, underthe direction of the Vampirdgi, the grave is110 MINOR MORALS.opened, and the body is always discovered —the skin peeled ois, the muscles fresh andred but swelled) the hair and beard (if it bethecorpse of a man) considerably lengthened.There is no disagreeable odour, but the smellis solely that of newly-uncovered earth. (Remember,this is the account given by thepeople themselves.) The spectators all retireto some distance, while the Chadedgi drivesa pointed stake through the heart of thecorpse, from whence there is always an emissionof blood. The crowd then approach, afuneral pile is prepared, and the body, withthe stake, is burnt till they are both whollyconsumed:— and, the ashes being deposited inthe grave, the Vampire can molest his neighboursno more. The proceedings vary somewhatin different parts of the East ; those Ihave described are exactly such as take placein the Turkish provinces on the Danube.VAMPIRES. IllIt is not an uncommon thing for aGovernor, at the request of a district, toorder the burial-place to be changed, whenit is suspected of being favourable to thecreation of Vampires. Old Ali Pacha ofTannin issued several such decrees ; and Ihave known instances where the inhabitantsof whole villages have left their houses andpassed the night in the fields, when it wassupposed a Vampire had got into theirhabitations.At Sees, in Macedonia, there was aVampire which created great disturbance. Heoften visited the house in which he had dweltwhen alive, and amused himself by peltingthe persons he found in it with pigeon'sdung. One day, when there was a largecompany, a daring young man bid defianceto the Vampire, told him to show himself,and challenged him to single combat. He112 MINOR MORALS.was answered by a shower of pigeon's dung-upon which he drew a pistol from his belt,and fired at the spot whence the showerproceeded ; but great was everybody's astonishmentwhen, instead of going directly tothe object, the ball stopped in the middle ofthe room and fell perpendicularly down uponthe floor. Immediately quantities of dirt werehurled at the persons who were present, andthey were obliged to fly from the place.A Vampirdgi was immediately sent for,and he came, accompanied by a crowd ofpeople. Placing himself in the middle ofthe court, he wrote an inscription on a pieceof paper, which he threw into the air, whereit continued describing circles for more thanaquarter of an hour, when it fell perpendicularlyto the ground. The Chadedgi immediatelydrove a staff", with a sharp ironpoint, through the paper — and, on lifting itVAMPIRES. 113up, a small frog was seen pierced throughby the iron. A fire had been before kindled,and in the midst of the fire he placed thestair, the paper, and the frog — and, when allwere consumed, the ashes were collected, takento the churchyard, and buried ; and thevillage was never afterwards disturbed by theVampire.A district celebrated for its number ofVampires is that of Sari-gueul, in the neighbourhoodof Japonica. Any one who likesto visit that part of Macedonia might fill avolume with the stories he could collect.That which I am about to relate was relatedby the Governor, and verified by the Mufti,of Modena, who said that fifteen hundredpersons were willing to swear to the truthof the statement.In the village of Embord there died,some years ago, a Greek peasant of the name114 MINOR MORALS.of Marco Loutclie. He left a widow andtwo daughters, aged eight and ten years.One evening, about three months after hisdeath, while the woman and her children wereemployed in spinning flax by lamp-light,Marco appeared. The door had not beenopened, and they were naturally alarmed bythe presence of a man, whom they at firstsupposed to be a robber ; but their alarm wasincreased tenfold when they perceived that theirvisitor was one of the dead — that he was herhusband and their father. But he spoke tothem in gentle tones — declared he would dothem no harm — that his visit was one ofaffection — and that, with their consent, heproposed to pass every night in their company.He said he should not come empty-handedin future ; and, in fact, at his next visit, hebrought them each a pair of loose trowsers,such as are worn by Oriental women. EveryVAMPIRES. 115evening something was added to their wardrobe,or to their stock of culinary v^are andhousehold furniture ; while in the village ofEncore, and the neighbouring villages, nothingwas heard of but the robberies ofgarments, chairs, tables, pots and pans — andnobody could discover the thief. Not a wordwas said by the woman about their growingpossessions, for, in fact, the Vampire hadmenaced them with dreadful vengeance ifthey ever opened their lips on the subject.In other particulars the conduct of the Vampirewas reprehensible, and he was fond of talkingwith and caressing the girls. After about amonth he had made himself quite at homein the house, where he passed all his nights,but departed at the dawn of day ; when hiswidow, alarmed lest her conduct should bedeemed sinful, determined to consult the Papa(Greek priest) of the parish, and to ask his116 MINOR MORALS.counsel in so very embarrassing a state ofthings. The Papa recommended her to beprudent, to avoid any quarrel, but to endeavourto worm out from the Vampire wherehe passed his time from sunrise to sunset —as it would not be possible to destroy himin the churchyard, he having been dead morethan forty days. He even recommended herto welcome him, to speak of him and acttowards him with all kindness and affection,and to employ every winning art in orderto ascertain where he went when he desertedher in the morning. The widow managedit all with so much dexterity that, after afew days, she was able to communicate to thePriest that her husband passed his days inthe decayed trunk of a chestnut-tree — one ofseven or eight which grew at a short distancefrom the village, on the north-east side. Acommunication was, therefore, made to theVAMPIRES. 117local authorities, and the usual permission wasgiven. On the following Saturday the peoplecollected, and surrounded the trees ; but, asnone of them were to appearance hollow, itwas necessary to climb them — and on the topof one of the trunks, where it divided itselfinto branches, a large hole was discovered,and in that hole a dead body, standing erect,exhaling no disagreeable odour whatever. Theceremonies which have been described tookplace ; the tree was cut down and burntwith the corpse.A proclamation was issued throughout thedistrict that those who had lost anythingshould apply to the Turkish Commander,who would restore their property to them.He said that a great many people demandedthings they had never lost, and that themost violent disputes took place between thevarious claimants. But he averred the exact118 MINOR MORALS.truth of the facts, and added that the widowdeclared, before the competent tribunal, thatthe Vampire was cold as death, and that histouch was perfectly icy.""Is it not very likely, Papa ! that thewidow was a receiver of stolen goods, andthat, on detection, she invented the story ofthe Vampire ?" said George.That may well be," answered Mr Howard ;for I believe, in nine cases out of ten, thebelief in Ghosts, Genii, and Vampires is usedin the East by clever rogues, as a means ofcarrying on and of concealing their fraudulentdoings."MAHOMET ALL*^ Papa ! you have seen much of MahometAli Pacha; will you tell us something abouthim ? Where was he born ? " was Arthur'srequest to Mr Howard when next they allmet together.He was born at Camilla in Roumelia," washis father's answer, "and he told me he wasthe youngest of sixteen children. He wasmuch indulged by his father and mother, andwas a great favourite of his brothers and sisters.He once said to me, ' Do not wonder if I amsometimes impatient and want to have my ownway. I was never used to contradiction. Ihave scarcely ever known misfortune. I was120 MINOR MORALS.born under a smiling star, and that star hassmiled upon me all my life through. ' "But has not Mahomet Ali committed agreat many cruel deeds — did he not inviteall the Mamelukess to a festival, and causethem to be murdered ? " inquired George.And I have heard," added Arthur, '' thatone of them sprung, with his fine Arabhorse, over the battlements of the high citadelof Cairo, and so saved his life."What you have heard is true," said MrHoward, " and all that Mahomet Ali or hisfriends urge for his justification is that theMamelukess were plotting against him, andwould have destroyed him, had he not destroyedthem."What is meant by a Mameluke, Papa ?"asked Edith.A Mameluke, my dear, means a slave.The Mameluke in the East is a whiteIMAHOMET ALL 121person who was originally bought by a Turkishmaster. The Mamelukess come from Circassiaand Georgia, the Morea, and otherparts of the Ottoman Empire; sometimesthey are sold by their parents; sometimesthey are taken in war; and there are casesin which they have become voluntary slavesof a Mussulman master. Joseph, when hewas sold by his brethren in Syria to theMidianite merchants, was nothing but a Mameluke; and he rose to power in Egypt,under Pharaoh, as hundreds have risen whoare now in the Pacha's service — commandinghis fleets and armies, and occupying the veryhighest posts about his person and in hisGovernment. A Mameluke slave becomes apart of his master's family, is fed and clothedby him, and frequently gives evidence ofextraordinary attachment and devotion. Toadvance him in life is one of the greatVOL. III. G122 MINOR MORALS.objects of his master's policy. Usually, whena Mameluke slave gets to a marriageableage, a wife is found for him, and he issometimes established independently of hisowner. Of the Egyptians who have beensent to be instructed in Europe, many werepurchased in their boyhood by the Pachaand his son. It is seldom they know anythingof their parentage, and I have often taken occasionto inquire how far the feelings ofaffection, which children experience towardstheir parents, could be transferred to strangers,and to masters."Did you ever hear a Mameluke tell thestory of his being kidnapped, and of hissufferings, and of wdiat he felt when he wastorn from his home ?" asked Edith.Yes ! I once got a Bey, who had acquireddistinction in the Pacha's army, torelate to me what he recollected of theMAHOMET ALL 123history of his childhood; and what he saidwas this: — ' The earliest thing I can rememberis a great mountain, on the sideof which were many houses, and at its foota river, where a lady used to take me towalk. I do not know how old I was ; Ihave forgotten even the language I used tospeak ; but I remember we were severalboys and girls in the house — brothers andsisters, and we used to play together on agreen hill. One day I heard that our fatherhad been quarrelling with a relation. I hadseen him go out in the morning with hisarms, and he never returned again. I havea confused recollection that we were all (mymother, my brothers, and my sisters) carriedaway by persons whose faces I had neverbefore seen, arid we were conveyed to Tambour.All this has left no stronger impressionson my mind than if I had dreamt it,124 MINOR MORALS.SO completely have oilier events erased itfrom my memory. I know that I am aCircassian, for a few Circassian words arestill left in my mind, but of the name of thespot where I was born or that of my family,of even the faces of my brothers and sisters,I have now no idea. Yet I have endeavouredagain and again to hear somethingof my early fate and that of my father;I have described to every Circassian MamelukeI have met with all that I know ofmy birth-place and my family, and I havelistened to their stories in return; and Ihave often fancied that their mountain wasmy mountain, their river my river, and theirvillage my village. Had they never hearda story resembling mine ? Indeed suchstories are so common, they are an everyday'stale ; there was nothing peculiar inmy fate. And then my brother fromMAHOMET ALL 125whom I was separated as soon as we reachedConstantinople ; I to be received into a noblefamily, to be instructed in all the learningof the East, to be taught the profoundestpolemics of Islamism, to be pushed forwardinto the highest seats. But my brother —he must have been older by a year or twothan I — his riper memory would fill up^heblanks of mine — he would help me, now theirI am rich and powerful, to discover, to revisit,and to bless the little village in which wewere born. How often has my heart yearnedwhen holding converse with a Circassian Mameluke— how often has it occurred to me,perhaps he, even he, is my brother ! Yetnever but once, never but once did I feelany light was thrown on my earlier days,and that was in Upper Egypt, where I metwith a Circassian Hadji on a pilgrimage tothe Holy Cities. With him I talked of126 MINOR MORALS.the theme so dear to my heart — to him Idescribed all I knew of my native land,and he exclaimed, ' I know the place, Iknow it well, but I never heard of yourfamily.' He told me I might be certainhe would busy himself about my concernswhen he returned from Mekka. He sworeby the Prophet that I should hear. I madehim repeat his oath by all that is holiest.Not a word have I heard. Perhaps heperished in the desert; perhaps he has neverreturned to Circassia; perhaps he has returnedand has learnt nothing ; perhaps,after a lapse of thirty years, there was nothingto . learn, I have heard from our Circassianwomen that people know little of one anotherin that country. — that, busied in perpetualmisunderstandings and in petty warfare, everyfamily has too many cares of its own to beoccupied with the cares and concerns ofMAHOMET ALL 127others. Still a voice within me is perpetuallycrying, ' You will find your brother,you will return to your native village —you will see again the mountain, the river,and the green hill.' And when the Beyhad said this he hung down his head insilence, and raised it in smiles when I said,You will yet find your brother ! 'But we have forgotten Mahomet Allwhile talking of one of his Beys. I shouldtell you that Mahomet Ali was forty-sixyears old before he had learned either toread or to write. This he told me himself.I have heard that he was taught by hisfavourite wife. But he is fond of readingnow ; and one day, when I entered hisdivan unannounced, I found him quite alone,with his spectacles on, reading a Turkishvolume, which he was much enjoying, whilea considerable pile of books were by his,128 MINOR MORALS.side. ' It is a pleasant relief,' lie said, ' frompublic business; I was reading some amusingTurkish stories' (probably the ArabianNights) ; ' and now let us talk — what haveyou to tell me?' There is a great deal ofsagacity in Mahomet All's conversation, particularlywhen he knows or discovers, as heusually does, the sort of information whichhis visitor is most able to give. He discourseswith engineers, about mechanical improvements— with military men, on the artof war — with sea-officers, on ship-buildingand naval manoeuvres — with travellers, onthe countries they have visited — with politicians,on public affairs. He very willinglytalks of foreign countries, and princes andstatesmen, and is in the habit of mingling inthe conversation all sorts of anecdotes abouthimself and the events connected with hishistory. His phrases are often poetical, andMAHOMET ALT. 1*29he, like most Orientals, frequently introduceproverbs and imagery. I heard him oncesay, speaking of the agriculture of Egypt,When I came to this country I onlyscratched it with a pin, I have now succeededin cultivating it with a hoe ; butsoon I will have a plough passing over thewhole land You asked me, George, if hewere not a cruel Prince? and that he certainlyis not, for many a generous deed hashe done, and seldom will it be found thatthe reign of a Turkish sovereign is so littlestained with blood."We like to hear of acts of clemency,"said one of the children; "tell us of MahometAll's."When I was at Cairo a number of Levantinemerchants had got deeply and, Ifear, dishonestly in debt to the Pacha. Pay2130 MINOR MORALS.ment lead been urged in every possible way,but in vain. At last the Pacha got impatient,for the amount was large (exceeding100,000/. sterling), and he directed them to beseized, sent to the galleys for life, and alltheir property to be confiscated. It happenedthat an Englishman of distinction and myselfwere applied to by their distressedfamilies to intercede with the Pacha, and toimplore mercy, less on account of the imprudentdebtors than of their numerous families.We urged the excess of punishment,with reference to the offence, falling uponthe innocent more heavily than on the guilty.We talked of the gentle quality of mercy —blessing the giver as much as the receiver —and the old man's heart was touched, andhe forgave the debtors.""I have heard you say that Mahomet AliMAHOMET ALT. 131is a very interesting person in his ownfamily, now let us all know something ofhis private character," said Mrs Howard.I do not deny," answered Mr Howard,that I feel a great interest in MahometAli, and the more so because I have hadthe advantage of seeing him with his childrenand grandchildren around him, and oftalking with him about domestic matters.In the East it is very difficult to learnmuch about the private concerns of anyTurk, and still less of those of men of highstation. Mahomet Ali's great pride is IbrahimPacha; a victorious leader is always anobject of admiration among Mussulmanss, andIbrahim Pacha's career has been one of brilliantmilitary success. His father is fond oftalking of his first-born son and intended successor.'I did not know him,' he said — *Ihad not an unbounded confidence in him for182 MINOR MORALS.many, many years ; no, not till Ms beardwas almost as long as my own, and evenchanging its colour,' said the Pacha to me,'but now I can thoroughly trust him.' Onthe part of Ibrahim Pacha, though in rankabove his father (for the Pacha of the HolyCities is the first Pacha of the Ottoman Empire),there is always the utmost deferenceto Mahomet All's will. In the most difficultcircumstances of his life he has alwaysreferred to his renowned sire for advice,and whenever he has been pressed by therepresentatives of the great powders of Europe,he has invariably answered, that he shouldabide by the instructions he received fromhis father. Of the sons of Mahomet Ali,Toussoun, the second, was long the favourite.He was a Prince of a generous, not to sayextravagant disposition ; and when, on oneoccasion, he was reproached by his father forMAHOMET ALL 133his prodigality, he answered, 'It may bewell for you to be economical, who were notborn what you are, but I am the son ofMahomet Ali Pacha, and the son of a Pachamust be liberal.' His father smiled, theanswer flattered his sense of dignity, and heupbraided Toussoun no more. Not long afterToussoun died of the plague. A third son,Snail, was murdered by the blacks in Senna,the hut in which he was being surroundedby brushwood, set on fire, and heperished in the flames."Had they no motive — the blacks — had hedone nothing to deserve so cruel a fate ? "inquired Edith.He had invaded their country, and awakenedtheir animosity, and, looking on him asan intruder, they thus satiated their revenge."And what happened in consequence ?"asked George.134 MINOR MORALS.The Slieikli, or leader, at Sliendy, wherethe deed was committed, was afterwardsseized, and all the inhabitants who weresupposed to have taken any part in theassassination were put to death."How shocking ! " exclaimed Edith.War, horrible as it everywhere is, inbarbarous countries is accompanied by horrorswhich, happily in our days, and among civilizednations, have been modified, or whollyput an end to. But even now where it ragesin the East deeds are frequently done whichone cannot think of without shuddering.Vengeance acts with all its ferocity ; and totorture as well as to destroy an enemy isdeemed the right, as it is the not unfrequent,usage. Mutilations of the most frightful characterare still sanctioned and practised. Inthe ancient monuments of Egypt the arrivalof immense quantities of human ears is de-mahometALL 135picked, and, in one of the temples, the Kingis represented watching the turning over ofa large heap of ears, while the scribe is recordingtheir numbers, as they are reportedby persons employed in counting them. Tothis day such inhuman presents are often sentto the Sultan, and welcomed as appropriategifts. The heads, of rebellious chieftains areaccompanied by the ears of their obscurerfollowers, who, in hundreds of cases, havebeen forced to take part in insurrectionsfrom which they willingly would have keptaloof. In the last war with the Druses ofthe Hauoran, in Syria, the Egyptian prisonerswho fell into their hands were sawedin pieces while yet alive. I speak of suchthings unwillingly, my children ; but I havetwo objects — I wish you to know at what afrightful cost military reputations are oftenpurchased — I wish you to know what war is,130 MINOR MORALS.in order that you may hate it, and that,hating war, you may cherish the spirit ofpeace — seek peace on all occasions — avoidthose passions whose unrestrained outbreakleads to such vice and such misery — and especiallythat you should feel what a privilege,what a blessing it is to have been born Christians,and to have had your lot thrown upondays, and among people, who though theyretain somewhat of the warlike barbarisms andtendencies of past ages and distant realms,have, undoubtedly, made no small progress inthe career of humanity. And now I will againspeak of Mahomet Ali and his family.* I have been very happy in my children,'he said to me one day; ' there is not one ofthem who does not treat me with the utmostdeference and respect ; except,' he added,laughing outright, ' that little fellow, the lastand the least of all, Mahomet AK.'MAHOMET ALT. 137^' He was then a boy of five or six yearsold, called by lies father's name — the son ofhis old age — his Benjamin — his best beloved.' I see how it is,' I said ; ' your Highnessspoils the boy. You encourage the littlerogue.' Mahomet Ali laughed again — it wasan acknowledgment of a little paternal weakness.Not long after, I was in the Palace ofShoubra — it was on a Friday, the Mussulmansabbath, when the Pacha is in the habit ofreceiving all his family.I found him in the centre of his Divan.He was surrounded by all his sons and grandsons,who were then residing at Cairo. Hehad been listening to the accounts of theirstudies— of their amusements and their employments.Abbas Pacha, the eldest son ofToussoun Pacha, sat next his grandfather,and the rest of the family were seated on138 MINOR MORALS.chairs, according to their ranks and ages.After some conversation, Mahomet Ali toldhis descendants that they might now withdraw.One after another they rose, kneltbefore him, kissed the hem of his garment,and retired. Little Mahomet Ali came last;he was dressed in military costing, with asmall golden-cased scimitar dangling at hisside. He advanced towards his father — lookedin his face ; he saw the accustomed, theinvoluntary smile ; and, when he was about ayard from the Pacha, instead of bending orsaluting him, he turned on his heels, andlaughingly scampered away, like a yoimgcolt.' I see how it is,* said I to Mahomet Ali.The old man shook his head — lookedgrave for a moment — another smile passedover his countenance — ' Pekin, pekin ! ' saidhe, in a low tone, ' Well, well !' But IMAHOMET ALL 139certainly did not like his Highness theworse for what I had just witnessed."Children like to be talked to about children,and they like especially to have thosewho are too exalted to be approachable bythemselves, brought, as it were, into theirpresence, and made intelligible to their understandings." And now, good night ! " saidMr Howard ; and the young people withdrew,to dream about the great and the little MahometAILMAGICIANS.As George and Arthur were walking in thegarden, one said to the other — " Let us askPapa if he saw the Magician at Cairo, who,they say, has so often shown absent peopleto his visitors, and even brought into theircompany the exact likenesses of the dead ! "He you mean," answered George, " who,being asked to exhibit Lord Nelson, introducedthe image of Lord Nelson dressed likea naval officer, and having lost one of hisarms."That was indeed very strange. We willinquire of Papa how it can be explained."And after tea was over, and the tea-magicians.141tiling's removed, George said to Mr Howard,Arthur and I were talking to-day aboutthe Magician of Cairo, of whom we haveheard so much, and we determined to askyou whether you had seen him, and whetheryou can explain how he managed to convincehis visitors that he was able to summonthe absent and the dead into his presence.""I believe, my boys," answered Mr Howard," that the Magician would not havemuch success if his auditors understood Arabicthoroughly — if they were not themselvescredulous — and if the professed sorcerer didnot so put his questions as to enable him toelicit the answer he wishes to obtain. I didnot see him at Cairo, because he has been somuch exposed cf late, and his failures havebeen so repeated, that the interest felt inhis imposture has died away. You know henever practises except on young people, and142 MINOR MORALS.usually the ignorant and superstitious youngArabs, who are called in from the streets.You remember, after having performed hisincantations, he professes to show the reflectionof the persons whom it is wished to seein a small quantity of ink, which he poursinto the hand of the young person heoperates on. I know a case where an intelligentEnglish lad was taken into the presenceof the Magician ; and, after he had madehis preparations, and filled the boy's palmwith ink, he asked him whether he saw anything.The boy looked and looked — said,No ! nothing ! ' at first ; but at last criedout, ' O, yes ! O, yes ! I see, I see something! ' Upon which all the company criedout, in great excitement ^'Ancr'what — whatclo you'"'see ? ' — ' I see,' said the boy — ' I seemy o^vn nose ! 'Now I believe that the lads who 2;-o toMAGICIANS. 143the Magician now, merely see their ownnoses, or such things as they are led tofancy they see by the leading questionswhich the Magicians ask. I will tell you astory, however, which I heard from a veracioussource, and which will show you whatstrong credulity may do in deceiving thesenses.A young Mussulman had visited Mekkawhile quite a lad, and had obtained in consequencethe title of Hadji. He was onlytwelve years old when he went to the HolyCity, in company with his father, and hesaid he should undoubtedly have died, notso much from fatigue as from a perpetualsorrowing after his mother and sister, whomhe passionately loved, had not a pilgrimfrom Morocco, who turned out to be a Magician,come to his relief. I will tell hisstory in his own words.144 MINOR MORALS.« My father and I left Yakova, ournative town, for Japonica, on our way to theHoly City. My heart sunk within me atparting with my mother and sister ; but thenovelty of the journey sometimes turned mythoughts away from objects so inexpressiblydear to me. But in our passage from Sa-monicato Alexandria, when there was nothingto engage or direct my attention, every hournot passed in sleep — and many, many weremy waking hours — was occupied in thinkingof those I had left behind. Happily thevoyage only lasted six days, and the greatcities of Alexandria and Cairo, so unlikeanything I had seen, afforded me much amusementand enjoyment, and served for a littletime to relieve me from the grief with whichmy bosom was filled. But, as we travelledto Coster, the desire to see my mother andmy sister occupied all my mind, so that,MAGICIANS. 145when we reached the Red Sea, I could containmy feelings no longer, but gave wayto the bitterest weeping at the thought thatanother sea was to roll between me and thoseI so tenderly loved, and so earnestly desiredto see. A deep melancholy overcame me,and I fell seriously ill, being unable eitherto eat, drink or sleep. I had been fourdays in this state at Coster, when myfather received the visit of a Morocco pilgrim,whose acquaintance we had made atCairo, where we had inhabited the samehouse. Seeing that my father was much outof spirits, he inquired the reason, and wastold of my illness, and its cause — whichillness was not only in itself a source ofaffliction, but was likely to prevent our departurein the Djedda vessels, which were tosail in a very few days. The pilgrim at onceproposed to undertake my cure, and to showVOL. III. H146 MINOR MORALS.me my mother and my sister; but, as theallowing" a stranger to see a Mahommedanwoman is contrary to our laws, my fathermade many objections, fearing that, if seenby me, they would be seen by the pilgrimalso. But his great anxiety about his onlyson, and his desire to accomplish his pilgrimage,induced him to give his consent.I was taken from my bed, and dressed.The pilgrim lighted a charcoal fire, anddirected that I should not open my lips orstretch out my hands to the persons whomight appear. My father sat on one side ofme, and our servant on the other. Thepilgrim took a piece of paper, wrote aninscription on it, and threw it on the burningcoals, uttering some words in a low tone ;and hardly was the paper consumed ere mymother and my sister appeared in the middleof the chamber, smiling on me most sweetly.MAGICIANS. 147I felt no alarm, but lead great difficulty inrestraining myself from rushing into theirarms. They remained there for severalminutes, and not being able to resist, I endeavouredto rush forward, when my fathercaught me by the waist, and I cried out,Mother ! mother ! speak to me ! ' and atthat moment the vision disappeared. TheMagician scowled upon me terribly, and myfather gave me a violent cuff on the ear.I should have been in a state of despair, butthe Magician promised to repeat the incantationthe next day. He was indeed mylife ; and I entreated him to come and dwellwith us, as he only could console or saveme. The next day, before he began theceremonies, he made me swear on theKoran that I would keep still, which I religiouslydid. My health began to improve.148 MINOR MORALS.He allowed me to see my mother and sistertwice after, and I became perfectly well."The power of superstition," continued MrHoward, " and the universality of the belief inthe presence of Genii, mingling themselves inmortal affairs, may be traced by any inquirer.I will mention a circumstance that occurredto a European gentleman at Janina. He hadvisited Said Ahmet Effendi, and pipes andcoffee were being brought in, when a violentnoise was heard (probably from rats)under the floor. ' What is this ? ' said thehost; when one of the persons present said,laughingly, 'No doubt they are Djins.' Hardlywas the word uttered when the servant, whowas bringing in the coffee (his name wasIslam), let the tray fall — shrieked loudly —threw himself upon the traveller who wasthe nearest to him of all the guests — andMAGICIANS. 149hid his face under the cushion of the divan.His master broke into a great rage, and thetraveller, not being able otherwise to get ridof Islam, gave him a violent blow, whichflung him on the floor. When he came tohimself his master ordered him to explainhis strange conduct; and he said that, whena boy of ten or eleven years old, a womanfell ill in his native village — he was an Albanian— and medical assistance was soughtin vain. A Dervish, who was known toexercise authority over the Djins, was calledin. None but children can be employedto carry on the intercourse of the Magicianwith the Genii, and Islam was fixed on forthe purpose. The Dervish filled a basinwith water, and forced Islam to look into it.He found it grow larger and larger, till itseemed to occupy the space of a great city.Soon it became surrounded with palisades.150 MINOR MORALS.and a grated gate was opened, through whichhe saw hundreds and thousands and tens ofthousands of Genii pass in human shape,both men and women — the women beingbeautiful beyond anything he had ever seen,heard or imagined. Then came their Prince,escorted by such multitudes, perpetually increasing,that his brain got dizzy, and hefell down alarmed and exhausted, and wasdangerously ill for more than a year. Sincethen he could never dare to pronounce theword Djin, and he could not hear it utteredby any other person without its producingthe effect of which they had just seen anexample.An art professed by some magicians inthe East is to stop a ball when dischargedfrom fire-arms, and to secure the personagainst whom it may be directed from danger.Some time since there was a manMAGICIANS. 151from Tlemecen, in Algiers, who claimed thepossession of this secret. I have now, inthe hand-writing of a French officer of highrank, the following statement : — ' On the15th of November, 1817, I went with theAlgerine to the dwelling of a renegadeItalian, who commanded Ali Pacha's horseartillery. I took with me my own pistols,powder and balls, and delivered them to myservant to carry. The Algerine had nottouched either arms, ammunition or wadding.He wrote something on a scrap of paper,suspended it on his bosom, and desired meto fire ; but, as I thought the experimentrather too serious, I proposed that a horse,dog, sheep, fowl or some other living animal,should be brought. He immediately consented,and a hen, which was running aboutthe court-yard, was seized by my servant,and her legs tied, the Algerine keeping all152 MINOR MORALS.the while at a considerable distance. 1 tookthe writing from the Algerine, and tied it onmyself to the hen's neck. I took her intothe house, and, approaching her, fired thepistol. She sprung up — cackled — but theball had fallen by her side, and she was unhurt.The Italian made a similar experimentwith the same results, upon which wereleased the hen, who joined her companionsas if nothing had happened; I keep the ballas a souvenir of this event.' Though I havereason to believe there is much credulity inthe character of the Frenchman, I am surehis veracity cannot be called in question.'' Our own countrymen have shown suchincredible credulity when speaking of theEgyptian Magicians, that I do not hesitateto transcribe from the MSS. of a Frenchtraveller the following narrative : —< While in the Levant I made the ac-magicians.153acquaintance of the celebrated Slieikli, SaidMohammed Omer Effendi El Cadi El Giie-chant. He was born at Bagdad, though hisusual abode was Damascus. His intercoursewith supernatural spirits was notorious, and,after many urgent entreaties on my part, heconsented to bring a Djin into my presence,as I had expressed an intense desire to seeone of these beings of whom I had heard somuch. He gave me a few words on a scrapof paper, and ordered me to repeat them onehundred times, before I went to bed, onthree following nights. I did punctually ashedirected me, not, however, expecting thatanything would come of my obedience. Isaw nothing either on the first, second or thirdnight, and went to the Sheikh to inform himthat he had not succeeded in his arrangements.He told me that what had been done wasonly the preliminary step, but that I should seeH 2154 MINOR MORALS.the Djln, in a human shape, the followingnight in a vision, after I had followed hisinstructions. He then wrote a single wordupon another piece of paper, told me to repeatit three hundred times before I went tobed, and then to place the paper under mypillow. " You wil hear a loud voice," hesaid, "calling to you on the opposite side tothat where the Djin will appear, and it willsay, ' Behold the Djin ! ' and the namewhich is under your pillow will be repeated."I did as he told me, and fell asleep ; I dreamtthat I stood in the middle of a vast plain,without houses or trees or mountains ; theplain, the houses, the heavens above, were allof a gloomy grey colour. Soon I perceived abeing in lillian form approaching, from theright side, the place where I stood. He wasof the middle size, had a thick black beard,a face not thin, but singularly pale, and hisMAGICIANS. 155eyes were fixed steadily on me. A longwhite garment descended from his shouldersto his feet, which it entirely covered, andoverthis was a long Oriental scarlet robe,open in front. His hand held a staff, whichseemed either of ice or of salt. The expressionof his eyes was terrible, yet mine wererivetted to his, and I heard an awful voicein my left ear — " I am the Djin ! " — repeatingthe name under my pillow; he thenglided slowly and majestically away, not stepby step, for his feet moved not, but still heturned towards me, and his glance seemedto penetrate my very soul. He disappearedin the distance, and I awoke.'The writer adds, ' I swear on my honourthat what I have related is literally and exactlytrue; I have added nothing — I haveomitted nothing. All the incredulity of MINOR MORALS.rope will never persuade me that I have notseen what I know I have seen.'In March, 1816, the exhibition I amabout to describe took place in the town ofNapoli de Romania.A Jewish boy, of the age of fifteen,who was employed at the custom-house, declaredthat he was persecuted by a Djin,who haunted him in all directions. All sortsof exorcisms were tried in vain. There wasat this time a Magician at Napoli, calledKizitlu Effendi, who had studied the occultsciences at Fez, in Barbary, and he wascalled upon to practice his art on behalf ofthe Jewish boy — for Mussulmanss, Christians,and Jews, in the East are about equallycredulous. A large company of Turks andJews were assembled to see the Magicianexhibit his influence; soon after the boyMAGICIANS. 157entered the room, and the Magician beganhis conjurations, when the lad was seizedwith a sudden and violent trembling, and,being asked the cause of his fears, he saidhe saw a Negro, who looked at him in amost threatening way. Kizitlu Effendi directedthe boy to inquire of the Negro inwhat he had offended him, and why he persecutedhim ; upon which the Negro answered,that he was a Djin, and that inpassing under the window of the boy'shouse he had committed towards him a veryindecent act, drenched him, and that he haddetermined to be revenged. The Magicianintreated the Negro to desist, and to forgivethe boy, but he could not succeed; uponwhich he exhibited all the powers of hisart, and by long and elaborate conjurationshe forced the Monarch of the Genii (DineParish) to appear. He came with a very158 MINOR MORALS.numerous and brilliant attendance, but theywere only visible to the young Jew, whocarried on the conversation as directed bythe Magician. He addressed many complimentsto the Prince on his gracious appearance,and having reported the stubbornnessof the negro, entreated his Majesty to consentto the cure of the Jewish boy. TheMonarch ordered the Negro to be broughtin, for he had hurried away on the entranceof his Sovereign, and immediately one of theattendants disappeared, and soon came backaccompanied by the Negro. The Negrobent himself to the ground before his Sovereign,but still resolutely persisted in hisdetermination to persecute the boy, uponwhich the King ordered in the executioner,who severed the Negro's head from his body,and the boy was instantaneously restored tohealth. He has frequently been examinedMAGICIANS. 159by travellers, and persists in the truth of hisstory. More than thirty persons were presentat the above scene, who are unanimousin the belief that everything passed whichI have spoken of, and the boy himself undoubtedlybelieved it, in an excited anddiseased state of mind, receiving all the impressionsof ignorance and credulity, attributingto supernatural agency consequenceswhich medical art might readily explain, theonly real imposter being the Magician, who,by the dexterous management of leadingquestions, and pictures presented to the boy'smind, soon filled a childish fancy with allthe chimeras of his own imagination.The Albanians, in the pursuit of hiddentreasures, have long been in the habit of usingcandles made of human fat, stuck upon acurved hazel stick. They say that the candlesgo out with an explosion whenever the160 MINOR MORALS.holder of it approaches any spot where moneyis concealed.But it is not always that the most celebratedof Magicians can exercise authorityover the Djins. Mahomet Effendi, the Kiayaof Ali Pacha, was a man of great accomplishmentsand some philosophical knowledge,but he had not been able to rid himself ofthe superstitions of his countrymen, and thepalace in which - he lived in Albania washaunted by Djins. He did, indeed, at onetime suspect that the stories told him weretricks of the servants to get possession of thebest apartments of the palace, which wereabandoned by the family, and not offered toguests of distinction, on account of the disturbanceswhich often were created in them by theDjins. Once he went with his son to ascertainwhether the report which had reachedhim was true, that the Djins were throwingMAGICIANS. 161about the furniture and flinging stones intothe principal room. His son preceded him,and had no sooner entered than his turbanwas snatched off and flung into the Effendi'sface. Son and father retreated in no smallhurry. He spent large sums in bringingMagicians, Sheikhs, and Dervishes, to exorcisehis palace, but the Djins were toowell satisfied with their abode to surrenderit to anybody. He sent to remote places formen who had the reputation of sorcery. Onone occasion he made a bargain with twoMagicians, to pay them a large sum if theycould free his house from Djins. Theywere to take up their abode in the apartmentswhere the Djins appeared to haveestablished their head-quarters. The Magicianswithdrew after supper in order tocommence their exorcisms, but previously todoing this they, as good Mahometan, had162 MINOR MORALS.to discharge their devotional duties. In theEast people of all religions carry a chaplet,called Teshih in Turkish, on which theywrite their prayers, and which serves equallyfor a plaything, ornament, and religious emblem.The usual number of beads is ahundred, as they assist the worshipper inrepeating the hundred names of God, toutter which is considered by the Mussulmanas an act of acceptable homage to theDeity. But among the very ostentatious andfanatical Turks, chaplets of five hundred, oreven a thousand beads, are sometimes used — =betokening, by the multitude of their prayers,the superiority of their piety. The two Magicianshad chaplets of this unusual size,intended to give weight to their saintly character.As soon as they entered the chamberof the Djins, they took their chaplets out oftheir bosoms, when lo ! they were suddenlyMAGICIANS. 163snatched away; and, somewhat taken by surpriseat so unexpected a reception, theydetermined to defer the exorcisms to the followingday, and betook themselves to sleep.Next day, when they came down stairs, theirfaces and beards were found, unknown tothemselves, to have been powdered with quicklime,and in the room are still patches oflime left by the Djins, which the servantssay no washing or rubbing will remove. Thetwo Magicians refused to continue their attempt,and departed.Another Dervish, for whom Mahomet Effendibuilt an apartment in the court, sothat he might more easily carry on his plansfor exorcising the Djins, did so far succeedas to collect them all together in a room,but he had no sooner effected this than theyfell upon him, gave him a terrible beating,and one of them attempted to strangle him.164 MINOR MORALS.The Dervish rose up, and disturbed thewhole house with his clamour and cries, buthe was not able to utter a distinct word.Next day he found his speech again, but itwas to tell Mahomet Effendi that he wouldnot stay any longer for all the wealth hecould offer, and he too hurried away."It looks much like a confederacy of theservants," said George.It does, indeed," answered Mr Howard.INFANT SCHOOLS."You promised, dear Papa," said Edith onemorning to Mr Howard, " that you wouldtake me to an infant school. When shallit be?"This very morning", if Mamma sees noobjection, and if your brothers can manageto accompany us ""I'll go and see," answered Edith, and,before Mr Howard could finish his sentence,she skipped away as lightly as a water-wagtailthat dances along the side of a river. Shefound her brothers. " O George ! O Arthur !can you go — are you ready?""Go where?" said George. — "Ready for166 MINOR MORALS.what?" asked Arthur. — " O, Papa says hewill take us to the infant school. Comealong." So, taking her brothers each by thehand, away they ran together to the parlour."Here we all are. Papa; here we are, allready ; " but Edith was a little too eager,and on inquiry Mr Howard found that themorning's lessons had not yet been learnt.Duty first, and recompense after," saidMr Howard; and Emily then rememberedthat she had not waited to hear whether herfather meant to impose any conditions ontheir visiting the infant school.You were somewhat hasty, Edith ! Youwere too much in a hurry to go to yourbrothers before you knew what you were tosay to them."Edith blushed — it was a sufficient confession."' Well, boys ! " said Mr Howard, " anhour will suffice for you to get throughINFANT SCHOOLS. 167your tasks; at half-past nine you will come,and, if your lessons are thoroughly learnt,we will be off to the infant school."The lessons were learnt, thoroughly andcheerfully, and, at the appointed time, theboys and their sister were again in the parlour,ready to sally forth.On the way to the school Mr Howardgave them some particulars of the earliestinfant schools which had been established,and particularly of that which Mr Owenintroduced at New Lanark. He took occasionto speak of the beautiful Clyde sceneryadjacent to that busy village, of the fallof Cora Lynn, and the ever changing, everrenewed rainbows, which the sunshine makesout of the scattered foam of the waters,of Balfour of Burley's cave, which he reachedby the perilous leap over the frightful chasm,through which the Clyde rolls thundering,168 MINOR MORALS.and of the various spots made illustrious bythe deeds of ancient heroes or the songs andstories of modern bards. "I had often seensolitary children happy," said Mr Howard,or small groups of children, but I neverbefore saw a whole community of childrenso happy ; I had often seen a single childpleased at being instructed, but I never beforesaw crowds of children all learning andall delighted with their learning. I hadheard a child sing the song taught it by itsnurse, but I never before heard a chorus ofchildren singing together in perfect harmony.I had seen children dancing aboutin the fields, but never before did I seescores of infants dancing in perfect order,and beating with their little feet to measuresas regular as art could make them."They reached the school. The childrenwere singing the Morning Hymn. Did myINFANT SCHOOLS. 169young readers ever hear the singing of awell-conducted infant school? If they havenot, let them go and listen. " Certainly,Papa, this is sweeter than the music of theOpera. Look at that very small child, howits eye follows the motions of the lips of theone that is next to it. See yon little boyin petticoats marking time with his forefinger,without thinking of what he is about. Howmany heads move in concert, as it were, withthe teacher's. Hark ! there's a girl singingout of tune — she has stopped — a looli fromanotheivgirl a little older has corrected her."' A little slower,' said the master, givinghimself the example, and every voice obeyedthe command; 'Now, then, quick,' and theyall followed their leader."Is it not strange. Papa ! that learning sosoon, they should learn so well ? " inquiredGeorge.VOL. III. I170 MINOR MORALS.It would be well, perhaps, if we couldbe taught so early as not to remember in futurelife when we had been taught. Thereare few things which have a happier influencethan the instruction of children in themusical art. In many of the cantons ofSwitzerland all young people are taught eitherto sing or to play on some musical instrument.There is not a village which cannotat all times provide a charming concert.There is no bashfulness, no false shame,when a peasant is asked to sing. In holidaytime, when the people meet together, Ihave observed that music is invariably a partof their pleasures, not listening to a blindfiddler or wandering bagpipe-player, but musicin parts — music according to the rules of art.If a party visit a fair, they generally singboth in going and returning, and sing, too,in perfect harmony. Again and again I haveINFANT SCHOOLS. 171fancied I was listening to people who makemusic their trade, when I have discoveredthe sounds came from work people leavingtheir houses for their daily labour, or retiringto their homes when the day's businesswas over. In a few years, and with propercare, our schools will have introduced a newart and a new enjoyment among the peopleby making them musical."At this moment a very little child burstinto a violent fit of crying. " This is her firstday," said the master; "Mary]" he said,beckoning to a child of about four years old,who, without saying a wor<i, went and ledaway the crying infant. " Now see what willhappen," said the master ; " the tears will besoon dried." And so indeed it was, for in afew minutes Mary came in conducting herlittle charge, who had a smile on her countenance,and who even appeared as happy as172 MINOR MORALS.the happiest in the group. "And how hasshe managed?" asked Edith; "what can shehave said or done ? " — " I cannot always accountmyself," said the master, " for theinfluence that one child possesses over another.Even before they can talk plainlythere are certain children in the school whocan do more than I can with other children.In a day or two the infant is reconciled tothe strangeness or novelty of the place, andto the new faces about it. The scene isone of activity, of enjoyment. The childrencatch the infection of the general happiness.This school-room, this garden-ground even, becomesdelightfully attractive to them. Scoresof the children come long before the schoolhours, and there is great difficulty in gettingrid of them when the school Lours are over."Mr Howard went with Edith into the garden; many of the children were playingINFANT SCHOOLS. 173about. Edith remarked that fruit was hangingon the trees, and hanging, too, withinthe reach of the children. " They have beenalready taught that the fruit is not theirs,and that they have no right to touch it. Ifthe new comers are disposed to pilfer, theolder scholars check and control them. Therights of property may often be usefullystudied by grown-up people in an infantschool.""I should like to see a lesson given," saidEdith. It was not long wanting. A littleboy was playing with a ball; there came upanother little fellow, who kicked it away, andwhen he had done so ran after it, took itup, and put it into his pocket. The boy towhom it belonged cried aloud, the mastercame, and the children gathered round andtold him what had happened. He did notlecture the little boy, but went to hint174 MINOR MORALS.and took his hat off his head. He cried inturn, saying, " My hat ! "— " My ball," saidthe master. Now, young as he was, he feltthe lesson, and then the master, in simplewords, explained that the other boy had thesame right to his ball that he had to his hat,and, by making the ease his own, he was ableto make a practical application of the goldenrule— of doing to others what we would theyshould do unto us. " All questions of rightand wrong," said the master, "are in themselvesvery simple, and all the art of myteaching the children a sound morality consistsin finding the means of presenting totheir senses, in some palpable shape, and soof making intelligible to their minds, the pointwhich I desire them to understand.And thus," said the master, " I not onlyteach the children, but the parents of thechildren. You would be surprised to be toldINFANT SCHOOLS. 175How many of my little pupils are preceptorsin their turn! How many lessons taught inthis school go home to the fire-side, to berepeated to fathers and mothers, and brothersand sisters.""That is, indeed, being instructed to somepurpose," said Arthur, and his countenanceshowed how much the conversation instructedhim."That little boy," said the master, pointingto a child of five years old, "saved hisfather from a habit of drunkenness. I askedthe man, when he told me the circumstance,which he did with tears in his eyes, what theboy had said to him; he answered that hedid not know how it was, but he had beencoaxed out of his vice, and so cunningly, hesaid, that he could not be angry with theboy, whose looks were almost as convincingas his words. We have here a little fellow176 MINOR MORALS.who reads the newspaper to his parents, andthe neighbours come to listen, for he tellsthem where the countries are and who arethe people about which he is reading, andcan generally give them a great deal of very-usefulknowledge. " — " And is he not forwardand vain ? " asked George. — " You shallsee," said the master, and he called to apoor little crippled fellow, who blushed atbeing noticed, and of whom George inquiredin what part of the world was Egypt, andwhat was the capital of the country, andwhat was the course of the Nile, and whatare the names of its two principal branches,and of its two mouths; all of which he wasable to answer without embarrassment, andall of which I hope my young readers areable to answer too.The party were all delighted with theirvisit, pleased with the teacher and the scho-INFANT SCHOOLS. 177lars, and the infant school was often referredto, not only on account of the lessonstaught, but of the felicity which it exhibited.I 2DJEZZAR PACHA.*' Pray let us hear. Papa, something moreof the Turks and their character; give ussome account of somebody who has distinguishedhimself in the East — some greattyrant, if you like," said Arthur.Happily," replied Mr Howard, *' evenin the East there are no longer examplesof that extremely flagitious character whichwere so common formerly. I will give yousome particulars of one of the worst oppressorsand most cruel governors of thelast generation — the former Pacha of Acre,or Akka, as it is called by the Arabs, andDJEZZAR PACHA. 179which, as you perhaps know, is the Ptolemaicof the New Testament.Djezzar Pacha, whose name, which heconferred upon himself, signifies butcher, wasone of the most execrable of modern despots;and yet he had the reputation of being agreat warrior, and at Acre I heard a veryold man with a long white beard speak ofhim with affection, and seek to counterbalancethe history of his atrocities by recountingdeeds of generosity and valour. Hemurdered men, it is true, by wholesale, incold blood; but he built a beautiful mosque,an extensive bath, and a delightful fountainfor the people. There were no bounds tohis savage ferocity; yet his tomb bears alaudatory inscription; — and, though more thanaquarter of a century is passed since hisdeath, upon that tomb beautiful fresh flowersare growing, which are daily watched and180 MINOR MORALS.watered with as much care as if they grewupon the grave of a beloved parent, and weretended by a grateful child."But tell us. Papa, tell us something moreof this wicked man," said Arthur: and littleEdith asked, " Could he really be so verywicked ?"Yes ! " answered Mr Howard, " he wasone of those wretched beings who appear nowand then in the world, as if to teach ushow very wicked a human being may becomewho lets his evil passions get the upper hand,and who has power enough to exercise thesepassions without control. Perhaps, evenDjezzar Pacha was not quite so bad as hewas thought to be. One of his attendantstold me that he once murdered one hundredand forty prisoners with his own hand; butwhat is quite certain is, that, in a fit of jealousy,he drowned all the women of hisDJEZZAR PACHA. 181harem, and decapitated his Mamelukess inthe same day; and I was told on the spotthat the number of persons who were destroyedon this occasion was between seventyand eighty. He spared only two persons,and they succeeded him in the Pachalik,and were distinguished for their humanity.In the streets of St John d'Acre mutilatedpersons are frequently seen. I made therethe acquaintance of the son of his secretary,and he told me Djezzar Pacha had cut offhis father's nose, and that there were fewpersons about him who had not been mutilatedeither by himself or his executioner.You have heard of Nero, that he amusedhimself by fiddling while Rome was burning ;and it was with jokes and jeers that DjezzarPacha used to issue his horrible orders. Hewould sometimes lay down on his divan, call182 MINOR MORALS.in his executioner, and say : — ' Such a manlooked at me with an evil eye, he must notdo so again; tear his eye out' — and it wasdone ; — ' That fellow heard something whichhe ought to have told me ; what is the useof his ears ? cut them off ' — and the orderwas obeyed ; — * Why did not that Djaoursmell out what is doing in the town? sliceaway his nose;' and he would thus go onlaughing and seeing his dreadful commandsimmediately carried into execution."And why did not the people rise anddestroy him?" inquired the children. "Didhe die a natural death ? "Yes ! and his very last thoughts werethoughts and purposes of cruelty; on hisdeath-bed he ordered a list of sixty personsto be made out for mutilation, among whomwas a very rich man, now living, and whoDJEZZAR PACHA. 183is the Austrian Consul at Said; but beforethe shocking decree could be executed themonster died."But why are such wicked men ever born,and why are they allowed to live, and to dosuch abominable things ? " inquired Arthur.If we think of such men and such actionsseparately from the whole course of events —if our feelings dwell on them without consideringthem as a part of the great wholeof the arrangements and government of theDivine Being, it is difficult to say why permissionhas been given to any mortal tocreate so much misery. But out of all thisevil much good may grow. In order thattyranny should be hated and put an endto, tyrants must be allowed to commit theirhorrid deeds — the mischief they can inflictis only temporary — and may be repaired in184 MINOR MORALS.a single generation — the lesson they give ispermanent, — and may have a happy influenceon all future time. Under thedirection of Providence vice may become acause of virtue, — just as suffering and adversityare instruments of kindness andmercy. We may be certain the storm andthe earthquake, — war and pestilence, — diseaseand death — though we cannot alwaysperceive exactly how — are means of goodand proof of goodness ; and there is abeautiful expression in the Bible, whichimplies that whatever is allowed to humanwickedness redounds to the praise of God,and that its excesses are restrained — onlyso much is permitted as is necessary forthe guidance of things in the course markedout by our Heavenly Father; but theamount of mischief any one person canDJEZZAR PACHA. 185effect is checked and controlled, and keptwithin bounds by Him."The wrath of man shall praise Thee, and the remainderof wrath Thou shalt restrain."Mohammedanism,I AM afraid. Papa ! you have often hadto witness much want of charity in theEast, on account of religious opinions,"said George.Uncharitableness," said Mr Howard, " isthe common growth of ignorance, and is asmuch the consequence of the absence of generalknowledge as of the knowledge ofthe true character of the Christian religion,whose very essence is charity. Butthe examples set by dominant sects are toogenerally those of persecution — the strongwill not allow the weak either to think oract for themselves. At Silistria, which youMohammedanism. 187know is a town on the Turkish or rightbank of the Danube, I remember descendinginto a dark vault, where the GreekChristians were celebrating their religiousrites. The Mussulmanss would not permitthem to worship their God in the light ofday, and their intolerance was bitterly andjustly complained of. Well ! the place wastaken possession of by the Russians intheir wars with the Turks, in 1829, andthe Russians began to erect a large andbeautiful Christian temple ; and what alesson to Mahommedan infidels did theseChristians give, when they were masters ?I should tell you nothing is more sacredto the Mahometan than the cemeteriesof the dead. Thither they habitually resort.There rise their beautiful groves ofcypresses — there they plant their familyflowers ; and the Russians tore up the188 MINOR MORALS.Mussulman grave-stones in Silistria, andout of these alone did they construct thevast edifice which was to be dedicated tothe Christian's God — the God of love — theGod of all mankind ; and this — this wasthe lesson they gave to their Mussulmanneighbours. The church is still unfinished:it stands a lasting opprobrium to those whomeant to rear it — a monument which willfeed for ages the hatred of the Mohammedantowards those who ' have learnedChrist' — not in truth — not in charity — butinpride and insult and folly.Indeed," said Mr Howard, " all thewords or teachings of wise and virtuousmen will never effect a reconciliation, oreven obtain a patient attention, if suchuntoward and wicked acts are allowed tobe practised by those in authority.^' Europeans too frequently, when theyMAHOMMEDANISM. 189get into the East, assume the despoticand reckless character of which they seetoo many examples. Not long ago aPrussian Prince being refused entrance atJerusalem into the tomb of David, whichis considered one of the most sacred placespossessed by the Mussulmanss, forced his wayby actual violence ; and the consequencehas been that peaceable Christian travellershave been stoned in the street and exposedto much danger, and the entrance to manyinteresting spots, which were before accessibleto them, is now wholly denied."But in spite of all, does not a moretolerant spirit pervade the East ?" askedGeorge.Assuredly ; and but for the misconductof a few, many of the barriers of separationwould be broken down, and the mindsof Mussulmanss be gradually prepared even190 MINOR MORALS.for the reception of Christian truth. MahometAli, who has done more than anyTurk that ever lived to give developmentto a more liberal state of things, has forhis prime minister an Armenian Christian,Boghos Bey, than whom no man is moreattentive to the observance of his religiouscreed. His accountant-general, Bailies Bey,is a member of the ancient Egyptian CopticChurch. His principal interpreter and secretaryis also a Christian, and Christiansoccupy many of the highest offices of thestate. In Damascus, where a few yearsago no man could with safety go throughthe bazaar in a European Christian dress,and where Frank women have been frequentlyshot at by the fanatics of that holycity, there is now the most complete security,and no one is molested for not beinga Mussulman."MAHOMMEDANISM. 191"Holy City, Papa!" interrupted Edith;I thought Mecca and Medina were theHoly Cities of the Mussulmanss."They are so — but so are also Damascusand Jerusalem; for you know of course thatthe Mahometan recognize many of the mostdistinguished Prophets of the Old and NewTestament. I saw at Cairo, in the school ofthe English missionaries, and with the highestsatisfaction, many Mahommedan children.One of them was the son of a servant ofmine, and he told me that if the masters tookcare to avoid speaking ill of his Prophet,and his Prophet's followers, he did notobject to the course of instruction pursued;that his wife had had some scruples at first,but he had convinced her the boy wouldonly get good at the school ; but that ifMahomet were reviled there, he should ofcourse take him away. This will enable you192 MINOR MORALS.to judge somewhat of the state of thingswhich is growing up in Egypt, and which,if properly watched and prudently concentrated,will, I have no doubt, bring with itlasting and immense results.What are the observances most rigidlyattended to by Mahonmiedans ? " askedGeorge.Prayer and ablution ; but the duty ofprayer has not given rise to such discussionsas that of washing. The Mussulmanprays five times a day, and his manner ofpraying is formally and unchangeably established.The number of prostrations — themoment, and the mode of prostration — aretaught without any variation ; and though thedevout Mussulman may lengthen his prayer,or employ extemporaneous prayer in additionto those of his ritual, the obligatory prayersof that ritual are defined. But, on the ques-mohammedanism.193tion of ablutions, infinite are the differencesof opinion, and the discussions among theUlemas run into every conceivable refinementand absurdity. When the question is whatdegree of adulteration will produce impurity,you easily suppose what thousands of shadesopinions may take. I heard this questionagitated at Cairo. "If a cat fall into a well,how far will it render the waters impure ?"But then came other questions — Was the catdead or alive ? If dead, how long had itbeen dead? If dead, how long had it lainin the well? What was the size of the cat?And what the quantity of the water ? Wasthe water wholly pure before ? Would anysingle element of impurity be sufficient torender any quantity of water impure ? Wouldthe action of time, and the gushing of thespring at the foot of the well, rid it in timeof its impure elements? Might a drop orVOL. III. K194 MINOR MORALS.more of the water, taken from the well,render pure water impure? Might a vesselbe used without offence whose exterior onlyhad touched the water of the well ? Wouldthe heat of the water add to or diminish itsimpurity ? If the cat, being alive, hadescaped from the well, would the waterscontinue pure ? If, being dead, the catwere carried away by an eagle descendinginto the well, when would the waters bepurified again? Into such frivolities do menfall when religions become more ceremonialthan practical, and when the observance ofexternal forms, instead of internal convictionsacting upon conduct, becomes the business andthe rule of life.The attention of the Mussulmanss to theduty of prayer is perhaps that part of theirreligious service which is most striking. Itis not ostentatious, but it is never neglectedMAHOMMEDANISM. 195by a devout Mussulman. In whatever societylie may find himself, he spreads hiscloak by his carpet, goes through the variousattitudes of prayer, kneels, bends his foreheadto the earth, raises his hands, oxpresses them to his breast, and is perfectlyregardless of all that is passing around him.The habit of public prayer is so universalthat it never excites a remark. Often andoften have I seen the Arab in the desert,the fisherman in his boat, the day labourerin his field, the traveller by the fountain orthe river, the shopkeeper in the bazaar, theartizan in his workshop, the minister in hisdivan, engaged as earnestly as the Ulemain the mosque, in the discharge of this oft-recurringduty — sometimes in silence, sometimesin low accents, sometimes aloud. Whena Priest or Mufti is present, it generally196 MINOR MORALS,happens that he takes his place in front ofthe other worshippers, who form a linebehind him, follow his movements, and sometimesrespond to his ejaculations. In additionto the required prayers, the Mussulmanfrequently repeats the hundred names ofAllah on his beads, which are his constantcompanions, and which serve alike as a playthingand a religious memento."And yet. Papa, do you not think thesecret and solitary prayer — the prayer ofretirement — more acceptable to God?" askedGeorge."All prayer and praise which emanatefrom a pure and devout heart is no doubtwelcomed by Him to whom they are addressed; but one of the most beautiful lessonsof the New Testament is this : ' When thoupriest, enter into thy closet, and, whenMAHOMMEDANISM. 197thou hast shut the door, pray to thy Fatherwho is in secret, and thy Father, who seethin secret, himself shall reward thee openly."- " Are the prayers of the Mussulmanss allprayers learnt by heart, or do they sometimespray extemporaneously ? " inquiredArthur.Adoration is a more fitting word thanprayer for the worship of the Mussulmanss.The obligatory forms are repetitions of ' —God, he is most great ; ' that heis supremely glorious — that praises are dueto God, and to God alone. There is onesupplication for peace upon the Prophet andhis followers, and a declaration of the worshipper,that there is one God alone, andthat Mahomet is the Prophet of God. Versesof the Koran are sometimes added to theprayer, particularly a very striking verseat the end of the second chapter, beginning —108 MINOR MORALS.God ! no deity is there but God ! ' andending with — ' He is the exalted — the Great ! *which the Mussulmanss call ' The Verse ofthe Throne ;' but it is seldom that prayeradapted to particular contingencies or eventsis employed by them.DJINS,Though the children were interested in theaccounts Mr Howard gave them of his travels,yet it was observable, they listened withparticular attention to the stories which hadin them any of the romance of the East,and particularly where unearthly beings wereintroduced. "I do so wish Papa would tellussomething more about Oriental fairies andstrange beings," whispered Edith to Arthur,but loud enough to be overheard by MrHoward, who smiled upon the little girl,which encouraged her to ask, in a verywinning way, " Do you think you dear200 MINOR MORALS.Mamma, could persuade Papa?" — "We willtry," was Mrs Howard's answer ; so, alienthe happy hour of evening came, Mr Howardtook his accustomed seat and began — " Soyou want some more supernatural stories, doyou ? Well, then, so be it.The proceedings of the Djins, or Orientalgenii, resemble in most particulars those ofthe ghosts in Great Britain. Haunted housesin the East are sometimes abandoned bytheir owners, and may frequently be obtainedat a rent much beneath their fair value. Inthese houses rattling noises are said to beheard — the clanking of chains — showers ofstones falls-the furniture is thrown about —the lights extinguished — the water cisternsemptied — the dishes removed from the tablesand other similar derangements take place.It is very usual for the Turks to employDJINS. 201exercises, and even to spend large sums ofmoney, in order to get their houses abandonedby the Djins.Very odd stories are told of the freaksof the Djins. At Omer Aga's haunted houseat Libokovo (in Epirus) the Djins threw agreat quantity of stones among an assembledcompany. 'Now how kind it would be,' saidone of the guests, ' if they would give usroasted chesnuts instead of stones.' Anon ashower of roasted chesnuts, skinned ready foreating, fell into the room, which the personspresent, the Cadi among the number, declaredto be excellent.But a far more remarkable circumstanceis said to have occurred in this very housein the first week of August in the year ofthe Hegira 1223 (Ad. 1808). Omer Agahad invited his friends to dinner, and anumber of stones fell upon the table andK 2202 MINOR MORALS.among the guests. ' You are always throwingstones,' said Omer Aga ; * why cannot youthrow us gold now and then ?' Immediatelya piece of gold fell on the table, bright asfrom the Mint. It bore the year of theHegira 1223 ; but, instead of the name ofthe Sultan Selim, then the reigning prince,the name of Sultan Mustapha was inscribed.The coin was-sent off to Ali Pacha at Tannin,who expressed his astonishment ; but a fewdays afterwards brought the account of themurder of Selim, and of his having beensucceeded by his nephew, the Sultan .*But the Djins have a great antipathy tothose who disbelieve in their existence. OmerAga had a visiter called Hussein Aga, who,I mention the story as I heard it, but there is init an obvious anachronism. Selim was deposed in 1807,and Mustapha in 1808.miNS. 203in mounting the staircase, cried out, ' YourDjins ! where are your Djins ? — they takecare to keep out of the way.' Upon whichhe got so violent a slap on the face from aninvisible hand that his turban rolled down tothe foot of the stairs, and he was flungagainst the bannisters, and so frightened thathe was conveyed home and kept his bed formore than a fortnight.One hears more instances of their oddhumours than of their malignity. They pullpeople out of bed — blow out their candles,leaving them in the dark — knock glasses outof the hands of those who are drinking — takeoff men's turbans — and, in fact, play the tricksof schoolboys or spoiled children.The house of Boushenak Mahmoud Pacha,the ex-Governor of Lepanto, was said to behaunted by a negro giant, whom the servantsdeclared they had often seen. But as most204 MINOR MORALS.of those servants were Bosniacks — less credulousand more courageous than Orientalsgenerally — the presence of the intruder didnot cause much disturbance in the house.One night, however, when everybody else wasasleep, a Greek saraidar (servant of all work),called Nicol, disturbed the whole family byloud cries for help. The Pacha himself andall the servants rose, ran into the Greek'schamber, who was almost dead with fright,and said an enormous negro woman, with amenacing look, had entered his chamber,jumped upon his body, and, seizing him bythe throat, had attempted to strangle him —but, alarmed at his cries (as he supposed),had disappeared, saying, ' To-morrow shaltthou see me again !' Everything was doneto console and to encourage him, and heentreated he might not be left alone. Uptothat moment he had been in perfect health.DJINS. 205The next day several of his fellow servantsentered his room. He was rising to meetthem, when he suddenly screamed out ' TheNegress !' and fell down dead,This was, of course, a case of night-mare,acting upon a very weak and superstitiousperson.I heard a curious case of possession by aDjin, in which the subject was a Mussulmangirl of fourteen. She was sitting in thecorridor of the harem, at two o'clock in theafternoon, when a negro appeared and menacedher with a lance, which he shook ather. The fright prevented her from cryingout ; but after a few minutes the black disappeared,and a European stood in his place,holding in his hand a glass of water, whichhe directed her to drink. The girl thoughtthey were both ordinary mortal men, andcried out that a man had made his way into206 MINOR MORALS.the harem. All the women of the haremrushed in veiled, and the girl called outseveral times — ' Look ! look ! he wants to forceme with his spear to drink the water.' Butthe women could see nothing ; they encouraged,however, the girl to refuse the water,which she did very stoutly — though the Europeancontinued to urge her for a quarterof an hour, and then struck her several blowswith the lance, which left severe contusions —after which he disappeared ; but at six o'clockin the same afternoon she felt herself possessed,and the white spirit said he hadentered into her in order to shut out theblack one.The following conversation took placebetween this girl and a gentleman who wasallowed to converse with her.« Q. 'Who art thou ?'— J 'A Djin, notof the human race.'DJINS. 207' Thy name ?'— ' Abduliliaz.'' Where wert thou before thou interestthis woman ?' — ' Here.'' How old art thou ?' — ' That is beyondthy poor conception.'' Where are thy companions ?' — * It mattersnot to thee.'' What becomes of the soul of man afterdeath ?' — ' After death thou wilt know !'' Are the planets inhabited ?' — ' Go andsee, if thou canst !'' Hast thou seen them ?' — •* That is nobusiness of thine !'' Art thou a creature of God ?' — ' Dostthou think God has created nothing noblerthan things like thee ?'' Hast thou any religion ?' — ' Assuredly !'« Tell me what it teaches ?'— « 'Tis noconcern of thine !'* Is your race immortal ?' — ' No !'208 MINOR MORALS.' Are you male and female ? ' — ' Yes ! ^"have you parents and children?' —Impudent and foolish inquirer !*' Where dwells the Supreme Being ?' —I know not.'' Is there more than one sort of spirits(Roukhanis) ?' — ' Ay ! more than humanarithmetic can reckon !'' Of what class art thou ? ' — ' One ofthe least perfect, and the most resemblingman.'' What is your external form ?' — ' We haveno form that can be conceived of by a narrowmind like thine !'' How, then, didst thou take a humanshape ?' — ' Thou couldst not understand me,and 'tis not thy business to know.'' Dost thou eat or drink ? ' — ' It concernsthee not.'' Is there a distinction of rank and powerDJINS. 209among you ? ' — ' Of power ? Yes ! But whathast thou, foolish creature ! to do withthat ?'' Why dost thou insult me ?'—' Thy questionsare insults.*' Then don't answer — ' I have my reasonsfor answering.'« Tell me what they are ?'—« They donot concern thee.'' Canst thou look into futurity ? ' — * Thatis the attribute of the Creator.'' Canst thou read the thoughts of man ? '' Sometimes.'' What means sometimes ? ' — ' I neithercan nor will I tell thee.''Art thou acquainted with what we callmathematics ? ' — 'I know the science of numbersbetter than you or all your teachers.''Dost thou know the quadrature of thecircle'— 'Yes!'210 MINOR MORALS.' Explain it to me, I beseech thee ? ' —« I will not ! '<« < Why ? ' — ' Because thou weariest me.''Dost thou know the physical sciences?''Better than men do; yet I am but ignorant.'' What gives its influence to the magnetand the magnetized steel?' — ' Thou wiltlearn this after death ! know that I was notsent here to teach thee.'' Yet I would willingly learn some truthsfrom thee?' — 'The truth of truths is God!'' I knew that before !' — ' Then thouknowest enough.'' But I would fain know more of God,and of God's works, to adore him moredevoutly; surely it would be a merit inthee to instruct me in this I ' — ' Thou knowestenough for man to know. After death thouwilt know more ; and as to the merit of in-DJINS. 211strutting one of tliy despicable dying race,that would be small indeed.'' Why is our race despicable ? ' — ' Studythat in your books of morality.'* Hast thou read our books ? ' — ' Never ! '' How then dost thou know their contents? ' — ' How ? that is above thy comprehension.I am a Djin — thou art but a man.'' Where dwells thy race ? ' — * Enough ! Iwill answer no more.'Not another word could be obtained.The questioner made several attempts, andso did divers other persons who were present,but the girl kept an unbroken silence.A Sheikh was called in to exorcise the girl,but he failed. A few days afterwards shesaid that the Djin had told her he meant toabandon her, and he did so — she declaringherself quite well and happy.212 MINOR MORALS."These facts are interesting, for they serveto show how completely the popular beliefof the Jews, as to the possession by evil spirits,which is so often referred to in the NewTestament, still maintains itself in Orientalcountries.Djins are supposed often to take theshape of huge negroes. In 1814 a numberof persons, in the service of Well Pacha, weretravelling on horseback from Tirnova to clarissa; among them was a Greek secretary,whose horse, when they had performed abouthalf their journey, suddenly bolted, and therider shrieked aloud, bending himself forwardover the horse's neck as if to escape from ablow levelled at his head, and he remained forsome time stupefied and speechless. His companionsinquired into the cause, and he toldthem that he had seen a gigantic negro .213proach with a naked sword in his hand, withwhich he had aimed a blow at him to severhis head from his body. They all consideredthe matter as a joke, and laughed at thecredulity of the secretary. When the sameparty was returning to Clarissa, near the samespot, the horse again started, the Greek secretaryuttered a loud scream and fell lifelesson the ground. Three European Christianswere mentioned to me as having beenpresent.To the Djins the Orientals attribute halfthe calamities of life. If you ask a blindman the cause of his misfortunes, he willvery likely attribute it to the malignity of aDjin; if he fall from a ladder and break alimb, he will often fancy it was a Djin thatthrew him down. If he lose his way, hewill tel you it was a Djin that led him214 MINOR MORALS.astray. If he enter into an unfortunate speculation,it was a Djin that suggested it inhis waking or his sleeping dreams. In ninecases out of ten superstition and credulity-bringconsolation to the people of the Levant.As in the greater events of life theyperceive the hand of inevitable destiny, and,therefore, accommodate themselves patientlyand piously to the decrees of Heaven, so, inless important matters, they like to thinkthat it is not by their own imprudence orfault that life's lighter calamities visit them.The interference of supernatural beings explainall difficulties. ' How could I haveprevented it?' is the question they put tothemselves, and as both their own self-loveand the opinions of their neighbour answer —You could not ! * resignation is easily practised.DJINS. 215And now," said Mr Howard, " youmust be almost tired with these stories ofthe Genii of the East."O no ! no ! no ! " exclaimed the youngpeople, " some other day, Papa, you musttell us some more."SINCERITY WITH PRUDENCE.At the next family meeting the conversationturned on the great varieties of human characterwhich are found, not only in theinhabitants of regions remote from one another,but even among those born under the sameform of government, speaking the same language,and educated under the same system.It would be difficult, " observed MrHoward, " to say whether wisdom £ind goodnessare exhibited most in those points inwhich men resemble, or in which they differfrom one another. Out of their resemblancetheir sympathies grow, and yet, if the resemblancewere so complete as to preventSINCERITY WITH PRUDENCE. 217persons from being easily distinguished, whatconfusion and embarrassment there would bein the world !I am often amused," continued Mr Howard,"at the different and contrasted viewsmen take of the same objects. Society wouldbe very dull if the same thoughts occurredto every mind alike on the same occasion ! "Mr Howard liked to throw out remarkssuch as this, in order to give his childrenthe opportunity of applying them to subjectswhich had occupied their attention.I have just been reading a curious instancein point," said George.Let us hear it, then ; your repeating, itwill impress it on your memory."The Spanish Ambassador, on his introductionto Henry the IVth of France, saidhe was very anxious to ascertain the chasIII. L218 MINOR MORALS.racteristic qualities of his ministers. ' Youshall judge of them yourself,' said the King.He first called Silvery, his Chancellor, andsaid — ' Mr Chancellor, there's a beam loosein the palace above my head; I am afraid itwill fall and injure me.' — ' We will send forthe architect. Sire, and have the repairs attendedto.' He called in next Villeroi, the ministerof war, who answered, 'It is most true.Sire, and it is a very fearful thing.' Thethird minister was the President Tannin, andhe responded, ' I don't understand you. Sire ;if I am not blind, the beam is sound andsteady. You may sleep in peace, the roofwill last longer than any of us.' When theywere gone, the King said to the Ambassador,Have you learnt their characters ? TheChancellor does not know his ot^ti meaning.Villeroi never contradicts me, but echoesSINCERITY WITH PRUDENCE. 219back what lie fancies is my opinion. Jean-inthinks like a wise man, and speaks likean honest one.'Very much to the purpose," said MrHoward, " and a lesson, too, on the value ofsincerity. In the presence of superiors menfrequently get into the habit of shaping theirexpressions to the supposed opinions of thosesuperiors. It is natural enough, as ' likeloves like,' according to an old phrase, thata similarity of sentiment should be acceptable.And yet different, and even opposed, opinionsmay be so expressed as to give nopain whatever. The true art of conversationis to blend sincerity with courtesy, neverto sacrifice truth, but to wound as little aspossible the self-love of others. There ismuch in manner — there is much in tone.Tannin's speech was not wanting in respect,or it would not have excited, as it did, the220 MINOR MORALS.applause of the king ; it is an instructiveexample of courteous frankness, and sinceritytoo. Now I will show you, in a descriptionof two persons whom I know very well, thecontrast between the frankness that takes acourteous and that which takes an uncourteousform.Mr Sharp is a man of considerableability. He was admirably educated, and bycontinuing to read the best books that arewritten, and by mingling with the best societyof his neighbourhood, he never talksbut to give information, and it is impossibleto consult him on any topic without beingbenefited by the information he communicates,and he is really, and at heart, akind and benevolent man. He gives hismoney liberally to all good purposes; hewill take much trouble to oblige, and ishonest in all his intentions, and upright in allSINCERITY WITH PRUDENCE. 221his conduct. But lie has manners so repulsive,his forms of expression have so muchacerbity, he seems so bent on appearing ungracious,that his good qualities have not halfthe influence, nor do they produce a hundredthpart of the happiness, they might beexpected to do. He does the most agreeablethings disagreeably, and if a disagreeablething is to be done by him, he makes ittenfold worse by the tone and manner whichhe assumes. I have heard poor people say,they had rather have Mr Goodman's refusalthan Mr Sharp's consent — they had ratherfail with Mr Goodman than succeed with MrSharp.Mr Goodman is Mr Sharp's friend andneighbour. With less talent, and far lessinstruction than Mr Sharp, he has tentimes his influence ; everything he says hesays so graciously and kindly, everything222 MINOR MORALS.he does is so characterized by a regard tothe feelings of others, that he is an objectof universal affection to those aroundhim. His experience of the world has enabledhim to appreciate the true excellencesof Mr Sharp's character, to pass charitably-overthe harshness of his manners, and toavail himself of the soundness of his mind.In this way he really uses Mr Sharp's influenceas well as his own, for their intimacyleads to a constant communion between them.Mr Goodman tolerates, and passes by unnoticed,expressions such as those which have createdfor Mr Sharp a host of enemies. Mr Sharpis known by the title of the disagreeableman. Whenever he speaks there is a dispositionto dislike him; truth itself from hislips loses half its value, and beneficence itselfhalf its recommendation. I recollect acase in point.SINCERITY WITH PRUDENCE. 223A cottage belonging" to a poor man hadbeen destroyed by fire, owing to the poorman's imprudence. He bad fallen asleep,having in his mouth a lighted pipe, whichfell and ignited a bundle of straw that wasnear him, so that he had some difficulty inescaping and enabling his wife to escape.The next morning Mr Sharp called, withthe purpose really of relieving and assistingthe poor man. A lecture on imprudencemight have been a proper thing at a propertime, but at a moment when the poor manhad received so terrible a lesson, and whenhe was reduced to destitution by hisown fault, it was not kind nor thoughtfulin Mr Sharp to speak reproachfully to thesufferers. But his first words were, ' Thomas !you careless fellow ! ' upon which Thomas,whose heart was big enough to burst before.224 MINOR MORALS.replied, ' O, sir ! ' and, wringing Ms hands,ran away from the scene of his calamities. Itwas, in fact, more than he could bear, and hispoor wife, overwhelmed with their common misery,and thinking how needless it was to addto it by any reproaches, said, in tones loudenough to be heard, ' Hard-hearted man ! 'Now, though Mr Sharp was really a charitableman, and had come to the cottagersfor the purpose of serving them, his pridetook offence at conduct and expressions whichhe thought insulting to him, and he walkedmorosely, though not angrily, away.Thomas returned to the ruins of his cottage,which Mr Sharp had left. ' I haveoffended him,' he said to his wife. ' I havedone so ten times more,' she answered, 'forI could not bear his unkindness. It wasenough to lose our all, it was enough toSINCERITY WITH PRUDENCE. 22.5have no bed to rest upon, no roof to restunder ; but why did lie abuse us ? ' Thepoor, my children, have their pride as wellas the rich, and it sometimes breaks forthmost violently in the moments of their utterdestitution. Thomas and his wife shed bittertears, each repeating to the other, ' Heneeded not have added to our misery.''• There were many persons grouped roundthe cottages. They had heard Mr Sharp'swords, and had seen him walk away. Aloud murmur followed him, a low groan ofreprobation. And yet, as I told you, he camewith the kindest of intentions. The infirmityof temper thwarted them all. Onehasty word, one little incident, turned thewhole current of his friendly thought, andcondemned him to the severest judgment ofthe slanders by."And yet Mr Sharp was fond of popularL 2226 MINOR Morals.applause, but his failings often subjected him,as in this instance, to popular reprobation.Mr Goodman happened to pass by soonafter. He did not come with any purposeof helping the sufferers from the fire, buthe saw many people collected, and he heardhis friend, Mr Sharp, spoken of in mostopprobrious terms. He knew they were undeserved.In fact, as always happens, whathad passed had been terribly exaggerated.Mr Sharp was accused of all sorts of inhumanity,and it seemed as if every one wereoccupied in choosing the worst words of reproachto which their lips could give utterance.' What does all this mean ? ' asked MrGoodman, and a hundred answers told himof Mr Sharp's cruelty to the cottagers.Now this is impossible,' said he to thecrowd, ' Mr Sharp is an excellent and mostSlNCEHltY WITH PRUDENCE. 227humane man, sometimes a little harsh in hismanner of speaking, but always endeavouringand intending to do right; I am surehe never meant any unkindness But all MrGoodman's words were wasted. ' You judgeothers by yourself,' the people answered; butthey continued towards Mr Sharp their sentenceof condemnation, and all appeals, allreasonings were in vain.Mr Sharp suffered so much in the publicopinion from this incident, that he lost avery honourable public situation to which hehad been called by his fellow citizens, andfor which, in truth, he was admirably fittedby talent and study."But was he not most hardly used?" inquiredArthur. — " Indeed he was, " repliedMr Howard; " but I have narrated the circumstanceto you in order that you may seewhat annoying consequences may grow out228 MINOR MORALS.of a small defect. I told you that Mr Sharpwas ambitious; he got the fame of being disagreeable,and I am sorry to say he is nowan unhappy man J*v. :TREASURE SEEKINGIN THE LEVANT.But when are we to have some morestories about the credulity of the Orientals ? "inquired Arthur, when the lessons were done,and the happy family circle gathered againtogether. " Cannot you remember some otherstory to tell us, dear Papa?"Stories enough," answered Mr Howard;so many, that it is difficult to choose betweenthem.I told you the belief in ghosts is almostuniversal in the treasure-seeking East, evenamong the Christian Levantine population,and there is scarcely one who has not some230 MINOR MORALS.tale to tell of his own knowledge and experience,which to doubt or dispute wouldbe deemed, and perhaps resented, as, an insult.I will give an example in the wordsof the narrator, a Ragusan Captain, wellknown in the East.' I am in the habit of trading with Alexandria,in Egypt. Some time ago I knew aJewish tailor there, who spoke Italian tolerablywell, and. frequently acted as myinterpreter, so that wee became friends onaccount of the services he rendered me.But, on arriving at Alexandria, after one ofmy voyages, I sought in vain for my Hebrewacquaintance, and was told he wassettled at Canea, in Candia. It happened,some time after this, that I had a cargo forthat port, and I inquired about the fate andfortunes of my friend. His Jewish brethrentold me that he and all his family were re-TREASURE-SEEKING IN THE LEVANT. 231duce to extreme poverty, and that theirmisery had been heightened by a stroke ofthe palsy, with which the poor man hadbeen attacked. I sought his abode, andfound him a wretched cripple, having lostthe use of all his limbs, though his sensescontinued perfect. His wife and his two sons,of the ages of fourteen and fifteen, exhibitedthe same marks of having been smitten bythe palsy, and his only daughter, of sevenyears old, had alone escaped the generalmisery. A poor old Jewess was paid by theJewish community of Canea for serving thisunhappy family. I inquired what had happenedto him since he left Egypt, and Iheard from his own lips as follows: —' I left Alexandria in the hope of betteringmy condition, and when I had settledhere some of my brethren told me that Ihad been most lucky in the choice of my232 MINOR MORALS.house, for it was well known there was treasurehidden under the staircase. I was only a tenant,so I got together all my means, made a liberaloffer for its purchase to the Tui-k who wasits owner, which he accepted. Myself, mywife, and sons, then set diligently aboutremoving the earth under the staircase.After digging down some feet, we discovereda large black slab-stone, which we raisedwith incredible "toil and trouble, and, at ashort distance beneath it, we perceived thelid of a chest ; but, as we approached it, itbegan to descend, and descended deeper anddeeper as we dug. I called out to myeldest son to get ropes and poles, so thatwe might be able to seize and to lift thechest — and from the moment that the ladwent in search of them the chest remainedstationary, and sunk no more ; but, as it wasa little below the surface of the ground,TREASURE-SEEKING IN THE LEVANT. 233we could not get hold of it. My son arrivedwith the poles and the ropes, and webegan to dig holes by the sides of thechest in order that we might pass the ropesunder it, and so raise it up ; but we hadscarcely commenced operations ere the chestsunk down again, and all our efforts werevain. I grew red and mad with rage, andswore that neither ghost nor devil shoulddeprive me of the treasure. My wife andchildren repeated my exclamations, and weset to work with greater ardour than before,when lo ! the chest sunk down with a dreadfulcrash, and a hideous monster, in theshape of a huge toad, looked out of thehole. What happened next I know not, butwe were all found the next morning palsy-struck,and in the state in which you nowsee us.' Here the Jew finished his narrative,and I gave him some money for his imme-234 MINOR MORALS.date wants ; but, being somewhat incredulous,I asked him if he would allow me tovisit the place, and to try my own fortunethere. At first he resisted violently, but Isucceeded in obtaining his consent. I wenton board my ship, and landed again, accompaniedby four of my best sailors. Havingbrought a strong windlass on shore, webegan to dig under the staircase at oneo'clock in the afternoon. When we had dugabout three feet down, we perceived a blackflag-stone, which we raised, after very greatexertions, and digging lower down we perceivedthe cover of the chest, in the verycentre of which was a large ring, to whichwe fastened a stout rope without any oppositionor difficulty. In a transport of delightone of the sailors exclaimed — " Now, by StAnthony ! it shan't escape ; " upon whichthe windlass was shivered to pieces, the chestTREASURE-SEEKING IN THE LEVANT. 235fell down with a frightful noise ; it was asif immense masses of broken iron, pottery,and tin ware, had fallen into a deep well.A noisome stench burst forth, and we wereall of us glad to scamper away as fast asour fright would let us.' "ABU ABDALLAH.COURAGE UNDER CALAMITY.Some of the events connected with the presenceof the Moorish conquerors in Spain,"was an observation made by Mr Howard tothe children, " are of the most patheticthat have been recorded by history." — " Pray,Papa," said George, " tell us somethingof those people who, as you told us, havewritten hundreds and hundreds of volumes,and improved the agriculture and advancedthe instruction of the people they conquered,and left permanent traces of their wisdom onthe soil of Spain."I will read to you," answered MrABU ABDALLAH 237Howard, " a little historical sketch of anevent — the final event in the Moorish historyof Spain." And Mr Howard, openinghis desk, drew forth a paper, and read asfollows : —If beings superior to man had beencharged to construct a glorious stage for theexhibition of some great event, in whichnations should be the actors, and divinitiesthe spectators, they would have spread outthe Vega, or Garden of Granada, and havesurrounded it with mountains like those whichoverlook that magnificent plain. There it isno fiction to say that the fruits of the northand of the south are blended, and the flowersof different regions flourish in the same soil.The cold freshness of winter comes downfrom the snowy tops of the Sierra to temperthe hot winds wafted over from the Africancontinent.238 MINOR MORALS.It would not be easy for the imaginationto add one additional charm to the romanticattraction of the Canadian scenery. Toweringover the rest, the central points of beautyand sublimity, rises the Snowy Mountain(Sierra Nevada), around which are gatheredother mountains, rugged and broken, butgradually declining in height, till the undulationscarcely rises above the surface of theMediterranean Sea. The base of the SierraNevada is not less than sixty miles wide,and its two most prominent coronals, Veletaand Muley Harem, are 12,000 feet higherthan the ocean level. Wild and barren asis the appearance of the Sierra from the distance,it has numberless verdant and picturesquerecesses, in which churches and convents,and villages and cottages, are scatteredprofusely. The district called the Al-pusarras, sacred to Arabic song, the sceneABU ABDALLAH. 239of SO much wild romance, and which, evenin the present day, so often echoes with thesounds of the pipe and tabor, and the voice ofthe minstrel, is composed of the various elevationsof hill and valley which lie betweenthe Snowy Mountain and the Mediterranean,down to which a majestic range of hillyheights extends, ending in that promontoryso well known to mariners as the Cape deGat. On every side the Sierra Nevada putsforth its gigantic arms. To the west, branchesout the Tegea, overlooking the Moorishcities of Lama and Velez Malaga, andcrowned, like its proud superior, with a diademof everlasting snow. To the north arethe Parapanda and the Elvira mountains,each standing alone and unsupported, lookingdown in their solitudes on that vastamphitheatre where Granada appears in itsruined glories. A little further east is the240 MINOR MORALS.renowned Alpaca, the Jiuenlium aquariumwhose water-sources pour refreshment over awide extent of fertility, and feed that deliciousfountain, hidden in one of the mountaindells, whose surrounding prospects havebeen in all times the pride and the bosist ofMoors and Christians. The Vega, or gardenin which Granada is built, requires morethan a day's journey to traverse. It is wateredby the river Genii, which has its originin the snow streams at the foot of one ofthe peaks of the Sierra Nevada, and rollsdown, in wild and wandering way, throughthe broken and tortuous channel it has madeamong the precipices. It rushes passionatelyand precipitately down to the plains of Granada,and then proceeds onwards in calmand quiet dignity, lingering, as it were,among the green scenery, till the mountainsof Loja oppose its progress, when it ragesABU ABDALLAH. 241anew, forces at last its unobstructed courseto the wondrous Seville, and weds itself withthe Quadalquivir, its equal in strength andgrandeur. The Genii is the stream whichthe poets have called divine, a title whichCervantes has confirmed in his renownedromance. The idea of its divinity, say oldchronicles, originated in its high descent. TheGods have been always fabled to inhabitexalted abodes, and to associate with themrivers rolling down from inaccessible elevationswas but a natural and pardonablefancy."Abu Abdallah, the last of the Moorishmonarchs of Granada, lingered on the spotwhich, since the day of his exile, has bornethe name of El suspiro del Moro (TheMoor's sigh). Tradition has preserved thedetails of the affecting scene, and, even asrecorded by the dull though erudite Conte,VOL. III. M242 MINOR MORALS.ill his History of the Arabs in Spain, itis one of the most pathetic passages withwhich I am acquainted. The yellow flag ofIberia was floating on the towers of the Alhambra— Abdallah heard the shouts of joyand granulation which welcomed the Christianconquerors — he was almost deserted, andthose who remained taunted him with hismisfortunes— his favourite wife shouted ' YaKasil!^ (Coward!) in his ear, and his few followerstalked loudly of the glories of iiiforefathers. ' It is generous,' he said, ' towound the wounded. Allah Jniahar ! (Blessedbe Allah ! ') he added, and passed onward towardsthe Alpujarras in peace. Once again,from the Paul hill, Abdallah looked backon the city, on the palace, and the quietstream; it was his last look, and terribly didhe struggle with his sorrow — he subdued it-—he shed no tear — one sigh alone brokeABU ABDALLAH. 243from him, it was loud and deep, and thosewho heard it called the spot ' The Moor'sSigh,' a name by which it is still known,as the story is known to the meanest peasantof Andalusia.Among the Moorish attendants of AbuAbdallah there was one whose appearanceparticularly distinguished him from the rest.He uttered no one word either of sorrow orof consolation ; he joined not in the re-piracies of the revilers, and nothing brokehis silence but a sigh, which responded tothat of his master — a sigh which shook hisframe. He covered his eyes as if ashamedof his weakness, but it was to wipe away atear. He seemed strengthened by the triumphover his own feelings, and walkedonward, the firmest and the first among themelancholy crowd. His name was Abdil.Abdallah looked upon him with an ex'244 MINOR MORALS.pression of tenderness that completed theinfluence which the misfortunes of the sovereignhad made upon the heart of thesubject."Abdallah entreated the rest of his followersto tarry, promising that he wouldsoon rejoin them. He had beckoned toAbdil, who bowed his head, betokening hishumble obedience, and together they turnedaway into a bye path on the Paul hill.On one of the green spots where thetracks of the wild goats are lost, Abdallahseated himself, while Abdil stood silent athis side.' Seat thyself near me,' said the dethronedmonarch, * and let us talk togetherof our evil destiny.'' Allah lumbar ! ' was Abdil's reply ; ' ourdestiny is in Allah's hands, and he knowethwhat is best.'ABU ABDALLAH. 245'let US talk of our miseries, Abdil. Weshall bear them the easier when we seehow mighty they are. To bear them isworthy of a courageous spirit, and the moreintolerable they appear the nobler will betheeffort which instructs us to submit tothem with magnanimity.'' Noble teaching, and still nobler teacher,'said Abdil, ' hitherto calamity has taught methe weakness, and not the strength, of mortalnature. It has opened to me hiddenfrailties, and unveiled the infirmity of resolution,and the poverty and helplessness ofcourageous desire.'' Of what value is courage,' said themonarch, ' if it fail when it is most needed.There is little valour in following him whoflees. The bravery of conquest may or maynot be acceptable in Allah's holy eye ; but ifthe conquered shrink, and bend, and break246 MINOR MORALS.beneath the burthen of calamity, can he hopefor respect or confidence — can he be worthyof a better fate in better days? Will Allahchange the doom of the creature he mustcontemn, or look with anything but scornon the man who takes from adversity its soletitle to honour, which is to bear oneselfproudly while smarting beneath its discipline^^ ' Thou at least, King Abdallah, art entitledto the honour, as thou art supportedby the strength, of virtue; for what heaviergriefs were ever flung upon one of thefaithful than upon thee ! '' They might have been far, far moreintolerable. I have thy friendship, Abdil !thy fidelity; I might have been a lonelymourner, with none to hear me, none to consoleme, none to advise with me, none tolove me.'ABU ABDALLAH. 247' Small, King Abdailah, is the tribute,and poor the comfort, which can be offeredby a solitary follower to him who had theaffection of tens of thousands. His wordscannot find a shelter for that royal head,so lately o'er canopied by splendid palaceroof, nor make the contrast tolerable betweenthis wild solitude and the million glories ofthe Alhambra* Abdil, the devotion of one whose devotionhas stood the test of adversity is ofnobler praise and price than the countlessand clamorous asseverations of those whocrowd around the footsteps of a throne. Ihave learnt to estimate the value of lip-homage.The blast of winter shook mefrom the tree, and I lay, a dead leaf, at thefoot of those who had worshipped my greenand flourishing days. They passed by, either248 MINOR MORALS.silently or scornfully, and some of them indulgedin bitter insult as they passed. Whatthought, what wish, can be left, said I, butto rot into clay, and become insensible tospurning and contumely? But the voice ofAllah said, " Arise ! " and I arose, freshenedby the waters of sorrow. And now, whatis the worst that can befall me ? Someheavier blow ? But there is no heavierblow. He who hath lost a crown hath littleelse to lose.'* More honoured in thy falling than thyrising,' said Abdil, but Abdallah stopped thesentence.' No words of adulation now, but wemust rejoin our friends and followers.'Abdallah and Abdil wended their waywith a firm step towards the remnant — few andfaithful of their companions. The sadnessABU ABDALLAH. 249that had clouded the brow of the kingwas gone, and as he uttered — ' Courage,friends ! our exile is to the land of ourforefathers ! ' they followed him cheerfullyto the Mediterranean shore."LONDON:PRINTED BY C. REYNELL, LITTLE FULTENEY STREET.