OPTICS.BTDAVID BREWSTER, LL.D. F.R.S. &c.LONDON:PRINTED FORHangman, Trees, ORME, BROWN, AND GREEN,Paternoster-row ;AND JOHN TAYLOR,UPPER Power STREET.1831.THE NEW YorePUBLIC LIBRARYASTOR, LennoxIT IS NOT EAST TO DEVISE ▲ CURE FOR SUCH A STATE OFTHINGS (the declining TASTE FOR SCIENCE) ; BUT THE MOSTOBVIOUS REMEDY IS TO PROVIDE THE EDUCATED CLASSES WITHA SERIES OF WORJLS ON POPULAR AND PRACTICAL SCIENCE,FREED FROM MATHEMATICAL SYMBOLS AND TECHNICAL TERMS,WRITTEN IN SIMPLE AND PERSPICUOUS LANGUAGE, AND IllustratedBY FACTS AND EXPERIMENTS WHICH ARE LEVELTO THE CAPACITY OF ORDINARY MINDS.Quarterly Review for Feb. 18SUCONTENTS.INTRODUCTIONPagePART I.ON THE REFLEXION AVD REFRACTION OF LIGHT.CATOPTRICS.CHAP. I.Reflexion by Specula and Mirrors 'Reflexion of Rays fh>m Plane MirrorsReflexion of Rays from Concave MirrorsReflexion of Rays from Convex MirrorsImages formed by MirrorsCHAP. II.DIOPTRICS.CHAP. III.Refraction -CHAP. IV.Refiraction through Prisms and LensesOn the total Reflexion of LightRefraction of Light through Plane GlassesRefraction of Light through Curved SurfacesReflection of Light through Spheres .Refraction of Light through Convex and Concave SurfacesRefraction of Light through Convex LensesRefiraction of Light through Concave LensesRefraction of Light through Geniuses and Concavo-convexLenses .CHAP. V.On the Formation of Images by Lenses, and on their magnifyingPower .CHAP. VI.Spherical Aberration of Lenses and Mirrors .Spherical Aberration of Mirrors .On Caustic Curves formed by Reflexion and RefractionSOS64SVI CONTENTS.PART II.PHYSICAL Optics.CHAP. VII. PageOn the Colours of Light, and its Decomposition . . - 66Decomposition of Light by Absorption - . - 71CHAP. ViiOn the Dispersion of Light - - - - 75CHAP. IX,On the Principle of Achromatic Telescopes . . - 79CHAP. X.On the Physical Properties of the Spectrum . - 85On the Existence of Fixed Lines in the Spectrum . . ib.On the Illuminating Power of the spectrum - .88On the Heating Power of the Spectrum - . - 89On the Chemical Influence of the Spectrum . .90On the Magnetising Power of the Solar Rays . . 9SCHAP. XI.On the Inflexion or Distraction of Light . . .95CHAP. NilOn the Colours of Thin Plates . . .-100Table of the Colours of Thin Plates of Air, Water, and Glass . 103CHAP. XiiOn the Colours of Thick Plates . . . .109CHAP. XIV.On the Cours of Fibres and grooved Surfaces . . 113CHAP. XV.On Fits of Reflexion and Transmission, and on the Interference ofLight . . . . . .196CHAP. XVI.On the Absorption of Light . . . . 1S7CHAP. EvilOn the Double Refraction of Light . - - 143On Crystals with one Axis of Double Refraction . . 147On the Law of Double Refraction in Crystals with one NegativeAxja . . . . .149Contents. Vii«PageOn the Law of Doable Effusion in Crystals with (me PositiveAxis - - - - - . UlOn Crystals with two Axes of Double Refraction - . 153On Crystals with innumerable Axes of Double Refraction . 15%On Bodies to which Double Refraction may be communicated byHeat, rapid Cooling, Pressure, and Induration • - 155On Substances with Circular Double Refraction . . 156CHAP. XVIII.On the Polarisation of Light . - . - 1S7On the Polarisation of Light by Double Refraction . .159CHAP. XIX.On the Polarisation of light by Reflexion . . - 164On the Law of the Polarisation of Light by Reflexion . .169On the partial Polarisation of Light by Reflexion . . 172»CHAP. XX.On the Polarisation of light by ordinary Refraction . - 177CHAP. XXLOn the Colours of Crystallised Plates in Polarised Light . . 18SCHAP. Xxii .On the System of Coloured Rings in Crystals with one Axis - 19SPolarising Intensities of a few Crystals with one Axis - - 201CHAP. XxiiOn the System of Coloured Rings in Crystals with two Axes - ib.Polarising Intensities of some Crystals with two Axes - - 210CHAP. XXIV.Interference of Polarised Light — On the Cause of the Cdoun ofCrystallised Bodies ' . * . . - ib.CHAP. XXV.On the Polarising Structure of Analcime - - > 2MCHAP. XxviOn Circular Polarisation . 216Circular Polarisation in Fluids . 221Crystals which turn the Planes from Right to Left - - ib.Crystals which turn the Planes from Left to Right . - 222CHAP. XXVII.On Elliptical Polarisation, and on the Action of Metals upon Light 89#On Elliptical Polarisation . . . • ib.Order in which the Metals polarised most Light in the Plane ofReflexion . . - . - hissYUl CONTENTS.CHAP. XXVIII. PageOn the Polarising Structure produced by Heat, Cold, Compression,Dilatation, and Induration . 2921. Transient Influence of Heat and Cold . . . ib.(1.) Cylinders of Glass with one positive Axis of DoubleRefraction . . . . - ih,(2.) Cylinders of Glass with a n^;atiye Axis of Double Re.fraction . . . . .233(3.) Oval Plates of Glass with two Axes of Double Refraction 234(4.) Cubes of Glass with Double Reflection . . ib.(5.) Rectangular Plates of Glass with Planes of no DoubleReflection . . . . .235(6.) Sphere of Glass, &c. hath an infinite Number of Axes ofDouble Refiraction 237(7.) Spheroids of Glass with one Axis of Double Refractionalong the Axis of Revolution and two Axes along theEquatorial Diameters . . . ih.(8.) Influence of Heat on regular Crystals . .2962. On the permanent Influence of sudden Cooling . . 239& On the Influence of Compression and Dilatation . .2404. On the Influence of Induration . . . 24SCHAP. XXIX.Phenomena of Composite or Tesselated Crystals . .243CHAP. XXX.On the Dichroism, or Double Colour, of Bodies ; and the Absorptionof Polarised Light . - . . 219Colours of the two Images in Crystals with one Axis . . 25DColours of the two Images in Crystals with two Axes - . 252General Observations on Double Refraction . .253PART III.Oir THE Application OF OPTICAL PRINCIPLES TO THE ExplanationOF NATURAL PHENOMENA.CHAP. XxxiOn unusual Refraction - - . .255CHAP. XXXII.OntbeRainbow - - - - .264CHAP. XxxiiOn Halos, Coronae, Parhelia, and Paraselense . .270CHAP. XXXIV.On the Colours of Natural Bodies . > .280CONTENTS. IXCHAP. XXXV. PageOn the Eye and Vision . SeOn the Phenomena and Laws of Vision . . 290CHAP. XXXVI.On Accidental Colours and Coloured Shadows . - - SMPART IV.ON OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS. !CHAP. XxxviOn Plane and Curved Mirrors - . - .313Kaleidoscope . . <. . 314Plane Burning Mirrors . . . . 317Convex and Concave Mirrors 318Cylindrical Mirrors . r - .319CHAP. XXXVIII.On Single and Compound Lenses 380Burning and Illuminating Lenses - - .321CHAP. XXXIX.On l&nple and Compound Prisms 3S4Prismatic Lenses . . . . ib.Compound and Variable Prisms 3S6Multiplying Glass - - . - 388CHAP. XLOn the Camera Obscura and Camera Lucida . - 389Magic Lantern 331Camera Lucida . 333CHAP. XLI.On Microscopes . . 335Single Microscope . ; . . . ib.Compound Microscopes . 340On Reflecting Microscopes 343On Test Objects . . . . . .345Rules for miscroscoittc Observations . . . ib.Solar Microscope . 346CHAP. XLII.On Refracting and Reflecting Telescopes - . - 347Astronomical Telescope . . . -. - ib.Terrestrial Telescope . .; . - 349Galilean Telescope . . - - « ib.Contents.Gregorian Reflecting TelescopeCassegrainian TelescopeNewtonian Telescope .Sir 'William Herschel's TelescopeMr. Damages Telescope .CitAP. XLIII.On Achromatic TelescopesOn Achromatic Eye-pieces .Prism Telescope . ^ . .Achromatic Opera Glasses with ffin^e LensesMr. Barlow's Achromatic Telescope .Achromatic solar Telescopes with sins LensesOn the Improvement of imperfectly Achromatic TelescopesATREATISEONOPTICSINTRODUCTION.(1.) Optics from a Greek word which signifies to see,is that branch of knowledge which treats of the propertiesof light and of vision, as performed by the humaneye.(2.) Light is an emanation or something which proceedsfrom bodies and by means of which we areenabled to see them by the eye. All visible bodies maybedivided into two classes — self-luminous and non-luminous.Self-luminous bodies such as the stars flames of allkinds and bodies which shine by being heated or rubbedare those which possess in themselves the property ofdischarging light. Non-luminous bodies are those whichhave not the power of discharging light of themselvesbut which throw back the light which falls upon themfrom self-luminous bodies. One non-luminous bodymay receive light from another non-luminous body anddischarge it upon a third; but in every case the lightmust originally come from a self-luminous body. Whena lighted candle is brought into a dark room the formof the flame is seen by the light which proceeds fromthe flame itself; but the objects in the room are seen by2 A TREATISE ON OPTICS.the light which they receive from the candle and againthrow hack; while otho' objects on which the light of thecandle does not fall receive light from the white ceilingand walls and thus become visible to the eye.(3.) All bodies, whether self-luminous or non-lumen*vous, discharge light of the same colour with themselves.A red flame or a red-hot body discharges red light; and apiece of red cloth discharges red lights thou it is illuminatedby the white light of the sun.(4.) Light is emitted from every visible point of aluminous or of an illuminated body and in every directionin which the point is visible. If we look at theflame of a candle, or at a sheet of white paper and magnifythem ever so much, we shall not observe any pointsdestitute of light.(5.) Light moves in straight lines and contrasts ofseparate and independent parts, called rays of light. Ifwe admit the light of the sun into a dark room througha small hole, it will illuminate a spot on the wall exactlyopposite to the sun, — the middle of the spot, the middleof the hole, and the middle of the sun, being all in thesame straight line. If there is dust or smoke in theroom, the progress of the light in straight lines will bedistinctly seen. If we stop a very small portion of theadmitted light, and allow die rest to pass, or if we stopnearly the whole light, and allow only the smallest portionto pass, the part which passes is not in the slightestdegree affected by its separation from the rest. Thesmallest' portion of light which we can either stop orallow to pass is called a ray of light,(6.) light moves with a velocity of 192,500 milesin a second of time. It travels from the sun to the earthin seven minutes and a half. It moves through a spaceequal to the circumference of our globe in the 8th part ofa second, a flight which the swiftest bird could not performin less than three weeks.(7.) When light fills upon any body whatever, partof it is reflected or driven back, and part of it enters thebody, and is either lost within it or transmitted throughINTRODUCTION. 5it. When the body is bright and well polished likestiver, a great part of the light is reflected and theremainder lost within joie ever, which can transmitlight only when hammered out into the thinnest film.When the body is transparent like glass or watery almostall the Hght is transmitted and only a small part of itreflected. The light which is driven back from bodiesis reflected according to particular laws the considerationof which forms that branch of optics called catop^tries ; and the light which is transmitted through transparentbodies is transmitted according to particular lawsthe consideration of which constitutes the subject of:B 2A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PART J.PART I.ON THE REFLEXION AND REFRACTION OF LIOHT#CATOPTRICS.(8.) Catoptrics is that branch of optics which treatsof the progress of rays of light after they are reflectedfrom plane and spherical surfaces and of the formationof images from objects placed before such surfaces.CHAP. I.reflexion bt specula and mirrors.(9.) Any substance of a regular form employed forthe purpose of reflecting lights or of forming images ofobjects is called a speculum or mirror. It is generallymade of metal or glass having a highly polished surface.The name of mirror is commonly given to reflectors thatare made of glass ; and the glass is always quicksilveron the back to make it reflect more light. The wordspeculum is used to describe a reflector which is metallicsuch as those made of silver steely or of grain tin mixedwith copper.(10.) Specula or mirrors are either planer concave,or convex.A plane speculum is one which is pertly flat, likea looking-glass; a concave speculum is one which ishollow like the inside of a watch-glass ; and a convexspeculum is one which is round like the outside of awatch-glass.As the light which fans upon glass mirrors is interceptedby the glass before it is reflected from the 4|uick-CHAP. I.INCIDENCE AND REFLEXION.silvered surface we shall suppose all our mirrors to beformed of polished raetal^ as they are in almost alloptical instruments.(11.) When a ray of light, A 'D^fig, 1., falls upon aFig' 1. plane speculum, MN, at the pointB D, it will be reflected or drivenback in a direction D B, which isas much inclined to ED, a line perpendicularto M N, as the ray A D'N was; that is the angle B D £ isequal to A D E, or the circular arc B E is equal to E A.The ray A D is called the incident ray, and D B thereflected ray A D E the angle of incidence, and B D £the angle of reflexion ; and a plane passing through A Dand D B^ or.the plane in which these two lines lie iscalled the plane of incidence, or the plane of reflexion,(12.) When the speculum is concave, as MN,fig, 2.,then if C be the centre of thecircle of which M N is a part,the incident ray A D and the reflectedray DB will form equalangles with the line C D, which^y is perpendicular to the small portionof the speculum on which theray falls at D. Hence in thiscase also the angle of incidence A D £ is equal to theangle of reflexion B D E.(IS.) When the speculum is convex, as M N, fig, 3.^let C be the centre of the circle ofwhich M N forms a part, and C £a line drawn through D ; then theangle of incidence A D £ will beequal to the angle of reflexion BDE.These results are found to be true'>v by experiment; and they may beeasily proved by admitting a ray ofthe sun's light through a hole inthe window shutter, and making itfall on the mirrors MN in theB 3A TREATISE ON OPTICS.PART I.direction AD, when it will be seen reflected in thedirection D B. If the incident ray A D is made to approachthe perpendicular D E, the reflected ray DB willalso approach die perpendicular D £; and when the rayA D fsJls in the direction E D, it will be reflected backin the direction D £. In like manner when the rayA D approaches to D N, the ray D B will approach toDM.(14.) As these results are true under all circumstanceswe may consider it as a general law, that when light fallsupon any surface, whether plane or curved, the angle ofits reflexion is equal to the angle of its incidence.Hence we have a method of universal application forfinding the direction of a reflected ray when we knowthe direction of the incident ray. If A D, for example,^gs, 1,2, 3,, is the direction in which the incident rayfalls upon the mirror at D, draw the perpendicular D £in. 1., and in. 2. or. 3. draw aline from D to C,the centre of the curved surface M N ; and, having describeda circle M B £ A N round D as a centre, takethe distance A £ in the compasses and carry it from £to B, and having drawn a line from D to B, D B will bethedirection of the reflected ray.Reflexion of Rays from Plane Mirrors.(15.) Reflexion of parallel rays. When parallel orequidistant rays, A D, A' D', fig. 4., are incident uponFig. 4.a plane mirror, M N, they will continue to be parallelafter reflexion. By the method already explained,describe arches of circles round D, D' as centres, andmake the arch from £ towards B equal to that betrees A D and D E, and also the arch from E' towardsB' equal to that between Ad' and D' E"; then drawingdieUnesDB.'D'B, if will be found that these Unes areparallel. If the apace between A D and Ad* ii filledwith other rays parallel to A D, so aa to constitute acandle beam or mass of light, A A' N'd, the reflectedla^B will be all parallel to A D, and will constitute aparallel reflected beam. The reflected beam, however,will be inverted ; for the Side A D, which was uppermostbefore reflexion, will be undermost, as at D B, afterreflexion.(16.) Reflexion of diverging rage. Diving rayatre those which proceed from a point. A, and separateas they advance, Ulte A D, A D', A D". When suchrays fall upon a plane mirror M N, fig. 5., they will bereflected in directions D B, D' B', D" B", making theangles A D E, AD' E', A D" E" respectively, equalto BDB, BD'B', B"D"E"; the Unes DE, Dee',I>"E" bang drawn from the points D, D', D'', wherethe rays are incident, perpendicular to M N ; and byFig 5yA.^"-■>-;\■■■^Acontinuing the reflected rays backwards, they will befound to meet at a point A' as far behind the mirror MNas A is before it ; that is, if A N A' be drawn perpendicularto M N, A' N will be equal 10 A N. Hence theisis will have the same divergency after reflexion as theyhad before it. If we wonder A D" D as a divergentbeam of light included between A D and A B", then them*reflected beam inclosed between DB and Deb" willdiverge from A', and will be inverted after reflexion.1 7-) Repetition of converging ray*. Converging railare those which proceed from several pnnti AA'A",fig. 6., towards oDe point B. When rich n,jt ftU npoaFig.e.■ plane minOT, M K, they will be reflected in direction*D B', IVB', D''fi', forming the same angles with the perpendicular*D£, Dee', D'ye", a« the incident laura didand converging to a point B' aa far before the mirror aithe point B is behind it. If we consider ADD" A"HB a converging beam of light, D" B' D will be its formafter reflexion.In all these cases the teSeuon does nothing motethan invert the incident beam of light, and shift its pointof divei^^ce or convergence to the opposite side of theRefrain ^Sagtfrom Coneatie Mirror.(18.) Refft:tUm of harald ran*. Let M N, fig. 7.,he a concave mirror whose centre of concavity is C( andlet A M, A D, A N be parallel rays, or a parallel beamof light falling upon it. Then, since C M, C N areperpendicular to the surface of the mirror at the pointsM and N, CMA, CNA will be the angles of in-thence of the raya AM, AN. Make the angles ofreflexion C M F, C N F equal to CMA, CNA, andit will be fomid .that the lines M F, N F meet at FOBAFU I. Concave IflRROIIS. 9in the fine A D^ and these lines M F^ N F will he thereflected rays. The ray A C D being perpendicular toFig. 7.the mirror at D^ because it passes through the centre C,will be reflected back in an opposite direction D F; sothat all the three rays, AM, A Dj and A N^ will meetat one point, F. In like manner it will be found thatall other rays between A M and A N, falling upon otherpants of the mirror between M and N, will be reflectedto the same point F. The point F, in which a concavemirror collects the rays which fall upon it, is called thefwms, or fire-places because the rays thus collected havethe power of burning any inflammable body placed there.When the rays which the mirror collects are parallel, asin the present case, the point F is called its principalfocus, or its focus for parallel rays. When we considerthat the rays which form the beam A M N A occupy alarge space before they fall upon the mirror M N, and byreflexion are condensed upon a small space at F^ it iseasy to understand how they have the power of burningbodies placed at F.Rule. — The distance of the focus F frown the nearestpoint or vertex D of the mirror M N is in all mirrorswhatever be their substance, equal to one half of C t^,the radius of the mirror's concavity. The distance F Dis called the principal focal distance of the mirror. Thetruth of this rule may be found by projecting fig. 7*upon a large scale, and by taking the points M N neartoD.(19.) Reflexion of diverging rays. Let M^,fig. 8.,be t concave mirror whose centre of concavity is C ; and10 A TREATISE OX OPTICS. PART Llet rays A M, A D, A N, diverging or radiating from thepoint A^ fall upon the mirror at the points M^ D, N^ andFi, 8.»Mbe reflected from these points. The lines C M^ CD,and C N being perpendicular to the mirror at the pointsM, D, and N, we shall find the reflected rays M F, N F,by making the angle F M C equal to A M C, and F N Cequal to AN C; and the point F where these rays meetnell be the focus where the diverging rays A M, A Nare collected. By comparing fig. 7- with fig. 8. it isobvious that as the incident ray A M in fig. 8. is nearerthe perpendicular C M than the same ray is in fig. 1.,the reflected ray M F will also be nearer the perpendicularC M than the same ray in. 7*; and as the sameis true of the reflected ray N F, it follows that the pointF must be nearer C in fig. 8, than \nfi>g. J.; that is, inthe reflexion of diverging rays the focal distance D F ofthe mirror is greater than its focal distance for parallelrays.If we suppose the point of divergence A, fig. 8., orthe radiant point, as it is called, to approach to C, theincident rays A M, A N will approach to the perpendicularsCM, CN, and consequently the reflected raysMF, NF will also approach to CM, CN; that is, as theradiant point A approaches to the centre of concavity C,the focus F also approaches to it, so that when A reachesC, F will also reach C ; that is, when rays diverge fromthe centre, C, of a concave mirror they will all be refleeted back to tke same point.if the radiant point A passes C towards D^ then theCHAP. I. CONCAVE MIRRORS. IIfocus 1^ will pass C towards A ; so that if the light nowdiverges from F it will be collected in K, the points thatwere formerly the radiant points being now the foci.From this relation or interchange between the radiantpoints and the foci the points A and F have been calledconjugate fod, because if either of them be the radiantpoint the other will be the /oca/ point.If in. 7. we suppose F to be the radiant point, thenthe focal point A will be at an infinite distance ; that isthe rays will never meet in a focus, but will be parallel,like MA, NA in ^.7.In like manner it is obvious, that if the point F is atfy Bsiafig. 9'i the reflected rays will be Ma, Na; that is.Fig, 9.they will diverge from some point. A', behind the mirroril N ; and as approaches to D, they will diverge moreand more, ais if the point A', from which they seemed todiverge, approached to D. The point A' behind themirror, from which the rays M a, N a seem to proceed,or at which they would meet if they moved backwardsin the directions a M, a N is called their virtual focus,because they oily tend to meet in that focus.In all these cases the distance of the focus F may bedetermined either by projection or by the followingrule, the radius of the concavity of the mirror, C D, and.lie distance, A D, of the radiant point being given.RuLiB. Multiply the distance, AD, of sie radiant12 A Treating ON OPTICS. Part I*point from the mirror by the radius C D^ of the mirror,and divide this product by the difference between twicethe distance of the radiant point and the radius of themirror and the quotient will be F D^ the conjugate £001!distance required.In applying this rule we must observe what will bereadily seen from the figures that if twice A D la hmthan CD (as at y^ fig. 9-), the rays will not meet beforethe mirror but will have a virtual focus behind it, dwdistance of which from D will be given by the rule.(20.) Reflexion of converging rays. Let MN,j%f.lO.>Fis 10.be a concave mirror whose centre of concavity is C^ andlet rays Am AD, An converging to a point A' behindthe mirror, fall upon the mirror at the points M, D, andN, and suffer reflexion at these points. The lines CM,C D, and C N being perpendicular to the mirror at thepoints Med, and N, we shall find the reflected rays MFand N F by making the angle F M C equal to A M C,and F N C equal to A N C; and the point F, where theserays meet, will be the focus where the converging raysA M, A N are collected. By comparing fig, 10. withfig. 7. it will be manifest, that, as the incident ray Aminfig. 10. is farther from the perpendicular C M thanthe same ray A M in fig. 7., the reflected ray M F infig, 10. will also be farther from the perpendicular C M .than the same ray in fig. 7* ; and as the same is true of<mAV. I. CONVEX Horrors. ISthe reflected ray N F^ it follows that the point F mustbe farther from C in fig, 10. than in /^. 7* ; that is indie reflexion of converging rays the conjugate focaldistance D F of the mirror is less than its distance forparallel rays.If we suppose the point of convergence A!, fig, 10., toapproach to D, or the rays A M, A N to become moreconvergent, then the incident rays A M^ A N will recedefrom the perpendiculars C M^ C N ; and as the reflectedrays M F, N F will also recede from C M, CN, the focusF will likewise approach to D; and when Af reaches D^ Fwill also reach D.If the rays Am AN become less convergent that is,if their point of convergence A' recedes farther from Dto the left, the focus F will recede from D to the right;and when A' is infinitely distant or when Am AN areparallel, as in fig, 7<> F will be half way between Dand CIn these cases the place of the focus F will be foundby the following rule.Rule. Multiply the distance of the point of convergencefrom the mirror by the radius of the mirror,and divide this product by the sum of twice the distanceof the radiant point and the radius C D, and the quotientwill be the distance of the focus, or FD, the focus Fbeing always in front of the mirror.Reflexion of Rays from Convex Mirrors,(21.) Reflexion of parallel rays. Let M N, fig, 11.,be a convex mirror whose centre is C, and let AM,AD, AN be parallel rays falling upon it. Continue thelines CM an CN to E, and Mesne will be perpendicularto the surface of the mirror at the pointsM and N. The rays AM, AN will therefore be reflected'in directions MB, NB, the angles of reflexion£MB, ENB being equal to the angles of incidenceE M A, E N A. By continuing the reflected rays B M,BN backwards, they will be found to meet at F, theirA TREATISE ON OPTICS.PART I,virtual focus behind the mirror; and the focal distance.D F for parallel rays will be almost exactly one half o^Fig, 11.the radius of convexity C D^ provided the points M andN are taken near D.(22.) Reflexion of diverging rays. Let 'M'S^fy. 12.,be a convex mirror C its centre of convexity, and AM,Fig. 12.MAN rays diverging from A, which fall upon the mimeat the points Men. The lines CME and CNE willbe, as before, perpendicular to the mirror at M and N;and consequently, if we make the angles of reflexion£MB,£NB equal to the angles of incidence £Ma£NA, MB,NB will be the reflected rays which, whencontinued backwards, will meet at F, their virtual focusbehind the mirror. By comparing. 12. idQify* Ih,Chap. n. IMAGES FORMED BT Mirrors. 15it is obvious that the ray AM,fg, 12., is farther fromME than in fig. 11.^ and consequently the reflected rayM B must also be farther from it. Hence as the sameis true of the ray N B, the point F, where these raysmeet must be nearer D in fig, 12. than in. 11.; thatis in the reflexion of diverging rays the virtual focaldistance DF is less than for parallel rays.For the same reason if we suppose the point ofdivergence A to approach the mirror the virtual focusSwill also approach it; and when A arrives at D^ F willalso arrive at D. In like manner if A recedes horn themirror F will recede from it; and when A is infinitelydistant or when the rays become parallel as in fig. 11.,F will be half way between D and C. In all thesecases, the focus is a virtual one behind the mirror.CHAP. II.IMAGES FORMED BY MIRRORS.(23.) The image of any object is a picture of itformed either in the air, or in the bottom of the eye, orupon a white ground, such as a sheet o£ paper. Imagesare generally formed by mirrors or lenses, and accuracyresemble the object in shape and colour; though theymay be formed also by placing a screen with a smallaperture, between the object and the sheet of paper whichis to receive the image. In order to understand this, letC D be a screen or window-shutter with a small aperture,A* and £ F a sheet of white paper placed in a daricroam. Then, if an illuminated object, R G B, is placeden the outside of the shutter, we shall observe an in-Termed image of this object painted on the paper at robinorder to understand how this takes place, let us sup->pose the object R B to have three distinct colours, redat R^ green at G^ and bltte at B ; their it \a i^\vav ^()c^»Xl6 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. 7ABTLthe red light from R will pass in straight lines dmmg^the aperture A^ and fall upon the paper £ F at r. InFig. 13.like manner the green light from G will fall upon thepaper at g, and the blue light from B will fall upon thepaper at 6 ; thus painting upon the paper an invertedimage, rb, of the object, R B. As every coloured pointin the object R B has a coloured point corresponding toit,and opposite to it on the paper £ F, the image b rwill be an accurate picture of the object R B, providedthe aperture A is very small. But if we increase theaperture, the image will become less distinct; and it willbe nearly obliterated when the aperture is large. Thereason of this is, that, with a large aperture, two ac|jaoentpoints of the object will throw their light on the ^mepoint of the paper, and thus create confusion in theimage.It is obvious from. 13., that the size of the imageh r will increase with the distance of the paper £ F behindthe hole A. If Ag is equal to AG, the imagewill be equal to the object ; if A ^ is less than A G, theimage will be less than the object ; and if A ^ is greaterthan A G, the image will be greater than the object.As each point of an object throws out rays in alldirections, it is manifest that those only which fall uponthe small aperture at A concur in forming the image b r;and as the number of these rays is very small, the imageb r must have very little light, and therefore cannot beused for any optical purposes. This evil is completelyremedied in the formation of images by mirrors andlenses.(24.) FomuUion of images by concave mirror. LetCHAP. 11. Images IN CONCAVE Mirrors. 17AB, fig. 14., be a concave mirror whose centre isC, and let MN be an object placed at some distanceFig, 14.before it. Of all the rays emitted in every directionby the point M^ the mirror receives only those whichlie between M A and M fi or a cone of rays M A Bwhose base is the circular mirror the section of' whichis A B. If we draw the reflected rays Aw, B w, foran the incident rays MA, MB, by the methods alreadydescribed, we shall find that they will all meet at thepoint m, and will there paint the extremity M of theolivet. In like manner, the cone of rays NAB flowingfrom the other extremity N of the object will be reflectedto a focus at n, and will there paint that point of the object.For the same reason, cones of rays flowing fromintermediate points between M and N will be reflectedto intermediate points in the image between m and n,and m n will be an exact inverted picture of the objectMN. It will also be very bright, because a great numberof rays concur in forming each point of the image.The distance of the image from the mirror is found bythe same rule which we have given for finding the focusof diverging rays, the points M, m in fig, 14. correspondingwith A and F in. 8. .If we measure the relative sizes of the object MNand its image m n, we shall find that in every case thesize of the image is to the size of the object as the distanceof the image from the mirror is to the distance ofthe object from it.If the concave mirror A B is large, and if the objectM N is very bright, such as a plaister of Paris statuestrongly illuminated, the image mn will appear suspendedcIS A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PART I.in the air; and a series of instructive experiments may bemade by varying' the distance of the object and observingthe variation in the size and place of the image.When the object is placed at mn, sk magnified representationof it will be formed at M N.(25.) Formation of images by convex mirrors. Inconcave mirrors there is in all cases a positive image ofthe object formed in front of the mirror excepting dienthe object is placed between the principal focus and themirror in which case it gives a virtual image formedbehind it ; whereas in convex mirrors the image la alwaysa virtual one formed behind the mirror.Let A B^ fig, 15.^ \it^ a convex mirror whose centre isFig, 15. C^ and M N an object placed beforeit; and let the eye of theobserver be situated any where IBfront of the mirror, as at £. Outof the great number of rays whidbare emitted in every direction fromthe points M, N of the object, andare subsequently reflected from themirror, a few only can enter the eyeat E. Those which do enter theeye, such as D£, F£ and G£, H£, will be reflectedfrom the portions D F, O H of the mirror so situatedwith respect to the eye and the point M, N that theangles of incidence and reflexion will be equal. Theray.M D will be reflected in a direction D£, formingthe same angle that M D does with the perpendicularC N, and the ray N G in the direction G £. In likemanner, F £, H £ will be the reflected rays correspondingto the incident ones M F, N H. Now, if wecontinue backwards the rays D £, F E, they will meetat m; and they will therefore appear to the eye to havecome from the point m as their focus. For the samereason the rays G £, H £ will appear to come from thepoint 71 as their focus, and m n will be the virtual imageof the object M N. It is called virtual because it is notlevied by the actual union of rays in a focus, and cannotIje received Upon paper. If the eye E is ]dated in anyWher position before die mister, and if »;b are dramafrom M and N, vliich after reflexion enter the eye, itVHI be fomtd tb*t there rays continued backwards willhave their virtual foci at m and n. Hence, in every positionof the eye before the mirror, the image will be seen indie same spot m n. If we draw the lines C M, C N fromdiecentreof the mirror, we shall find that the points m, nare always in these lines. Hence it is obvious that theImage mn is always erect, and less than the object. Itwin approach to theinirroraathe object Approachedto it, and it will recede from it as M N recedes ; andft&en M N is infinitely distant, and die rays which itemits become parallel, the image mn will be half waybetween C and the mirror. In other positions of theolgect the distance of the image will be found by the rulealready given for diverging rays falling upon convexmirrors. The size of the image is to the size of theobject, as C m, the distance of the image iron the centreAf the mirror, is to C M, the distance of the ol^ect. Inapproaching the mirror, the image and olgect approachto equality ; and wfam die touch it, they are both of thsine size. Hence it frflowa thai objects are always seendiminished in convex mirrors, unless when they actuallyVDneh the mirror.(26.) Formation qf images by plane tnirrars. LetA.'B, fg. 16., be a plane mirror or loading-glass, MNIf. 1& an ol^ect situated before it, and Eg the place of the eye ; then, upon the(1 very same principles which we haveexplained for a convex minor', it willbe found that an image of M N willj,g ^- ^ T y — be formed at mn, the virtual fod-Si // m, n being determined by continuingback the reflected rays D E, F E tillthey meet at m, and G£, HE tillthey meet at n. If we join thepoints M, Di and N,n, the lines M«i,Nn willie perpendicularto the mirror A B, and consequently pared;20 A TREATISE OK OPTICS. PAST Land the image will be at the same distance, and have iStutsame position behind the mirror that the object has beforeit. Hence we see the reason why the images of allobjects seen in a looking-glass have the same form anddistance as the objects themselves.DIOPTRICS.(27-) Dioptrics is that branch of optics which treatsof the progress of those rays of light which enter transparentbodies and are transmitted through their substance.CHAP. III.REFRACTION.(28.) When light passes through a drop of water or apiece of glass, it obviously suffers some Change in itsdirection, because it does not illuminate a piece of paperplaced behind these'bodies in the same manner as it didbefore they were placed in its way. These bodies havetherefore exercised some action, or produced some changeupon the light, during its progress through them.In order te discover the nature of this change ktFig. 17. A B C D be an empty vcssd,having a hole H in one of itssides B D, and let a lightedcandle S be placed within a fewfeet of it, so that a ray of itslight S H may fall upon the"d "^^^ bottom CD of the vessel, andform a round spot of light at a. The beam of lightS H R a will be a straight line. Having marked thepoint a which the ray from S strikes, pour water intothe vessel till it rises to the height £F. As soon asttw surface of the water has become smooth, it wiUbaOHAP. HI. REFRACTION. 21seen that the round spot which was formerly at a is nowat h, and that the ray SHR& is hent at R; HR and R&being two straight lines meeting at R^ a point in thesurface of the water. Hence it follows that all objectsseen under water are not seen in their true direction bja person whose eye is not immersed in the water. If 'afirst, for examples is lying at h,fig, 17., it will be seen byan eye at S in the direction S a, the direction of the refractedray R S; so that in order to shoot it with a ball,we must direct the gun to a point nearer us than the pointa. For the same reason, every point of an object underwaterappears in a place different from its true place ;and the difference between the real and apparent placeof any point of an object increases with its depth beneaththe surface, and with the obliquity of the ray R S by whichit is seen. A straight sticky one half of which is immersedin water, will therefore appear crooked or bentinto an angle at the point where it enters the water.A straight rod SRa, for example, will appear bent likeS R 6 ; and a rod bent will, for a like reason, appear straight.This effect must have been often observed in the caseof an oar dipping into transparent water.If in place of water we use alcohol, oil, or glass, thesurfaces of all these bodies coinciding with the lineF, we shall find that they all have the power of bendingthe ray of light S R at the point R ; the alcoholbending it more than the water the oil more than thealcohol, and the glass more than the oil. In the case ofglass, the ray would be bent into the direction Re. Thepower which thus bends or changes the direction of aray of Hght is called refraction, — a name derived from aLatin word, signifying breaking hack, — because the ray8 Ra is broken at R, and the water is said to refract, orbreak the ray, at R. Hence we may conclude that if aray of light, passing through air, falls in an oblique orslanting direction on the surface of solid or fluid bodiesdiat are transparent, it will be refracted towards a line,M N, perpendicular to the surface E F at the point R,where the ray enters it ; and that the quantity of thiso3M A Treatise OK OPTICS. Part LRefraction or the angle aRb, varies with the natoof the body. The power by which bodies producethis effect is called their refractive power, and bodiesthat produce it in different degrees are said to hawdifferent refractive powers.Let the vessel A B C D be now emptied and let abright object such as a sixpence be cemented on diebottom of it at a. If the observer places himself a fewfeet from the vessel be will find a position where hewill see the sixpence at a through the hole H. If waterbe now poured into the vessel up to E F^ the observerwill no longer see the sixpence; but if another dxpraiGeis placed at a, and is moved towards b, it will becomevisible when it reaches b. Now, as the ray from thesixpence at b reaches the eye, it must come out of thiswater at a point, B, in the surface, found by drawing 9straight line, SH R, through the eye and the hole H; andconsequently b R must be the direction of the ray, whichmakes the sixpence visible, before its refraction at R.But if this ray had moved onwards in a straight line,without being refracted at II, its path would have beenb h; whereas, in consequence of the refraction, its path isRH. Hence it follows, that when a ray of list,passing through any dense medium, such as water &c»j^in a direction oblique or slanting to its surface, quits tipmedium at any point, and enters a rarer medium, suckas air, it is refracted from the line perpendicular to thesurface at the polit where it quits it.'When the ray S H R from the candle falls, or is incidentupon the surface E F of the water, and is refractedin the direction R6, towards ti perpendicular MN,the angle M R H which it m^kea with the perpendicularis called the angle of incidence; and the angle NRd»^which the ray R b bent or refracted at R makes wixhithe same perpendicular, is called the angle of refraction,Hies ray H R is called the incident ra^^ and R 6 ther^fir€U!teEl ray* But when the light comes out of thewater from the sixpence at a, and is refracted at R inthe direction R H, aR is the incident ray and R H theChap* UI*IiAW OF UJBFRAOTION*S3reflected ray. The angle N R a is the angle of inch*dances and M R H the angle of refraction.Hence it follows that when light passes out qf a rareinifi a dense medium, matt from air to watery tks angle qfincidence is greater than the angle of refraction; andwhen light passes out of a dense into a rare medium, asowt (^ water into air, the angle of incidence is less thanthe aoigU (if refraction; and these angles are so related toon another that when the ray which was refracted inthe one case becomes the incident ray what was foxKoerly the incident ray becomes the refracted ray.(29.) In order to discover the law or rule accordingto which the rays of light enter or quit water or otherrefracting media, so that we may he ale to determinethe. refi:aieted ray when we know the direction of theincident ray describe a cixde MN upon a square boardABQDxfy* Is,, standing upon a heavy pedestal P, andFig. 18. dmw the two diameters MN,.£F^ perpendicular to one another, andalso to the sides AB,AC of thepiece of wood. Let a small tube,H R, be so made that it may beattached to the board along anyradius HR, H'R, or, what wouldbe still better, that it may movefreely round R aa a centre. Lei"the board with its pedestal h»praised in a pool or tub of water,,or in a g^asa vessel of water sothat the surface of the water mayeflBodde with the line £F without touching the end R<tf the tube HK When the tube is in the position Ali.perpendicular to the surface £ F of the water, admit a rayof light down the tube, and it will be seen that it entetftthe water at R, and passes straight on to N, without sui9Eer<».lug ay change in its direction. Hence it fc^ows, ^a^a ray of light incident perpendicularly on a retractingsurface experiences. no refraction or change in its .If we now place a sixpence a^ N, we shallc 424 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. part I.it through the the MR; so that the rays from the sixpencequit the water at R, and proceed in the samestraight line NR M. Hence a ray of light quitting a n*acting surface perpendicularly undergoes no rrfraetknor change of direction. If we now hiring the tube intothe position H R^ and make a ray of light pass aloi^ itthe ray will be refracted at R in some direction R^, theangle of refraction Nr being less than the angle ofincidence M R H. If we now with a pair of oompasteiytake the shortest distance hn oi the point h from theperpendicular Mn and make a scale of equal parts ofwhich 6 n is one part the scale being divided into tenthsand hundredths and if we set the distance H m i^oathis scale we shall find it to be 1*336 of these parts or1^ nearly. If this experiment is repeated at any otherposition H'R^ of the tube where R 6^ is the refracted raywe shall find that on a new scale in which ben is .onepart H n will also be 1*336 parts. But the lines H«^H ii' are called the sines of the angles of tneMlsMtHRM, Herm, and hn, hen' the sines of the angles ^refraction arn, &^RN. Hence it follows that inwater the sine of the angle of incidence is to die sine ofthe angle of refraction as 1*336 to 1, whatever be theposition of the ray with respect to the surface £ F of thewater. This truth is called by optical writers the constantratio of the sines. By placing a sixpence at 6^ weshall find that it will be seen through the tube when ithas the position H R; and placing it at I/, it will be seenthrough it in the position H'R. Hence when lig^quits the surface of water the sine of its angle of incidence6 R N will be to the sine of its angle of refractionH RM as 1 to 1*366^ as these are the measureof the sines b'nyHm; and since these are also themeasures of ben', H m' upon another scale in which ^Vis unity, we may conclude that, when light emergesfrom water into air, the sines of the angles of intenseand refraction are in the constant ratio of 1 to 1*336.If we make the same experiment with other bodies, wedial obtain different degrees of refraction at the sameCHAP. m. Refractive POWERS OF BODIES. 25angles; but in every case the sines of the angles of incidenceand refraction will be found to have a constantratio to each other.The number 1*3S6, which expresses this ratio forwatery is called the index of refraction for water andsometimes its refractive power,so,) As philosophers have determined the index ofrefraction for a great variety of bodies we are alesfrom those determinations to ascertain the direction ofmy ray when refracted at any angle of incidence fromthe BurfiEtce of a given body either in entering or quittingit. Thus in the case of water let it be requiredto find the direction of a ray H R^ after it is refracted atthe surface £F of water: draw RM perpendicular to£F at the point R^ where the ray H R enters the water,and from H draw Hm perpendicular to MR. TakeHm in the compasses and make a scale in which thisdistance occupies 1*336 parts oi* ^7 nearly. Then,taking 1 on the same scale, place one foot of the compassesin the quadrant N F, and move that foot towards orfrom N till the other foot falls upon some one point nin the perpendicular RN, and in no other point of it.Let b be the point on which the first foot of the compassesis placed when the second falls upon n, then theline R b passing through this point will be the refractedray corresponding to the incident ray H R.(31.) Table I. (Appendix) contains the index of refractionfor some of the substances most interesting inoptics.(32.) As the bodies contained in these tables haveall different densities, the. indices of refraction annexedto their names cannot be considered as showing theration of their absolute refractive powers, or the refractivepowers of their ultimate particles. The smallrefractive index of hydrogen, for example, arises fromits particles being at such a distance from one another ;and, if we take its specific gravity into account, we shidlfind that, instead of having a less refractive power than96 A TRSATna on gvtios. pati.matt other bodies, its ultimate particles exceed all thatbodies in their absolute action upon lightSir Isaac Newton has shown, upon the snppositkRithat the ultimate particles of bodies are equally heavy,that the absolute refractive power is equal to the excessof the square of the index of refraction above unitsdivided by the specific gravity of the body.In this way Table II. (Appendix) has been calculated.Mr. Herschel has justly remarked, that if, according tothe doctrines of modem chemistry, material bodies consistof a finite number of atoms, differing in their actualweight for every differently compounded substance, theintrinsic refractive power of the atoms of any given mediumwill be the product arising from multiplying thenumbers in Table II. by th atomic weight{33.) In examining Table II., it appears diat thesubstances which contain fluoric acid have the leastastute refractive power, while all inflammable bodieshave the greatest. The high absolute refractive powerof oil of cassia, which is placed above all other ijuids,and even above diamond, indicates the great inflammabilityof its ingredients.CHAP. IV.REFRACTION THROUGH PRISTS AND LENSBg.(S4.) By means of the law of refraction explained in thepreceding pages, we are enabled to trace a ray of Hinits passage through any medium or body of any flguie^or through any number of bodies, provided we can alwaysfind the inclination of the incident ray to that small portionof the surface where the ray either enters or quitebodyThe bodies generally used in (stoical experiments said'in the construction of optical instruments, where theeHA9. IV. Lenses. 9^eftct is produced by re£ractk)ii, 9xe prisms, plane gtasaef^spheres, and lenses, a section of each of which is shoivnm this annexed figure.Fig. 19.A B^ C PBIVC-Hl1. An optical prism, shown at A^ is a solid having twoplane surfaces A^^ As which are called its refractingsurfaces. The face R S, equally inclined to A R andA S^ is called the base of the prism.2. A plane glass, shown at B^ is a plate of glass withtwo plane surfaces ab, ai, parallel to each other.3. A spherical lens, shown at C^ is a sphere all thepoints in its surface being equally distant from thecentre O.4. A double convex lens, E^own at D^ is a solid formedby two convex spherical surfaces having their centres onopposite sides of the lens. When the radii of its tw<».sur^Ekces are equals it is said to be equally convex; andwhen the radii are unequal it is said to be an unequally,convex lens.5. A plano-convex lens, shown at E^ is a lens havingone of its surfaces convex and the other plane,6. A double concave lens, shown at F^ is a solid boundedby two concoflje spherical surfaces and may be eitherequally or unequally Concave.7* A plano-concave lens, represented at G^ is a lensone of whose surfaces is concave and the other plane.8. A meniscus shown at H^ is a lais one of whosesurfaces is convex and the other concave, and in whichthe two surfaces meet if continued. As the convexity-exceedstfe^ concavity it may be regarded as a convexleos.9. A concavo-convex lens, shown at I^ is a lens oneof whose suffices is concave and the other convex, andin. which th$ twa surfaces will not meet though oon«S8 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PART t.tinned. As the concavity exceeds the convexity it mayberegarded as a concave lens.In all these lenses a line M N^ passing throng islecentres of their curved surfaces and perpendicular totheir plane surfaces is called the axis. The figuresrepresent only the sections of the lenses as if they werecut by a plane passing through their axis; tit thereader will understand that the convex surface of a lensis like the outside of a watch-glass and the concave surfacelike the inside of a watch-glass.In showing the progress of light through such lensesand in explaining their properties we must still use thesections shown in the above figure; for since every sectionof the same lens passing through its axis has exactly thesame form what is true of the rays passing through onesection must be true of the rays passing through everysection and consequently through the whole surface.(35.) Refraction of light through prisms. As prismsare introduced into several optical instruments and areessential parts of the apparatus used for decomposinglight and examining the properties of its componentparts it is necessary that the reader should be able totrace the progress of light through its two refracting surfaces.Let A B C be a prism of plate glass whose indexof refraction is 1*500^ and letH R be a ray of light fallingobliquely upon its first surfaceA B at the point R. Round Ras a centre, and with any radiusH R, describe the circle H M 6.Through R draw M R N perpendicularto A B> and Hm perpendicularto M R. The angle H R M will be theangle of incidence of the ray H R^ and H m its sinewhich in the present case is 1*500. Then having madea scale in which the distance H m is 1*500^ or 1^ parts,take 1 part or unity from the same scale and having setone foot of the compasses on the circle somewhere aboutb, move it to different points of the circle till the otheraHAP.TY. Refraction BY PRISMS. 29foot strikes only one point n of the line RN ; the pointb thus found will he that through which the refracted raypasses R b will he the refracted ray and n R 6 the angleof refraction because the sine 6 n of this angle has beenmade such that its ratio to* H m, the sine of the angle ofincidence, is as 1 to 1*500. The ray R& thus refractedwill go on in a straight line till it meets the second surfaceof the prism at R's where it will again suffer refractionin the direction Rb\ In order to determine this directionmake R' H' equal to R H^ and with this distance as radiusdescribe the circle H' b'. Draw R' N perpendicular toAc and Wm perpendicular to RN, and form a scale onwhich H'' rn shall be 1 part or 1*000^ and divide it intotenths and hundredths. From this scale take in the compassesthe index of refraction 1*500^ as 1^ of these parts ;and having set one foot somewhere in the line Ren', moveit to different parts of it till the other foot falls upon somepart of the circle about b^, taking care that the point &' issuch that when one foot of the compasses is placedthere, the other foot will touch the line Rn' continuedonly in one place. Join R' b'. Then, since H' R' m'' isthe angle of incidence on the second surface A C^ andIVmf its sine, and since n!b\ the sine of the angle b R's',has been made to have to W m' the ratio of 1*500 to 1,h'Kn' will be the angle of refraction, and R's' the refractedray.If we suppose the original ray H R to proceed from adandle, and if we place our eye at 6' behind the prism soas to receive the refracted ray b' R', it will appear as ifit caine in the direction & R D, and the candle will beseen in that direction ; the angle H £ D representing itsangular change of direction, or the angle of deviation, asit is called.In the construction of fg. 20., the ray H R has beenmade to fall upon the prism at such an angle that therefracted ray R R' is equally inclined to the faces A B,A C, or is parallel to the base B C of the prism ; and itwill be found that the angle of incidence H R B is equalto the angle of emergence 6'R^C. Under these circumA TBEATIBB ON trPnOK* PAMt^Stances we shall find by tnddng the angle H R B dthttgreater or less than it is in the figures that tfafe an ofdeviation H E D is less than at any oder ange of uMi^hence. If we therefore place the eye behind the priaaiat &^, and turn the prism lonnd in the plane B AO^ sometimesbringing A towards the eyeaftd sometimes pushingit from it, we shall easily discover the position where Ifeimage of the candle seen in the direction bed has theleast deviation. Wlien this position is found, the ankleH R B and b' R' C are equal, and R R' is para to B C^and perpendicular to A F, a line bisecting the refractingangle B A C of the prism. Hence it may be shown faythe similarity of triangles, or proved by projection, thatthe angle of refraction & Rn at the first surface is equalto B A F, half the refracting angle of the pdsni. Butsince B A F is known, the angle of refraction i Rn isalso known ; and the angle of incidence H R B beingfound by the preceding methods, we may determine iJwindex of refraction for any prism by the following analogy.As the sine of the angle of refraction is to thesine of the angle of incidence, so is unity to the index nfrefraction ; or the index of refraction is equal to the ^eof the angle of incidence divided by the sine of theangle of refraction.{S6.) By this method, which is very simple in practice,we may readily measure the refractive powers ofall bodies. If the body be solid, it must be shaped intoa prism ; and if it is soft or fluid, it must be placed inthe angle BAG of a hollow prism ABC, fig. 21,,Fig. 21. made by cementing together direpieces of plate glass A B, AC, BC.|P A very simple hollow prism for thispurpose may be made by fasteningA tS'-y^'iiii i ^ i iiH iii lier B together at any angle two pieces ofplate glass, A B, A C, with a bit of wax, F. A drop ofthe fluid may then be placed in the angle at A, where itwill be retained by the force of capillary attraction.When light is incident upon the second surface of aprism, it may fall so obliquely that the surface is inL<»{Mible of liefVMting it and therefore the inlsidekit lightis t^ta^ affected from the second smfaioe. As this is ftcurious property of lists we must explain it at somelength.On the Mai Reflexion af Light,(37-) Wee have already stated that when light fallsten the first oar Second surfaced of transparent bodiesa certain portion of it is reflected and another and muchgreater portion transmitted. The light is in this casesaid to be parHaUy reflJetML, When die lights howera^^s Tery obliqndy upon the second surface of a transparentbody it is wholly reflected and not a single raysuffers refracting or is transmitted by the surface. LetA B C be H prism of glass whose index of refraction Is1-500: let « ray of light O K, fy, 22., be refracted at KFig 22, by the first surface A B>so as to fall on ^be point Rof the second surface very.^ obliquely and in the directionHR. Upon R as acentre and with any radiusH R^ describe the circe HM E N F; then in orderto find the refracted ray corresponding to H E^ make ascale on idiich H fn is equal to 1^ and take in the compasses1-500 or 1^ from that scale and setting one foot inthe quadrant E N^ try to find some point in it so that theother foot may fall only in one point of the radius R N.It will soon be seen that there is no such pointy and that1-500 is greater even than £ R> the sine of an angleE RN of 90°. If the distance 1*500 in the compasseshad been less than E R^ the ray would have been refractedat R; but as there is no angle of refraction whosesine is 1*500, the ray does not emerge from the prismbut suffers total reflexion at R in the direction R S> sothat the angle of reflexion M R S is equal to the angleof incidence M R H. If we construct Jig. 2S. so as tomike the incident ray H R take diffisr^t position bcS2 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PABTLtween M R and F R^ we shall find that the refractedray will take different positions between R N and R £.There will be some position of the incident ray aboutH R, where the refracted ray wiH just coincide withR£; and that will happen when the quantity 1*500,taken from the scale on which H m is equal to 1^ litexactly equal to R E^ or radius. At all positions of theincident ray between this line and F R^ refraction willbe impossible and the ray incident at R will be totallyreflected. It will also be found that the sine of theangle of incidence at R, at which the light begins to betotally reflected, is equal to tttftt* or '666, or -J, whichis the sine of 41^ 48' for plate glass.The passage from partial to total reflexion may befinely seen, by exposing one side AC, of a prism ABC,fig. 20., to the light of the sky, or at night to the lightreflected from a large sheet of white paper. When theeye is placed behind the other side, A B, of the prism,and looks at the image of the sky, or the paper as reflectedfrom the base, B C, of the prism, it will see whatthe angle of incidence upon BC is less than 41^48',the faint light produced by partial reflexion; but byturning the prism round, so as to render the incidencegradually more oblique, we shall see the faint light passsuddenly into a bright light, and separated from thefaint light by a coloured fringe, which marks theboundary of the two reflexions at an angle of 41^ 48'.But, at all angles of incidence above this, the light willsuffer total reflexion.Refraction of Light through Plane Glasses,(38.) Let M N, fig, 23., be the section of a planeglass with parallel faces; and let a ray of light, A B, fallupon the first surface at B, and be refracted into thedirection B C : it will again be refracted at its emergencefrom the second surface at C, in a direction, C D, haraldto A B ; and to an eye at D it will appear to have proceededin a direction a C, which will be found by .PLANE OLAgSEg* 33timiiiig D C backwards. It will thus appear to comefrom a point a below A^ the point from which it wasj^. 23. really emitted. This may beproved by projecting the figureby the method already described;^^ though it will be obvious alsofrom the consideration that if wesuppose the refracted ray to becomethe incident ray and tomove backwards the incident rayypSL become the refracted ray. Thus the refracted rayBc falling at equal angles upon the two surfaces ofthe plane ^ass^ wil suffer equal refractions at B and C^ ifwe suppose it to move in opposite directions; and consequentlythe angles which the refracted rays Ba C Dform with the two refracting surfaces will be equals andUie raya parallel*If we suppose another ray A'' B'^ parallel to A B^ tofrdl upon the point B\ it will suffer the same refractionat B' and C% and will emerge in the direction C D%parallel to C D^ as if it came from a point a\ Henceparallel rays falling upon a plane glass mil retain theirparallelism after passing through it.{39.) If rays diverging from any point. A, fig. 9,^,,sudi as A B^ A B', are incident upon a plane glass M N,Fig. 24. they will be refracted intothe directions B C, B' Cby the first surface, andC D, C D' by the second.By continuing CB, Cab'backwards, they will befound to meet at a, a pointfarther from the glass thanA. Hence, if we suppose the surface B B^ to be thatof standing water, placed horizontally, an eye within itwould see the point A removed, to a, the divergency ofthe rays B C, W C having been diminished by. refractionat the surface B B^ But when the rays B C^ BecD34 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. part Lsuffer a second refraction as in the case of a plane ffaa,we shall find by continuing D C^ D' C backwards,' thtthey will meet at b, and the object at A will seem to bebrought nearer to the glass; the rays C D^ C'lX^ by wUdiit is seen having been rendered more divergent by &two refractions. A plane glass therefore diminishes thedistance of the divergent point of diverging rays.If we suppose D C^ IK C to be rays converging to b,they will be made to converge to A by ike refraction ofthe two surfaces ; and consequently a plane glass CMueito recede from it the convergent point of converging Ta|l>If the two surfaces B B^^ C C are equally curved, tiMone being convex and the other concave like awatdi-^JMi^they will act upon light nearly like a plane g^aas; ind'accurately like a plane glass if the convex and oonetfe'sides are so related that the rays B A^ C D are incidentat equal angles on each surface: but this is not the easewhen the surfaces have the same centre unless whenthe radiant point A is in their common centre. Forthese reasons glasses with parallel surfaces are used inwindows and for watch-glasses as they produce verylittle change upon the form and position of objects seenthrough them.E^ftticHon of Light thigh Curved Surfctcei,(40.) When we consider the inconceivable minutenessof the particles of lights and that a single ray consistsof a succession of those particles it is obvious that thesmall part of any curved surface on which it falls, andwhich is concerned in refracting it, may be regarded as aplane. The surface of a lake, perfectly still, is known tobe a curved surface of the same radius as that of Aeearth, or about 4000 miles; but a square yard of it, inwhich it is impossible to discover any curvature, is hagarin proportion to the radius of the earth than the ainaii:space on the surface of a lens occupied by a ray of li'is in relation to the radius of that surface. Now, maliid-maidens have demonstrated that a line touching a morrisCHAP. IT. SEFRACnON THROUGH SPHERES. 35at any point may be safely regarded as coinciding withan infinitely small part of the curve ; so that when a rayof lights A B^ Jig. 25., falls upon a curved refracting surfaceJ^. S5. ^^ ^y its angle of incidence must beconsidered as A B D^ the anglewhich the ray AB forms with a lineD C^ perpendicular to a line M 'S,which touches or is a tangent tothe curved surface at B. In allspherical surfaces such as those oflenses the tangent M N is perpendicularto the radius C B of the surface. Hence inspherical surfaces the consideration of the tangent M N isunnecessary ; because the radius C D^ drawn through thepoint of incidence B^ is the perpendicular from whichthe an of incidence is to be reckoned.Refraction of Light through Spheres.(41.) Let MN be the section of a sphere of glasswhose centre is C^ and whose index of refraction is1-500; and let parallel rays,^. 26., H R^ H^ R/ fall uponFig. 26.it at equal distances on each side of the axis 6 C F. Ifthe lay H R is incident at R^ describe the circle H D 6raid R, through C and R draw the line R D^ whichwin be perpendicular to the surface at R^ and drawH f» perpendicular to R D. Draw the ray R 6 r througha point b found by the method already explained and sothat the sine 6 n of the angle of refraction 6 R C may be1 on the same scale on which H m is 1*500^ or 1^; thenj Rb idol be the ray as refracted by the first suiiaice q£S6 ▲ TmSATBE 02r OPTICS. PABTLthe sphere. In like manner draw R's for the refractedray corresponding to H' B^If we continue the rays R r, Rr', dies will meetthe axis at E, which will be the focus of paraQd ia|Bfor a single convex surface RPR'; and the focal distanceP £ may be found by the following rale.Rui.E for finding the principal Jbeus ^ a tingle eo/mtatmrfaee. Divide the index of refraction by its ezceaabove unity and the quotient will be the principal fbcildistance P £; the radius of the surface or C R> heii^ 1.If C R is given in inches then we have only to multiplythe result by inches. When the snr&oe is that ofglass then the focal distance P £^ will always be equalto thrice the radius, C R.Round r as a centre with a radius equal to RH,describe the circle lyb'h^ and by the method formerlyexplained find a point }{ in the circle, such that Vf^ythe sine of the angle of refraction h' r n, is 1-500 or \\on the same scale on which h m, the sine of the angeof incidence, is 1 part, and r&'F will be the ray refractedat the second surface. In the same manner weshall find / F to be the refracted ray corresponding tothe incident ray R' /, F being the point where r h' cotsthe axis G £. Hence the point F will be the Jbeiuof parallel rays for the sphere of glass M N.If diverging rays fall upon the points R, R^ it is quitedear, from the inspection of the figure, that their fbcnswill be on some point of the axis G F more remote fromthe sphere than F^ the distance of their focus increasingas the radiant point from which they diverge approachesto the sphere. When the radiant point is as far beforethe sphere as F is behind it, then the rays will berefracted into parallel directions, and the focus will beinfinitely distant. Thus, if we suppose the rays Ff,F / to diverge from F, then they will emerge afterrefraction in the parallel directions R H, R' H'.If converging rays fall upon the points R R', it isequally manifest that their focus will be at some pointCHAP. IV. CURVED REFRACTING SURFACES. 3?of the axis, O F, nearer the sphere than its principal focusF; and their convergency may be so great that their focusmay fall within the sphere. All these truths may beTendered more obvious, and would be more deeply impressedupon the mind, by tracing rays of different degreesof divergency and convergency through the sphere,by the methods already so fully explained.(42.) In order to form an idea of the effect of asphere made of substances of different refractive powers,in bringing parallel rays to a focus, let us suppose thesphere to be one inch in diameter, and let the focus F bedetermined as in. 26., when the substances are.Index of Distance, F Q, of theRefiraction* Focxu from the Sphere.Tabasheer - 1-11145 - 4 ft. inch.Water - 1'3358 - iso —Glass - 1«500 - — OJ —Zircon - 2*000 - — —Hence we find that in tabasheer the distance F Q is 4feet ; in water, 1 foot ; in glass, half an inch ; and inzircon, nothing ; that is, r and F coincide with Q, aftera single refraction at R.When the index of refraction is greater than 2*000,as in diamond and several other substances, the ray oflight R r will cross the axis at a point somewhere betweenC and Q. Under certain circumstances the ray R r willsuffer total reflexion at r, towards another part of thesphere, where it will again suffer total reflexion, beingearned round the circumference of the sphere, withouttibe power of making its escape, till the ray is lost byabsorption. Now, as this is true of every possible sectionof the sphere, every such ray, R r, incident upon it in acircle equidistant from the axis, G F, will suffer similarreflexions.RuiiBybr finding the focus Y of a sphere. The distanceof the focus, F, from the centre, C, of any spheremay be thus found. Divide the index of refraction bytwice its excess above 1, and the quotient is the distance,CF, in radii of the sphere. If the radius of the sphereD 338 A TBKATm ON OVTIOI. Washis 1 inch and its refractive power 1*500, we shall tieC F quid to 1^ inches and Q F eqiul to half an inch.Refraction of Light through Convex and CommeSurfaces.(43.) The method of tracing the progress of a njwhich enters a convex surface is shown in J^.S6L Iso iIkray H R^ and of tracing one entering a concave msAfOtof a rare medium or quitting a convex surface of a denseone is shown for the ray R r^ in the same figure.When the ray enters the concave surface of a densemedium or quits a similar surface and enters the convexsurface of a rare medium the method of tracing itsprogress is shown in fig, S7-> where M N is a denseFig. 27,medium (suppose gkss) with two concave surfaces, or adick concave lens. Let C^ C he the centres of the twosurfaces lying m the axis C C^ and H R, H'R' panUdrays incident on the first surface. As C R is perpendicularto the surface at R^ H RC will he the angle ofincidence; and if a circle is described with a radius RJk^ikiiiwill be the sine of that angle. From a scale on which hmis 1*500^ take in the compasses 1^ and find some point, i,in the circle where, when one foot of the compasses isplaced, the other will fall only on one point, n, of the perpendicularR C : the line R 6 drawn through this pointwill be the refracted ray. By continuing this ray b R backwardsit will be found that it meets the axis at F. Inlike manner it will be seen that the ray H^R^ will be refractedin the direction Wr, as if it also diverged fromF. Hence F will be the virtual focus of parallel raysOHAP. IT. REFRACTION THROUGH LENSES. 39refracted by a single concave surface and may be foundby the following rule.Rule for finding the principal focus of a wngk coteaioe surface. Divide the index of refraction by itsexcess above unity and the quotient will be the principalfocal distance F E^ the radius of the surface or C E being1. If the radius CF is given in inches we have onlyto multiply C F^ thus obtained by that number of inchesto have the value of F E in inches.If by a similar method we find the refracted ray r hIt the emergence of the ray r h from the second surfacer / of the lens and continue it backwards it will be foundto meet the axis very near C ; so that the divergent raysRr, Viet' are rendered still more divergent by the secondsurface and C will be the focus of the lens M N.Definition of Light through Convex Lenses.(44.) ParaXM rays, Rays of light falling upon a convexlens parallel to its axis are refracted in precisely thesame manner as those which fall upon a sphere ; and therefracted ray may be found by the very same methods.But as a sphere has an axis in every possible directionevery incident ray must be parallel to an axis of it;whereas in a lens which has only one axis many of theincident rays must be oblique to that axis. In everyease whether of spheres or lenses all the rays that passakmg the axis suffer no refraction at all because the axisis always perpendicular to the refracting surface.When parallel rays R L^ R C^ R L^ fall upon a doubleeoQvex lens L It, parallel to its axis R F^ the ray R C whichcoincides with the axis will pass through without sufferingany refraction but the other rays R L^ R L^ will be refractedat each of the surfaces of the lens; and therefracted rays corresponding to them viz. LF^ L F^ willbe founds by the method already given to meet at somepointy F^ in the axis.When the rays fall oblique to the axis as S L^ S L^TL, T L, the rays S C, T C, which pass through thecentre, C^ of the lens will suffer refraction at each surface;D 440 A Treatise ON Optics. part X*but as the two refractions are equal, and in opposite di*sections the finally refracted rays C/ Q>f will be paxdUJ%. 28.to S C. Hence, in considering oblique rays, audi at SiT L, we may regard a line, S/, passing through the centresC, of the lens as the direction of the refracted ray correspondingto S C, T C. By the methods already explained,it win be found that 8 L, S L will be refinedto a common point, ^ in the direction of the central ny8/, and T L, T L, to the point /^ The focal distaofleF C, or/C, may be found numerically by the followingrule, when the thickness of the lens is so small that itmay be neglected.Rule for finding the principal focus, or the foes tfparallel rays, for a glass unequally confess. Multiply theradius of the one surface by the radius of the other, anddivide twice this product by the sum of the same radiiWhen the lens is equally convex, the focal distancewill be equal to the radius.RuLB^r the principal focus qfa plano-oonveof le»$^glass. When the convex side is exposed to parallel tssp,the focal distance will be equal to twice the radius of itsconvex surface, diminished by two thirds of the thicknessof the lens. «When the plane side is exposed to parallel rayf^ thflfocal distance will be equal to twice the radius.(45.) Diverging rays, Men diverging rays, R L,R ityfig. 29., radiating from the point R, fall upon thedouble convex lens L L, whose principal focus is alCHAP. iV. Refraction THBOI/OH Lenses. 41and 0', their focus will be at some point F more remotedttn O. If R approaches to L L^ the focus F willLrecede from L L. When R comes to P^ so that P C isequal to twice the principal focal distance C O^ thefocus F will he at P', as far behind the lens as theradiant point P is before it. When R comes to O^^the focus F will be infinitely distant or the rays L F^L F will be parallel ; and when R is between O^ and C,the refracted rays will diverge and have a virtual focusbore the lens. The focus F will be found by the followingrule for glass.Rule /or finding the focus of a convey lens fordiverging rays. Multiply twice the product of the radiiof the two surfaces of the lens by the distance R C^ of&e radiant pointy for a dividend. Multiply the sum ofthe two radii by the same distance R C^ and from thisproduct subtract twice the product of the radii for adivisor. Divide the above dividend by the divisor, andthe quotient will be the focal distance C F, required.If the lens his equally convex, the rule will be this.Multiply the distance of the radiant point, or R C, by theradius of the surfaces, and divide that product by thedifference between the same distance and the radius, anddie quotient will be the focal length, C F, required.When the lens is plano-convex, divide twice the productof the distance of the radiant point multiplied bythe radius by the difference between that distance andtwice the radius, and the quotient will be the focal distancerequired.(46.) For converging rays. When rays, R L, R L,converging to a point, fig, 30., fall upon a convex lensL L, they will be so refracted as to converge to a pointor fooufl F nearer the lens than its principal focus O.4& A TSKATI8B ON OPTIflB. Saba I.As the point of convergence precedes from the lens iipoint F wi]l.al80 recede from it towards O^ which it justFig. SO.LB; —reaches when the point / becomes infinitely distant.When / approaches to the lens F also approaches to itThe focus F may be found by the following rule: —RvijH forbidding the focus of converging rays. Multiplytwice the product of die radii of the two surfaces of thelens by the distance /C of the point of convergence, foradividend. Multiply the sum of the two radii by thesame distance fCy and to this product add twice theproduct of the radii for a divisor. Divide the abovedividend by the divisor and the quotient will be thefocal distance C F required.If the lens is equally convey, multiply the distance/C by the radius of the surface and divide that productby the sum of the same distance and the radius and thequotient will be the focal length F C required.Men the lens is planoconvex^ divide twice the ]^o-duct of the distance /C multiplied by the radius by thesum of that distance and twice the radius and the quotientwill be the focal distance F C required.Refraction of Light through Concave Lenses.(47.) Parallel rays. Let L L be a doubly concaveFig. 31.R-R S^B— -lens and R L^ R L parallel rays incident upon it; theseOBAP. ZV. BBFRAOnON Through LENSES. 48cays will diverge after refraction in the directions L t,L r^ as if they radiated from a point F^ which is thevirtual focus of the lens. . The nile for finding F C isthe same as for convex lenses.(48.) Bwersvng raps. When the lens LL receivesFig. S2.die rays R L^ R L diverging from R^ they will he refractedinto lines Lr,Lr, diverging from a focus F,more remote from the lens than the principal focus O^and the focal distance FC^ will he foimd hy the followingrule: —Rule for finding the focus of a concave lens for dUverging rays. Multiply twice die product of the radiihy the distance R C^ of the radiant point. Divide thisproduct hy the sum of the radii multiplied hy the distanceR C^ added to twice the product of the radii andthe quotient will he the focal distance.If the lens is equally concave the rule will he this.Multiply the distance of the radiant point hy the radiusand divide the product hy the sum of the same distanceand the radius and the quotient will he the focal distance.When the lens is plano-concave multiply twice theradius hy the distance of the radiant pointy and dividethis product hy the sum of the same distance and twicethe radius ; the quotient will he the focal distance.(49.) Converging rays. When rays, RL, RL, fig. 33.,converging to a point / faU upon a concave lens, L L,they will he refracted so as to have their virtual focus atSand the distance F C will he found hy the rule given foromvex lenses. The rule for finding the focus of contiA TREATISE ON OPTIOfiU part I*forging rays is exactly the same as that for divergingrays in a double convex lens.Fig. 33.TL , ^When the lens is plano-concave the rule for findingthe focus of converging rays is the same as for divergingrays on a .plano-convex lens.Refraction of Light through Geniuses and Omcawhconvex Lenses.(50.) The general effect of a meniscus in refractingparallel diverging and converging rays is the same asthat of a convex lens of the same focal length ; and thegeneral effect of a concavo-convex lens is the same as thatof a concave lens of the same focal length.Rule for a meniscus with parallel rays. Dividetwice the product of the two radii hy their differenceand the quotient will he the focal distance required.Rule for a meniscus with diverging rays. Multiplytwice the distance of the radiant point hy the product ofthe two radii for a dividend. Multiply the differencebetween the two radii by the same distance of the radiantpointy and to this product add twice the productof the radii for a divisor. Divide the above dividend bythis divisor and the quotient will be the focal distancerequired.The same rule is applicable for converging rays.Both the above rules are applicable to concavo-convexlenses ; but the focus is a virtual one in front of thelens.The truth of the preceding rules and observationsare capable of being demonstrated mathematically ; butthe reader who has not studied mathematics may obtainan ocular demonstration of them by projecting the raysCHAP. y.IMAGES Formed BY LENSES.and lenses in large diagrams and determining the courseof the rays after refraction by the methods already described.We would recommend to him also to submitthe rules and observations to the test of direct experimentwith the lenses themselves.CHAP. V.ON THE FORMATION OF IMAGES BY Lenses AND OKTheir MAGNIFYING POWER.(51.) Wb have already described, in Chapter II., theprinciple of the formation of images by small aperturesand by the convergency of rays to foci by reflexionfrom mirrors. Images are formed by lenses in the verysame manner as they are formed by mirrors ; and it is anuniversal rule, that when an image is formed by a convexlens, it is inverted in position relatively to theposition of the object, and its magnitude is to that ofthe object as its distance from the lens is to the distanceo£ the object from the lens.If MN is an object placed before a convex lens,LL,^. 34., every point of it will send forth rays inevery direction. Those rays which fall upon the lensL L will be refracted to foci behind ihfl lens, and atFig' 34.Meach a distance from it as may be determined by theRules in the last chapter. Since the focus where anyiS A TREATISE ON OPTICS. ' PART I.'sint of the object is represented in its image is in theStraight line drawn from that point of the object throng'fbe middle point C of the lens the upper end M of tibeobject will be represented somewhere in the line MCm^and the lower end N somewhere in the line N C n^ that'is at the points m, n, where the rays Lm, hmyhn,L n cross die lines M C m^ N C n. Hence m will representthe upper and n die lower end of the objectMN. It is also evident that in the two triai^^MCN, mCn, mn, the length of the image must be toM N the length of the object as C m^ the distance ofthe image is to C M^ the distance of the object fromthe lens.We are enabled therefore by a lens to form animage of an object at any distance behind the lens weplease greater tian its principal focus and to make thisimage as large as we please and in any proportion tothe object. In order to have the image hu'ge^ we mustbring the object near the lens and in order to have itsmall we must remove the object from the lens ; andthese effects we can mary still farther by using lenses ofdifferent focal lengths or distances.When the lenses have the same focus we may increasethe brightness of the image by increasing the size of thelens or the area of its surface. If a lens has an idea of12 square inches it will obviously intercept twice as.many rays proceeding from every point of the object asif its area were only 6 square inches ; so that when itis out of our power to increase the brightness of the objectby illuminating it we may always increase die'brightness of the image by using a larger lens.(52.) Hitherto we have supposed the image mn tobe received upon white paper mr stucco or some smoothand white surface on which a picture of it is distinctlyformed; but if we receive it upon ground glass ortransparent paper or upon a plate of glass one of whosesides is covered with a dried film of skimmed milk, andif we place our eye 6 or 8 inches or more behind thissad-transparent ground interposed at m n^ we shall seeChap. ▼. HCAOES FO&lfED BY LENSES. 47the inverted image m n as distinctly as before. If wekeep the eye in this position and remove the ground we shall see an image in the airdistinctly and more bright than before. The cause ofdiis win be readily understood if we consider that allthe rays which form by their convergence the pointsmen a£ the image m n, cross one another at m, n, anddiverge from these points exactly in the same manner asthey would do from a real object of the same size andbrightness placed in m n. The image m n therefore ofany olgect may be regarded as a new object; and byplacing another lens behind it another image of theimage mn would be formed exactly of the same sizeand in the same place as it would have been had m nbeen a real object. But since the new image of mnmust be inverted this new image will now be an erectimage of the olgect Mn obtained by the aid of twolenses; so that by using one or more lenses we canobtain direct or inverted images of any object at pleasure.If the object M N is a moveable one and withinoar reach it is unnecessary to use two lenses to obtainan erect image of it: we have only to turn it upsidedown and we shall obtain by means of one lens animage erect in reality though still inverted in relationto the object(53.) In order to explain the power of lenses inmagnifying objects and bringing them near us or ratherin giving magnified images of objects and bringingthe images near us we must examine the differentcircumstances under which the same object appearswhen placed at different distances from the eye. If aneye placed at'£ looks at a man a by Jig, 35,^ placed at aFig, 35.Bii^yftff^ his general outline only will be seen and48 A Treatise ON OPTICS. part Lneither his age nor hia features nor his dress will berecognised. When he is brought gradually nearer u^we discover the separate parts of his dress till at thedistance of a few feet we perceive his features; andwhen brought still nearer we can count his very eye*lashes and observe the minutest lines upon his sldikAt the distance E b the man is seen under the aogkbEa, and at the distance EB he is seen under Uiegreater angle B E A or 6 E A^^ and his apparent magnitudesa b, A^b, are measured in those different positionsby the angles bea, B E A^ or 6 E A^ The apparentmagnitude of the smallest object may therefore be equalto the apparent magnitude of the greatest. The head ofa pin for examples may be brought so near the eye thatit will appear to cover a whole mountains or even thewhole visible surface of the earthy and in this case theapparent magnitude of the pin's head is said to be equalto the apparent magnitude of the mountains &cLet us now suppose the man a 6 to be placed at the.distance of 100 feet from the eye at E^ and that weplace a convex glass of 25 feet focal distance half waybetween the object a b and the eye that is 50 feet fromeach then as we have previously shown an invertedimage of the man will be formed 50 feet behind thelens and of the very same size as the object that is, sixfeet high. If this object is looked at by the eye placed6 or 8 inches behind it it will be seen exceedingly dis**tinct and nearly as well as if the man had been rougenearer from the distance of 100 feet to the distance of 6inches at which we can examine minutely the details ofhis personal appearance. Now in this case the man,though not actually magnified has been apparently magnifiedbecause his apparent magnitude is greatly in-creased in the proportion nearly of 6 inches to 100 feet,or of 200 to 1.But if, instead of a lens of 25 feet focal length, wemake use of a lens of a shorter focus, and place it insuch a position between the eye and the man, that itsconjugate foe may be at the distance of 20 and 80 feetOBAP. ▼. Magnifying POWER OF LENSES. 49from the lehs^ that is that the man is 20 feet before thekns^ and his image 80 feet behind it then the size ofthe image Ufimr times that of the object and the eyeplaced 6 inches behind this magnified image will see itwith the greatest distinctness. Now in this case theimage is magnified 4 times directly by the lens and 200times by being brought 200 times nearer, the eye ; sodiat its apparent magnitude will be 800 times largerthan before.It, on the other hand we use a lens of a still smallerfocal lengthy and place it in such a position between theeye and the man that its conjugate foci may be at thedistance of 7^ and 25 feet from the lens that is thatthe man is 75 feet before the lens and his image 25feet behind it then the size of the image will be onlyone third of the size of the object; but though the imageis thus diminished three times in size yet its apparentmagnitude is increased 200 times by being broughtwithin 6 inches of the eye, so that it is still magnifiedor its apparent magnitude is increased ^ O-o, or 67 timesnearly.At distances less than the preceding, where the focallength of the lens forms a considerable part of the wholedistance, the rule for finding the magnifying power of alens, when the eye views the image which it forms at thedistance of 6 inches, is as follows. From the distancebetween the image and the object in feet, subtract thefocal distance of the lens in feet, and divide the remainderby the same focal distance. By this quotientdivide twice the distance of the object in feet, and thenew quotient will be the' magnifying power, or thenumber of times that the apparent magnitude of theobject is increased.When the focal length of the lens is quite inconsiderable,compared with the distance of the object, as it isin most cases, the rule becomes this. Divide the focallength of the lens by the distance at which the eye looksat the image ; or, as the eye will generally look at it at thedistance of 6 inches, in order to see it most distinctly60 A TREATISE OK OPTICS. Parti.divide the focal length by 6 inches; or what is the samethings double the focal length in feet and the result willbe the magnifying power.(54.) Here then we have the principle of the sfan-lest telescope; which consists of a lens whose focallength exceeds siw inches placed at one end of a tubewhose length must always be six inches greater than thefocal length of the lens. When the eye is placed at isleother end of the tube it will see an inverted image ofdistant objects magnified in proportion to die focallength of the lens. If the lens has a focal length of 10or 12 feet, the magnifying power will be from SO to 24times and the satellites of Jupiter will be distinctly seenthrough this single lens telescope. To a very shortsightedperson who sees objects distinctly at a distanceof three inches the magnifying power would be from40 to 48.A single concave mirror is upon the same prindq[ik^a reflecting telescope, for it is of no consequence whetherthe image of the object is formed by refraction or reflection.In this case however the image mn,fig. 14.^cannot be looked at without standing in the way of theobject ; but if the reflection is made a little obliquely (nrif the mirror is sufficiently large so as not to interceptall the light from the object it may be employed as atelescope. By using his great mirror 4 feet in diameterand 40 feet in focal lengthy in the way now mortified.Dr. Herded discovered one of the satellites of Saturn.But there is still another way of increasing the apparentmagnitude of objects particularly of those whichare within our reach which is of great importance inoptics. It will be proved when we come to treat ofvision that a good eye sees the visible outline of an objectvery distinctly when it is placed at a great distance,and that, by a particular power in the eye, we can accommodateit to perceive objects at different distances.Hence, in order to obtain distinct vision of any object,we have only to cause the rays which proceed from it toenter the eye in parallel lines, as if the object itself wasCHAP. V. Magnifying POWER OF LENSES. 51very distant. Now, if we bring an object, or the imageof an object, very near to the eye, so as to give it greatapparent magnitude, it becomes indistinct ; but if wecan by any contrivance, make the rays which proceedfrom it enter the eye nearly parallel, we shall necessarilysee it distinctly. But we have already shown that whenrays diverge from the focus of any lens, they will emergefrom it parallel. If we, therefore, place an object or animage of one in the focus of a lens held dose to the eye,and having a small focal distance, the rays will enterdie eye parallel, and we shall see the object very distinctlyas it Till be magnified in the proportion of itspresent short distance from the eye to the distance ofsix inches, at which we see small objects most distinctly.But this short distance is equal to the focal length ofthe lens, so that the magnifying power produced by thelens will be equal to six laches divided by the focallength of the lens. A lens thus used to look at or magnifyany object is a single microscope; and when such aleos is used to magnify the magnified image producedby another lens, the two lenses together constitute a compoundmicroscope.When such a lens is used to magnify the image producedin the single lens telescope from a distant object,the two lenses together constitute what is called theastronomical refracting telescope; and when it is used tomagnify the image produced by a concave mirror froma distant object, the two constitute a reflecting telescope,such as that used by Le Maire and Herschel ; and whenit is used to magnify an enlarged image, M N, figA4!.,produced from an object mn, placed before a concavemirror, the two constitute a reading microscope. Allthese instruments will be more fully described in a futurechapter.B S52 A TREATISE OV Optics. PARTI.CHAP. VI.SPHERICAL ABERRATION OF LENSES ASD MIRRORS.(55.) In the preceding chapters we have supposed thatthe rays refracted at spherical surfaces meet exactly inafocus ; but this is by no means strictly true : and ifthe reader has in any one case projected the rays by themethods described he must have seen that the raysnearest the axis of a spherical surface or of a lens arerefracted to a focus more remote from the lens than thosewhich are incident at a distance from the axis of thelens. The rules which we have given for the fod oflenses and surfaces are true for rays very near the axis.In order to understand the cause of spherical aberrationslet L L be a plano-convex lens one of whose surfacesis spherical and let its plane surface Lfi»L beturned towards parallel rays R L^ R L. Let R'L'', R'L'be rays very near the axis A F of the lens and let F betheir focus after refraction. Let R L^ R L be pararays incident at the very margin of the lens and it willFig. 36.be found by the method of projection that the correspondingrefracted rays L/, L/ will meet at a pointmuch nearer the lens than F. In like manner intermediaterays between R L and R' L' will have their fociintermediate between / and F. Continue the rays L/hfy till they meet at G and H a plane passing through F.The distance /F is called the longitudinal spherical aberration,and G H the lateral spherical aberration of thelens. In a plano-convex lens placed like that in the figureCHAP. VI. SPHERICAL Aberration. 53the longitudinal spherical aberration /F is no less than4^ times m n the thickness of the lens. It is obvious thatsuch a lens cannot form a distinct picture of any objectin its focus F. If it is exposed to the sun the centralpart of the lens 1/ m 1/ whose focus is at F, will formapretty bright image of the sun at F ; but as the raysof the sun which pass through the outer part L L ofthe lens have their foci at points between / and F, therays will after arriving at those points pass on to theplane GH, and occupy a circle whose diameter is G H;hence the image of die sun in the focus F will be ajFfe. 37. right disc surrounded and rendered indistinctby a broad halo of light growing fainterand fainter from F to G and H. In likemanner every object seen through such alens, and every image formed by it, will berendered confused and indistinct by sphericalaberration.These results may be illustrated experimentally bytaking a ring of black paper, and covering up the outerparts of the face L L of the lens. This will diminishthe halo G H, and the indistinctness of the image, andif we cover up all the lens excepting a small part in thecentre, the image will become perfectly distinct, thoughless bright than before, and the focus will be at F. If,on the contrary, we cover up all the central part, andleave only a narrow ring at the circumference of thelens, we shall have a very distinct image of the sunformed about.(^56.) If the reader will draw a very large diagram ofa plano-convex, and of a double convex lens, and determinethe refracted rays at different distances from theaxis where parallel rays fall on each of the surfaces ofthe lens he will be able to verify the following resultsfor glass lenses.1 . Iq a pktno-convejv lens, with its plane side turnedto parallel rays as in fig, 36., that is, turned to distantobjects if it is to form an image behind it,, or turned tothe eye if it id to be used in magnifying a near object, theE wi54 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. • PART J.spherical aberration will be 4j^ times the ^dmess^ or4i^ times m n.2. In a plano-convex lens, with its convex side turnedtowards parallel rays the aberration is only l-j^^^thsof its thickness. In using a plano-convex lens thereforeit should always be so placed that parallel rayseither enter the convex surface or emerge from it.3. In a double convex lens with equal convexities theaberration is l-j^^ths of its thickness.4. In a double convex lens having its radii as S to 5^the aberration will be the same as in a plano-convex lensin Rule 1^ if the side whose radius is 5 is-turned towardsparallel rays ; and the same as the plano-convex lens inRule 2^ if the side whose radius is 2 is turned to parallelrays.5. The lens which has the least spherical aberrationis a double convex one whose radii are as 1 to 6. Whenthe face whose radius is 1 is turned towards parallelrays the aberration is only l^^^ths of its thickness;but when the side with the radius 6 is turned towardsparallel rays the aberration is S ^^^ ths of its thickness.These results are equally true of plano-concave anddouble concave lenses.If we suppose the lens of least spherical aberration tohave its aberration equal to 1^ the aberrations of the otherlenses will be as follows : —Best form, as in Rule 5. - - - 1 *00Double convex or concave, with equal curvatures 1*567Plano-convex or concave in best position, as i.Afiiin Rule 2 ^ *'^*Plano-convex or concave in worst position,in Rule 1. -(57') As the central parts of the lens LJj,fig. 36,,refract the rays too little and the marginal parts toomuch it is evident that if we could increase the convexityat n and diminish it gradually towards L, weshould remove the spherical aberration. But the ellipseand the hyperbola are curves of this kind, in which thecurvature diminished from n to L ; and mathematicianseve shown how spherical aberration may be entiretyCQAP.'TI. JsESeta WITHOUT ABERRATION.lemoyed^ by lenses whose sections are ellipses or hyperbolas.This curious discovery we owe to Descartes.Fig, 38.If A L D L^ for examples is an ellipse whose greateraxis AD is to the distance between its foci F,/as theindex of refraction is to unity then parallel rays RL^ RLincident upon the elliptical surface L AL will be refractedby the single action of that surface into lines which wouldmeet exactly in the focus F^ if there were no second surfaceintervening between L A L and F. But as everyuseful lens must have two surfaces we have only to describea circle hah round F as a centre for the secondsurface of the lens L L. As all the rays refracted at thesurface L A L converge accurately to F^ and as the circularsurface L a L is perpendicular to every one of therefracted rays all these rays will go on to F without sufferingany refraction at the circular surface. Hence itfollows that a meniscus whose convex surface is part of9n ellipsoid and whose concave surface is part of anyspherical surface whose centre is in the farther focuswill have no spherical aberration and will refract parallelrays incident on its convex surface to th farther focus.Ill like manner a concavo-convex lens L L^ whoseFig. 39.concave surface L A L is part of the ellipsoid A L D L,and whose convex surface hah is a circle describedE 456 A TREATISE OK OPTIOB. PABff f .round the farther focus of the ellipse will cause panrays R L^ R L to diverge in directions Lr,ljr, wfaiekwhen continued backwards will meet exactly in the focusF^ which will be its virtual focus.If a plano-convex lens has its convex surface L A L,Fig, 40.part of a hyperboloid formed by the revolution of ahyperbola whose greater axis is to the distance betweenthe foci as the index of refraction is to unity thai parallelrays, RL, RL, falling perpendicularly on the planesurface will be refracted without aberration to the fartherfocus of the hyperboloid. The same property belongs toa plano-concave lens, having a similar hyperbolic surface,and receiving parallel rays on its plane surface.A meniscus with spherical surfaces has the property ofrefracting all converging rays to its focus, if its first surfaceis convex provided the distance of the pint ofconvergence or divergence from the centre of the firstsurface is to the radius of the first surface as the indexof refraction is to amity. Thus, if M L L N is a menis-icus, and R L, R L rays converging to the point £, whosedistance E C from the centre of the first surface L A Lof the meniscus is to the radius C A or C L as the indexof refraction is to unity, that is as 1*500 to 1 in glass;then if F is the focus of the first surface, describe withany radius less than F A a circle M a N for the secondsurface of the lens. Then it will be found by projectionthat the rays R L, R L, whether near the axis A £ orremote from it, will be refracted accurately to the fbeuaF, and as all these rays fall perpendicularly on the second<SEAP. TI. LENSES WITHOUT ABERRATION.wfiioe M^ they will still pass on without refraction tothei focus F. In like manner it is obvious that raysFig.4UF L, F L diverging from F will be refracted into R L,R L, which diverge accurately from the virtual focus.When these properties of the ellipse and hyperbola,and of the solids generated by their revolution, were firstdiscovered, philosophers exerted all their ingenuity ingrinding and polishing lenses with elliptical and hyperbolicalsurfaces, and various ingenious mechanical contrivanceswere proposed for this purpose. These, however,have not succeeded, and die practical difficultieswhich yet require to be overcome are so great, that lenseswith spherical surfaces are the only ones now in use foroptical instruments.But though we cannot remove or diminish the sphericalaberration of single lenses beyond 1 j^^^ths of theirthickness, yet by combining two or more lenses, andmaking opposite aberrations correct each other, we canremedy this defect to a very considerable extent in somecases, and in other cases remove it altogether.(58.) Mr. Herschel has shown, that if two plano-convexlenses AB, CD, whose focal lengths are as 2*3 to 1,are placed with their convex sides together, AB the leastconvex being next the eye when the combination is tobe used as a microscope, the aberration will be only0*248, or one fourth of that of a single lens in its bestfoi* When this lens is used to form an image, A B5SA TREATISE OK Optics.JPABTl.must be turned to the object. If the focal lengths ofthe two lenses are equals the spherical aberration will be0'603, or a little more thanA ^' * one half of a single lens in its|l A^ best form.^ ^H Mr. Herschel has also shown^Hfl| I that the spherical aberrationJp» — ^ ^ ™^y ^ trW/^ removed by com-Heh A binding a meniscus CD with aW ^1 double convex lens A B, as inf ^ ./^^* ^^* ^^d ^^-^ ^c l^iis 'Ab® ^ being turned to the eye when itis used for a microscope and to the object when it is tobe used for forming images or as a burning glass.Fig, 43.The following are the radii of curvature for theselenses as computed by Mr. Herschel:—^Fights.Focal length of the double convex iq-OOOlens A B - - JRadius of its first or outer surface 4- 5*833Radius of its second surface - — 35 "000Focal length of the meniscus C D + 17*839Radius o£ its first surface - + 3*688Radius of its second surface - + 6*291Focal length of the compound lens + 6*407++++Fig; 44.10-0005*83335*0005*4972-0548*1288*374Spherical Aberration of Mirrors,(59*) We have already stated, that when parallel rayi>A M, A N, are incident on a spherical mirror, M N^ theyare refracted to the same focus, F, only when they arc incidentvery near the axis, AD. If F is the focus ofyi. Aberration OF Mirrors. 6^Tery near the axis, such as A m, then the focus ofFig. 45.■Amore remote, such as A M, will he at between F>, and /F will he the longitudinal spherical aber-whichwill obviously increase with the diametermirror when its curvature remains the same, andlie curvature when its diameter is constant. Thes,therefore, formed by mirrors will he indistinctlose formed by spherical lenses, and the indistinct-nilarise from the same causesmanifest that if M N were a curve of such aI that a line, A M, parallel to its axis, A D, and an-line,/M drawn from M to a fixed point, /, should5 form equal angles with a line, C M, perpendicularcurve M N, we should in this case have a surfacewould reflect parallel rays exactly to a focus /, andperfectly distinct images of objects. Such a curveparabola; and, therefore, if we could constructrs of such a form that their section M N is a para-theywould have the invaluable property of rays to a single focus. Wlien the curvature\ mirror is very small, opticians have devised meocommunicating to it a parabolic figure; butthe curvature is great, it has not yet been foundcable to give them this figure,the same manner it may be shown, that when dingrays fall upon a concave mirror of a sphericalthey will be reflected to different points of theand that if a surface could be formed so that the in-and reflected rays should form equal angles with aperpendicular to the surface at the point of incidence,Seated rays would all meet in a single point as theirfocus. A surface whose section is an ellipse hu tbbproperty; and it may be proved (hat rays diverging franone focus of an ellipse will be reflected accurately to theether focus. Hence in reflecting microscopes the mirrvshould be a portion of an ellipsoid; the axis of the mil'or being the axis of the ellipsoid, and the object beii^placed in the focus nearest the mirror.On Caustic Curvet formed by Reflexion and S^raUitu.(60.) Caustic fired bji refteteiim. — As the nyi incidenton different points of a reflecting surface at dissentdistances from its axis are reflect to different foiin that axis, it is evident that the rays thus reflectedmust cross one another at particular points, and whoeverthe rays cross the; will illuminate the white gttnUKlon which they are received with twice as much let afalls on other parts of the ground. These Inminooiintersections form curve lines, called caustic Hei acaustic curves; and their nature and form will, of contr,vary with the aperture of the mirror, and the distanceof the radiant point.In order to explain their mode of formation andgeneral properties, let M B N be a concave sphericalmirror, fig, 46., whose centre is C, and whose fbcui fiFig. 46.CHAP. Yli CAUSTIC CURVES. ^1•parallel and central rays is F. Let RMB be a beam of light falling on the upper half M B^ ofIjOR mirror at the points 1, 2, 3, 4, &c. If we drawHues perpendicular to all these points from the centre C,and make the angles of reflexion equal to the angles ofincidence we shall obtain the directions and foci of allthe incident rays. The ray R 1, near the axis RB,will have its conjugate focus at f, between F and thecentre C. The next ray, R 2, will cut the axis nearerF, and so on with all the rest, the foci advancing fromF to C. By drawing all the reflected rays to these^i, they will be found to intersect one another as inthe figure, and to form by their intersections the causticcurve Mf. If the light had also been incident on thelower half of the mirror, a similar caustic shown by adotted line would also have been formed between N and/. If we suppose, therefore, the point of incidence tomove from M to B, the conjugate focus of any two contiguousrays, or an infinitely slender pencil divergingfrom R, will move along the caustic from M to.Let us now suppose the convex surface M B N of themirror to be polished, and the radiant point R to be placedas far to the right hand of B as it is now to the left, itwill be found, by drawing the incident and reflected rays,that they will diverge after reflexion; and that whencontinued backwards they will intersect one another,and form the imaginary caustic M/^ N situated behindthe convex surface, and exactly similar to the realcaustic.If we suppose the convex mirror M B N to be completedround the same centre, C, as at M A N, and thepencil of rays stUl to radiate from R, they will form the.imaginary caustic M/'N smaller than Men, anduniting with it at the points M, N.Let the radiant point R be now supposed to recedefrom the mirror MBN, the line Bf, which is calledthe tangent of the real caustic Men, will obviouslydiminish, because the conjugate focus swill approach toF; and, for the same reason, the tangent A/' of theimaginary caustic will increase. When R becomes infinitelydistant, and the incident nyt parallel, the poinji/,/', called the ciupt of the caution, will both ctdnddtwith P and F', the principal foci, and will have the topsame Size and form.But if the radiant point R appioaxihei to the tithecusp / of the real caustic will approach to the eatttC, and the tangent Swill increase, the cusp /'of dieiroaginar; caustic will approach to A, and its tangoilA/' win diminish ; and when the radiant point carrat the circumference at A, the cup /' will also antiA, and the imaginary caustic will disappear. At dwsame time, the cusg^ / of the real caustic will be a Htdtto the right of C, and itg two opposite summit wiSmeet in the radiant point at A.If we suppose the radiant point R now to enter widiiathe circle A M B N, as shown in fig. 47., so that B C iiless than R A, a remarkable double caustic will be formed.This caustic will consist of two short ones of the con-mankind, ar,br, having their common cusp at r, and oftwo long branches, aB, &B, which meet in a focus atWhen R C is greater than R A, the curved branches thatmeet at/behind the mirror will diverge, and haveavir-teal focus within the mirror. When R coincides wideF, a point halfway between A and C, and the virgilcmAP. ti. caustic curves. 6s^ncipal focus of the convex mirror M A N^ these curvedIffanches become parallel lines ; and when K coincidesivith the centre C^ the caustics disappear, and all thel^ht is condensed into a single mathematical point atGy from which it again diverges and is again reflectedto Ae same point.In virtue of the principle on which these phenomenadepend a spherical mirror has under certain circumstancesthe paradoxical property of rendering rays divergingfrom a fixed point either parallel, diverging, orconverging ; that is, if the radiant point is a little waywithin the principal focus of a mirror, so that rays verynear the axis are reflected into parallel lines, the rayswhich are incident still nearer the axis will be rendereddiverging, and those incident farther from the axis willbe rendered converging. This property may be distinctlyexhibited by the projection of the reflected rays.Caustic curves are frequently seen in a very distinctand beautiful manner at the bottom of cylindrical vesselsof china or earthenware that happen to be exposed to thelight of the sun or of a candle. In these cases the raysgenerally fall too obliquely on their cylindrical surface,owing to their depth ; but this depth may be removed,and the caustic curves beautifully displayed, by insertinga circular piece of card or white paper about an inch orso beneath their upper edge, or by filling them to thathest with milk or any white and opaque fluid.The following method, however, of exhibiting causticcurves I have found exceedingly convenient and instructive.Take a piece of steel spring highly polished,such as a watch spring, M N, fig, 48., and having bentit into a concave form as in the figure, place it vertically onits edge upon a piece of card or white paper A B. Letit then be exposed either to the rays of the sun, or thoseof any other luminous body, taking care that the planeof the card or the paper passes nearly through the sun;and the two caustic curves shown in the figure will befinely displayed. By varying the size of the spring, andbinding it into curves of different shapes all the Nmc^A TREATISE ON OPTICS.Pablocaustics with their cusps and points of contour)flexure, will be finely exhibited. Thesteel may be bent accurately into differentcurves by applying a portionof its breadth to the required curvesdrawn upon a piece of wood andeither cut or burned sufficiency dinthe wood to allow the edge of 13^thin strip of metal to be inserted init. Gold or silver foil answers verywell; and when the light is strong,a. thin strip of mica will also answer,the purpose. The best substance of1 all however is a thin strip of polishedsilver.(61.) Caustics formed by refraction. If we expose aglobe of glass filled with water, or a solid spherical lens, oreven the belly of a round decanter, filled with water, tothe rays of the sun, or to the light of a lamp or candle,and receive the refracted light on white paper held almostparallel to the axis of the sphere, or so that its planepasses nearly through the luminous body, we shall perceiveon the paper a luminous figure bounded by twobright caustics, like a sand b f, Jig, 47., but placed behindthe sphere, and forming a sharp cusp or angle at thepoint which is the focus of refracted rays. The productionof these curves depends upon the intersection ofrays, which, being incident on the sphere at differentdistances from the axis, are refracted to foci at differentpoints of the axis, and therefore cross one another. Thisresult is so easily understood, and may be exhibited soclearly, by projecting the refracted rays, that it is unnecessaryto say any more on the subject.Some of the phenomena of caustics produced by refractionmay be illustrated experimentally in the followingmanner: -^ Take a shallow cylindrical vessel of lead,M N, two or three inches in diameter, and cut its uppermargin, as shown in the figure, leaving two oppositeprojections, ac, bd, forming each about 10° or 15**eeiF.vi. CAUSTIC curves. 65niche whole circumference. Complete the circumferencetj cementing on the vessel two strips of mica so as toFig 49. substitute for the lead that hasa^ been removed two transparent/^^D^^kft " cylindrical surfaces. If this vesselJ^^^^^ys*— iy is filled with water, or any other^ ^ transparent fluid, and a piece ofI^^^^^H card or white paper, A B C D, is^^^^^^ held almost parcel to the of tie water, and having its plane nearly passingtfarou^ the sin or the candle, the caustics A F, D Fwin be finely displayed. By altering the curvature ofthe vessd^ and that of the strips of mica, many interestingvariations of the experiment may be made.66 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PAm,PART ILPHYSICAL OPTICS.(62.) Physical Optics is that branch of the cadencewhich treats of the physical properties of light. Theseproperties are exhibited in the decomposition and recompositionof white light ; in its decomposition by absorption; in the inflexion or distraction of let ; in the cobunof thick and thin plates ; and in the double refractionand polarisation of light.CHAP. VII.ON THE Colours OF Lights AND ITS DBCOBfPOSITIOir*(63,) In the preceding chapters we have regardedlight as a simple substance all the parts of which hadthe same index of refraction and therefore suffered thesame changes when acted upon by transparent media*This however, is not its constitution. White light, aiemitted from the sun or from any luminous body, is composedof seven different kinds of light, viz., red, orange,yelloWy green, blue, indigo, and violet ; and this compoundsubstance may be decomposed, or analysed, or separatedinto its elementary parts, by two different processes vii.,by refraction and absorption.The first of these processes was that which was employedby sir Isaac Newton, who discovered flie compositionof white light. Having admitted a be of thesun's light, SH, through a small hole, H, in the window-shutter,E F, of a darkened room, it will go on in a straightline and form a round white spot at P. If we nowinterpose a prism, BAG, whose refracting angle is B ACjchap. Til. ANALYSIS OF LIOHT BY THE PRISM. 6?io that this beam of light may fall on its first surfaceC A, and emerge at the same angle from its second surfaceFig. 50.E.:;:>•Wai»6^B A in the direction g G, and if we receive the refractedbeam on the opposite wall or rather on a white screenM N^ we should expect from the principles already laiddown, that the white hem which previously fell upon Pwould sufibr only a change in its direction, and fallsomewhere upon M N, forming there a round white spoteuedy similar to that at P. But this is not the case.instead' of a white spot, there will he formed upon theween M N an oblong image KL of the sun, containingseven colours, viz., red, orange, fellow, green, blue, indigo,and violet, the whole beam of light diverging fromits emergence out of the prism at g, and being roundelaythe lines gK, gh. This lengthened image of the sunb called the solar spectrum, or the prismatic spectrum.If the aperture H is small, and the distance g G considerable,the colours of the spectrum will be very bright.The lowest portion of it at L is a brilliant red. Thisred shades off by imperceptible gradations into orange,the orange into ydlow, the .yellow into green, the greeninto blue, the blue into a pure indigo, and the indigo intoI violet. No lines are seen across the spectrum thusproduced ; and it is extremely difficult for the sharpesteye to point out the boundary of the different colours.Sr Isaac Newton, however, by many trials, £o\md OftF 268 A TREATISE ON OPTIOS. PAlengths of the colours to be as follows in the hglass of which his prism was made. We havethe results obtained by Fraimhofer with flint glassRedNewun.IVsoiiImOrangeYellow -GreenBlue . -IndigoViolet -Total lengthThese colours are not equally brilliant. At theend h, of the spectrum the red is comparativelybut grows brighter as it approaches the oranlight increases gradually to the middle ois the ;space where it is brightest; and from this it agradeclines to the upper or violet end K^ of the specwhere it is extremely faint.(64.) From the phenomena which we have ncscribed sir Isaac Newton concluded that the bewhite hght^ S^ is compounded of light of seven di:colours and that for each of these different twilightthe glass of which his prism was made hafervent indices of refraction; Uie index of retractthe red light being the least and that of the violgreatestIf the prism is made of crown glcLSs, for exam!indices of refraction for the different coloured rabeas follows : —Red -Index ofRefiraction.- 1-5258Blue -OrangeYellow- 1-5268- 1-5296IndigoViolet -Green -- 1-5330BIf we now draw the prism B A C^ on a great sea]determine the progress of the refracted rays, supplbe incident upon the same point of the first surfaoby using for each ray the index of refraction in tbClap. VU. RECOBIPOfiDETION OF LIGHT. 09ceding table we shall find them to diverge as in thepreceding figure and to form the different colours indie order of those in the spectrum.In order to examine each colour separately sir Isaacmade a hole in the screen Mn opposite the centre ofeach coloured space; and he allowed that particularColour to fall upon a second prism placed behind thehide. This lights when refracted by the second prismwas not drawn out into an oblong image as before, andwas not refracted into any other colours. Hence heconcluded that the light of each different colour had thesame index of refraction; and he called such light or simple white light being regarded as heterogeneousor compound. This important doctrine is calledthe different refrangihility of the rays of light Thedifferent colours as existing in the spectrum are calledprimary colours; and any mixtures or combinations ofmy of them are called secondary colours, because we cantaaSlj separate them into their primary colours by refractionthrough the prism.(65J) Having thus clearly established the compositionof white light, sir Isaac also proved, experimentally, thatall the seven colours, when again combined and made toftU upon the same spot, formed or recomposed whitelight. This important truth he established by variousexperiments ; but the following method of proving it is80 satisfactory, that no farther evidence seems to bewanted. Let the screen MN,^^. 50., which receivesthe spectrum, be gradually brought nearer the prismB A C^ the spectrum K L will gradually diminish ; butthough the colours ben to mix, and encroach uponone another, yet, even when it is brought close to theface B A of thb prism, we shall recognise the separationof the light into its component colours. If we nowtake a prism, B a A, shown by dotted lines, made of thesame kind of glass as B A C, and having its refractingangle A B a exactly equal to the refracting angle B A C ofdie other prism; and if we place it in the opposite dictionwe shall find that all the seven different colouredp370 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. ■ PAST ILrays which fall upon the second prism A B a^ are againcombined into a single beam of white list g P^ forminga white circular spot at P^ as if none of the prin hadbeen interposed. The very same effect will be proceed,even if the surfaces A B^ of the two prisms are joinedby a transparent cement of the same refractive power uthe glass so as to remove entirely the refractions tt thecommon surface A B. In this state the two prioncombined are nothing more than a thick i»ece dglass B C A a^ whose two sides A 0^ a B^ are ezacdyparallel; and the decomposition of the light by the iefraction of the first surface A C^ is counteracted by dieopposite and equal refraction of the second surface, a B;that is the light decomposed by the first surface is decomposedby the second surface. The refraction andre-union of the rays in this experiment may be wdl exhibitedby placing a thick plate of oil of cassia betweentwo parallel plates of glass and making a narrow beamof the sun's light fall upon it very obliquely. The 1spectrum formed by the action of the first surface will |be distinctly visible and the re-union of the colours bythe second equally distinct. We may therefore considerthe action of a plate of parallel glass on the son'srays, that is, its property of transmitting them odourless,as a sufficient proof of the decomposition of lightThe same doctrine may be illustrated experimentallyby mixing together seven different powders having tlKsame colours as those of the spectrum, taking as muchof each as seem to be proportional to the rays in sadicoloured space. The union of these colours will be asort of greyish white, because it is impossible to obtainpowders of the proper colours. The same result will beobtained, if we take a circle of paper and divide it intosectors of the same size as the coloured spaces; andwhen this circle is placed upon a humming-top, madeto revolve rapidly, the effect of all the colours whencombined will be a greyish white.CHAP. TU. NEW ANALYSIS OF LIGHT. 71DeannpositioH of Light by Absorption.m(66J) If we measure the quantity of light which isneglected from the surfaces and transmitted through thesubstance of transparent bodies we shall find that thesun of .these quantities is always less than the quantityof light which falls upon the body. Hence we mayconclude that a certain portion of light is lost in passingthough the most transparent bodies. This loss arisesfinom two causes. A part of the light is scattered in alldirections by irregular reflexion from the imperfectlypolished surface of particular media or from the imperfectunion of its parts; while another, and generally agreater portion is absorbed, or stopped by the particlesof the body. Coloured fluids, such as black and redink though equally homogeneous, stop or absorb differentkinds of rays, and when exposed to the sun theybecome heated in different degrees; while pure waterteems to transmit all the rays equally, and scarcelyreceives any heat from the passing Hght of the sun.MHhen we examine more minutely the action of colouredglasses and coloured fluids in absorbing light,many remarkable phenomena present themselves, whichthrow much light upon this curious subject.If we take a piece of blue glass, like that generallyused for finger glasses, and transmit through it a beamof white light, the light will be a fine deep blue. Thisblue is not a simple homogeneous colour, like the blueor indigo of the spectrum, but is a mixture of all thecolours of white light which the glass has not absorbed ;and the colours which the glass has absorbed are thosewhich the blue wants of white light, or which, whenmixed with this blue, would form white light. In orderto determine what these colours are, let us transmitthrough the blue glass the prismatic spectrum K L,fig, 50.; or what is the same thing, let the observer placehis eye behind the prism BAG, and look through it atthe sun, or rather at a circular aperture made in theF 472 A TREATISE ON 0PTIG8. part EUwindow-shutter of a dark room. He will then leethrough the prism the spectrum KL ais far below theaperture as it was above the spot P when shown in thescreen. Let the blue glass be now interposed betweenthe eye and the prism and a remarkable spectrum willbe seen deficient in a certain number of its differentlycoloured rays. A particular thickness absorbs the mickof the red space the whole of the orange a great partof the green a considerable part of the blue, a littk ofthe indigo, and very little of the violet The yellowspace, which has not been much absorbed, has incrustedin breadth. It occupies part of the space formerlycovered by the orange on one side, and part of the spaceformerly covered by the green on the other. Hence itfollows, that the blue glass has absorbed the red Hgh^which, when mixed with the yellow light, constitutedorange, and has absorbed also the blue light,* which, whenmixed with the yellow, constituted the part of the greoispace next to the yellow. We have therefore, by absorption,decomposed green light into yellow and bine,and orange light into yellow and red; and it consequentlyfollows, that the orange and green rays of thespectrum, though they cannot be decomposed by prismaticrefraction, can be decomposed by absorption, andactually consist of two different colours possessing diesame degree of refrangibility. Difference qf colour Utherefore not a test of difference of rtfrangtbUity, andthe conclusion deduced by Newton is no longer admissibleas a general truth : ^^ That to the same degree atrefrangibility ever belongs the same colour, and to thesame colour ever belongs the same degree of refiran-gibiUty."With the view of obtaining a complete analysis of diespectrum, I have examined the spectra produced byvarious bodies, and the changes which they undergo byabsorption when viewed through various coloured media,and I find that the colour of every part of thespectrum may be changed not only in intensity, but incolour, by the action of particular media; and from theseCrawl*. yn. NfiW Analysis OF LIGHT. 73observations which it would he out of place here to detail,I conduce that the solar spectrum consists of threespectra of equal lengths viz. a red spectrum a yellowspeetnun, and a blue spectrum. The primary red spectrumhas its maximum of intensity about the middle of.tie red space in the solar spectrum, the primary yellowfpectruin has its maximum in the middle of the yellowspaces and the primary blue spectrum has its maximumbetween the blue and the indigo space. The two minimaof each of the three primary spectra coincide at thetwo extremities of the solar spectnmi.From this view of the constitution of the solar spectrin we may draw the following conclusions : —1. Mede yellow, and blue light exist at every point ofthe solar spectrum.2. As a certain portion of red, yellow, and blue constituteflite light, the cdbur of every point of the spectrummay be considered as consisting of the predominatingooloiir at any point mixed with white light. In the red^ftoe there is more red than is necessary to make whiteHg^ with the small portions of yellow and blue whichexist there; in the yellow space there is more yellowtfaan is necessary to make white light with the red andIdle; and in the part of the blue space which appearsvices dire is more red than yellow, and hence the excessof red forms a violet with the blue.S» By absorbing the excess of any colour at any pointof the spectrum above what is necessary to form whiteUf^ty we may actually cause white light to appear at thatpoint, and this white light will possess the remarkablepi tipcr t y of remaining white after any number of refractions,and of being decomposable only by absorption.dedi a white light I have succeeded in developing indiflfeimt parts of the spectrum. These views harmonisein a remarkable manner with the hypothesis of threeookmrs^ which has been adopted by many philosophers,and wfaidi others had rejected from its incompatibilitywith the phenomena of the spectrum.The existence of three primary colours in the A TREATISE ON OPTIGB. PART ILtrump and the mode in which they produce by theircombination the seven secondary or compound colourwhich are developed by the prism will be understood fromfi, 51. where MN is the prismatic spectrum consistingof three primary spectra of the same lengths MN,viz. a ready a yellow, and a blue spectrum. The red spectrumhas its maximum intensity at R; and this intensitymay be represented by the distance of the point Bfrom M N. The intensity declines rapidly to M andslowly to N^ at both of which points it vanishes. Theyellow spectrum has its maximum intensity at Y, theintensity declining to zero at M and N; and the blue hasits maximum intensity at B^ declining to nothing itM and N. The general curve which represents the totalillumination at any point will be outside these threecurves and its ordinate at any point will be equal to thesum of the three ordinates at the same point. Thus theordinate of the general curve at the point Y will beequal to the ordinate of the yellow curve, which we maysuppose to be 10^ added to diat of the red curve, whichmay be 2, and that of the blue, which may be 1. Heoeethe general ordinate will be 13. Now, if we supposethat 3 parts of yellow, 2 of red, and 1 of blue makewhite, we shall have the colour at Y equal to 3 + 2 + 1,equal to 6 parts of white mixed with 7 parts of yellow;that is, the compound tint at Y will be a bright yelhvwithout any trace of red or blue. As these colours alloccupy the same place in the spectrum, they cannot beseparated by the prism ; and if we could find a coloured .glass which would absorb 7 parts of the yellow, weshould obtain at the point Y a white light which the prismcould not decompose.CHAP. Vm. DISPERSION OF LIGHT. 75CHAP. VIII.ON THE DISPERSION OF LIGHT.In the preceding observations we have considered theprismatic spectrum Kli,fig. 50,, as produced by a prismof glass haying a given refracting angle BAG Thegreen ray or g G, which being midway between g K and^ L^ is called the mean ray of the spectrum has beenrefracted from P to G^ or through an angle of deviationP^G^ which is called the mean refraction or deviationproduced by the prism. If .we now increase the angleB A C of the prism we shall increase the refraction.The mean ray g G vidll be refracted to a greater distancefrom P^ and the extreme rays gli,gKto a. greater distancein the same proportion ; that is if ^G is refractedtwice as much g L and g K will also be refracted twiceas much and consequently the length of the spectrumK L will be twice as great. For the same reason if weHinninigh the angle B A C of the prism the mean refractionand the spectrum will diminish in the same proportion; but whatever be the angle of the prism thelength K L will always bear the same proportion to G P,the mean refraction.Sir Isaac Newton supposed that prisms made of allsubstances whatever produced spectra bearing the sameproportion to the mean refraction as prisms of glass; andit .18 a remarkable circumstance that a philosopher ofsadi sagacity should have overlooked a fact so palpable,as that different bodies produced spectra whose lengthswere different, when the mean refraction was the saioie.The prism BAG being supposed to be made of croupglassy let us take another of flint glass or white crystal,with such a refracting angle that, when placed in the positionBAG, the light enters and quits it at equal angles,and refracts the mean ray to the same point G. The two76 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PAST H.prisms ought therefore to have the same mean refraction.But when we examine the spectrum produced bythe flint glass prism we shall find that it extends beyondK and L, and is evidently longer than the spectrumproduced hy the crown glass prism. Hence flint gladis said to have a greater dispersive power than crownglass. because at the same angle of mean refraction itseparates the extreme rays of the spectrum gL,gKffarther from the mean ray g G.In order to explain more clearly what is the real measureof the dispersive power of a hody^ let us supposethat in the crown glass prism B A C^ the index of refractionfor the extreme violet ray, ^ K, is 1 '5466, andthat for the extreme red ray, gL, 1*5258 ; then thedifference of these indices, or *0208, would he a measureof the dispersive power of crown glass, if it and aUother bodies had the same mean refraction: hut as diisis far from being the case, the dispersive power must bemeasured by the relation between *0208 and die meanrefraction, or 1*5330, or to the excess of this aboveunity, viz., *5330, to which the mean refraction is alwaysproportional. For the purpose of making this clearer,let it be required to compare the dispersive powers ofdiamond and crown glass. The index of refraction ofdiamond for the extreme violet ray is 2*467, and for theextreme red, 2*411, and the difference of these is 0*056,nearly nine times greater than 0*208, the same differencefor crown glass ; but then the difference between thesines of incidence and refraction, or the excess of tibeindex of refraction above unity, or 1*439, is also aboutthree times greater than the same difference in crownglass, viz., 0*533; and, consequently, the dispersivepower of diamond is very little greater than that ofcrown glass. The two dispersive powers are as follows: —Ditpentve Owen.Crown Glass - --Bi! =■ 0386Diamond - - ,:«Jj = 0*0388CHAP. Xii. Dispersion OF LIOHT. 77This similarity of dispersive power might be provedexperimentally by taking a prism of diamond whichwhen placed a€ B A C in fig. 50., produced die samemean refraction as the green ray y G. It would then beseen that the spectrum which it produced was of thesame length a$ that produced by the prism of crownglass. Hence the splendid colours which distinguishdiamond from every other precious stone are not owingto its high dispersive power but to its great meanrefraction.As the indices of refraction given in our table ofrefractive powers are nearly suited to the mean ray of thespectrum we may, by the second column of the Tableof the Dispersive Powers of Bodies, given in the Appendix,No. I., obtain the approximate indices of refractionfor the extreme red and the extreme violet rays, byadding half of the number in the column to the meanindex of refraction for the index of refraction of theviolet, and subtracting half of the same number for theindex of the red ray. The measures in the table aregiven for the ordinary light of day. When the sunlightis used, and when the eye is screened from themiddle rays of the spectrum, the red and violet may betraced to a much greater distance from the mean ray ofthe spectrum.When the index of refraction for the extreme ray isthus known, we may determine the position and lengthof the spectra produced by prisms of different substances,whatever be their refracting angle, whatever bethepositions of the prism, and whatever be the distanceof the screen on which the spectrum is received.If we take a prism of crown glass, and another offlint glass, with such refracting angles that they producea spectrum of precisely the same length, it will be found,that when the two prisms are placed together with theirrefracting angles in opposite directions, they will notrestore the refracted pencil to the state of white light ashappens in the combination of two equal prisms ofcrown or two equal prisms of flint glass. TYi't 'wXslVlight V,fig. 50., will be tinged on one de wilfa .vwfrfi.and on the other with green light. This is called ^secondary spectrum, and the colours tecondoTy coiouh;and it is manifest that they must aris from the coloringspaces in the spectrum of crown glass not bang eqnil tothose in the Epectnun of flint glass.In order to render this curious property of the ^ee-tim very obvious to the eye, let two spectra of emaillength be formed by two hollow prisms, one containingmi of ctutia, and the other sulphuric acid. The oil flf-cassia spectrum will resemble A B, fig. 52., and the.Fig. 52.sulphuric acid spectrum CD In the former, tip red,orange, and yelhu> spaces are less than in the latter,while the hie, indigo, and violet spaces ere greater;the least refrangible rays bing, as it were, contracted inthe former and expanded in the latter, while the mintrefrangible rays are expanded in the one and contractedin the other. In consequence of this difference in thecoloured spaces, die middle or mean ray m n does netpass throws the same colour in both spectra. In theoil of cassia spectrum it is in the blue space, and in thesulfuric aid spectrum it is in the green space. As thecoloured spaces have not the same ratio to one anothaat the lengths of the spectra which they compose, thisOHAP. IX. VBLRATWHAUTY OF DISPERSION. 79property has been called the irrationality of dispersionor of Ihe coloured spaces in the spectrum.In order to ascertain whether any prism contracts or^HfMoids the least refrangible rays more than another oriffiidi of them acts most on green lights take a prism ofeach with such angles that they correct each other's dis-personas much as possible or that they produce spectraof the same length. If through the prisms placed withtheir refracting angles in opposite directions we look atdie bar of the window parallel to the base of the prism,we shell see its edges perfectly free of colour, providedthe two prisms act equally upon green light. But ifthey act differently on green light, the bar will have afringe of purple on one side, and a fringe of green onthe other; and the green fringe will always be on thesame side of the bar as the vertex of the prism whichcontracts the yellow space and expands the blue andviolet ones. That is, if the prisms are flint and crownglass, the uncorrected green fringe will be on the lowertide of the bar when the vertex of the flint glass prismpoints downwards. Flint glass, therefore, has a lessaction upon green light than crown glass, and contractsin a greater degree the red and yellow spaces. S^Appendix, No. II.CHAP. IX.ON THE Principle OF ACHROMATIC TELESCOPES*In treating of the progress of rays through lenses, it wastaken for granted that the light was homogeneous, and thatevery ray that had the same angle of incidence had alsothe same angle of refraction ; or, what is the same thing,that every ray which feU upon the lens had the same indexof refraction. The observations in the two ijjiete^iv^A TREATISE ON OPTIOB.Painchapters have however proved that this is not mei vdthat in the case of light falling upon crown glui| Caseare rays with every possible index of refraction ftw1 '525S, the index of refraction for the red, to 1*540E^the index of refraction for the violet rays. As the Giof the sun by which all the bodies of nature are rendntivisible is white this property of lights via. the difflnfltrefrangibility of its parts affects greatly the fonnatiflDtfimages by lenses of all kinds.In order to explain this let L L be a lens of enmglass and R L^ R L rays of white light incident upon itFig. 53.parallel to its axis R r. As each ray R L of white ligMconsists of seven differently coloured rays having diffidentdegrees of refrangibility or different indices of le*fraction it is. evident that all the rays which compoteR L cannot possibly be refracted in the same dirftfttiff"jso as to fall upon one point. The extreme red lay, ftrexamples in 11 L, R L, whose index of refraction ii1'5258, if traced through the lens by the method fivegiven will be found to have their focus in r, tndC r will be the focal length of the lens for red rays. Inlike manner the extreme violet rays which have a gnilBrindex of refraction or 1*5466^ will be refracted to a fiNOiV much nearer the lens and C v will be the focal lengthof the lens for violet rays. The distance vr \» called diechromatic aberration and the circle whose diameter itab passing through the focus of the meansays at o, is called the circle of least aberration.These effects may be shown experimentally bying the lens L L to the parallel rays of the sun. If iftreceive the image of the sun on a piece of paper plteedbetween o and C^ the luminous circle on the paper lAffLTczxxxnu:»Ti:h^p"adCHAP. IX. OHROICAT'C ABERRATION. 81have a red border because it is a section of the coneJjabL, the exterior rays of which La, L 6 are red ;but if the paper is placed at any greater distance than o,the luminous circle on the paper will have a violet borderbecause it is a section of the cone Ira b V, the exteriorrays of which a l\ 5 /^ are violet being a continuationof the violet rays Itv, It v. As die spherical aberrationof the lens is here combined with its chromatic aberrationsthe undisguised effect of the latter vidll be betterseen by taking a large convex lens L It, and covering upall the central part leaving only a small rim round itscircumference at L L through which the rays of lightmay pass. The refraction of the differently colouredrays will be then finely displayed by viewing the image ofthe sun on the different sides of a b.It is dear from these observations that the lens willform a violet image of the sun at v, a red image at r,and images of the other colours in the spectrum at intermediatepoints between r and v ; so that if we place theeye behind these images we shall see a confused imagepossessing none of that sharpness and distinctness whichit would have had if formed only by one kind of rays.The same observations are true of the refraction ofwhite light by a concave lens ; only in this case the parallelrays wldch such a lens refracts diverge as if theyproceeded from separate foci v and r, in front of theleiuLIf we now place behind L L a concave lens G G ofthe same glass and having its surfaces ground to theisle curvature it is obvious that since v is its virtualfocus for violet and r its virtual focus for red rays ifthe paper is held at a b, the focus of the mean refrangiblelays, where the violet and red rays cross at a and b, theimage will be more distinct than in any other position ;and when rays converge to the focus of any concave lens,they will be refracted into parallel directions; that is, theconcave lens will refract these converging rays into theparallel lines Gl, Gl, and they will again form whiteUg^t. That the red and violet rays will be thu Te-wxAX«^^382 A Theatre 03r OTTIOBL Fast IKin one viz. G /, may be proved by prqjeetiiig them ; bokit is obvious also from the oondderatioii that the tutlenses L L^ G G actually form a piece of parallel g^ifli^the outer concave surface of G G being parallel to Acouter convex surface of L L.(67*) But though we have thus corrected the colour inducedby L L, by means of the lens G G^ we have doMthis by an useless combination ; rince the two togetheract only like a piece of plane glass, and are incapable cfforming an image. If we make the concave lens 6G,however of a longer focus than L h, the two togetherwill act as a convex lens and will form images boundit as the rays Gl, Gl will now converge to a focus behindL L. But as the chromatic aberration of thelens G G will now be less than that of L L^ die onewill not correct or compensate the other; ao that the differencebetween the two aberrations will still reminiscenceit is impossible, by means of two leruet of Atsame glass, to form an image which shall be £ree ofcolour.As sir Isaac Newton believed that all snbttaneeiwhatever produced the same quantity of colour or hadthe same chromatic aberration when formed into kosei^he concluded that it was impossible by the oombinatiiiQof a concave with a convex glass, to produce refractionwithout colour. But we have already seen that the prmises from which this conclusion was drawn are ingot'rect and that bodies have different dispersive powers, orproduce different degrees of colour at the same mearefraction. Hence it follows that different lenses reproducethe same degree of colour when they have differentfocal lengths ; so that if the lens L L is made ofcrown glass, whose index of refraction is 1*519^ nddispersive power 0*036, and the lens G G of JIM gksi,whose index of refraction is 1*589^ and dispersive power0*0393, and if the focal length of the convex crown-glasslens is made 4>^ inches, and that of the concftfeflint-glass lens 7-^ inches they will form a lens with •focal length of 10 inches, and will refract white light toIZ. ACHROMATIC TELESCOPE. 83m nne foci free of colour. Such a lens is called anOftAnmatic lens; and when used as a telescope withanother glass to magnify the colourless image which itforms of distant objects it constitutes the achromaticMeicope, one of the greatest inventions of the last centtmy. Although Newton reasoning from his imperfect^ knowledge of the dispersive power of bodies pronouncedSQcfa an invention to be hopeless ; yet in a short timeafter the death of that great philosopher it was accompaniedby a Mr. Hall and afterwards by Mr. Holland,who brought it to a high degree of perfection.The image formed by an achromatic lens thus constrictedwould have been perfect if the equal spectrafanned by the crown and flint glass were in every re-spect similar: but as we have seen that the colouredipaoes in the one are not equal to the coloured spaces inthe other a secondary spectrum is left; and thereforethe images of all luminous objects when seen throughhick a lens will be bordered on one side with a purplefringe and on the other with a green fringe. If twobalances could be found of different refractive anddispersive powers, and capable of producing equalelectra in which the coloured spaces were equals a perfecticbxoniatic lens would be produced : but as no such substanceshave yet been founds philosophers have endeavouredto remove the imperfection by other means;*and Doctor Blair had the merit of surmounting thedifficulty. He found that muriatic acid had the propertycf producing a primary spectrum in which the greenlays were among the most refrangible something likeC Dy Jig* 52., as in crown glass. But as muriatic acidbaa too low a refractive and dispersive power to fit it forbttng used as a concave lens along with a convex one ofcrown grasse he therefore conceived the idea of increasingthe refractive and dispersive power of the muriaticadd, by mixing it with metallic solutions such asinitiate of antimony; and he found he could do this tothe requisite extent without altering its law of dispersionfar the proportion of the coloured spaces in its spectrum.6 284 A TREATISE ON OPTIGB. Pablo*.By enclosing therefore, muriate of antimony, L L, betweentwo convex lenses of crown glass, as A B, CD infig, 54., Doctor Blair succeeded in refracting paradeJP%. 54.TalcBetraysR A, R B to a single focus F^ without the kuttrace of secondary colour. Before he discovered tiiiiproperty of the muriatic acid he had contrived another,though a more complicated combination for producingthe same effect; but as he preferred the combinationwhich we have described, and employed it in the bestatlantic object-glasses which he constructed it is unnecessaryto dwell any longer upon the subject.In these observations, we have supposed that the lemAwhich are combined have no spherical aberration ; bntthough this is not the case the combination of concavewith convex surfaces, when properly i^usted^ enabkfus completely to correct the spherical along with thechromatic aberration of lenses.In the course of an examination of the secondaryspectra produced by different combinations I was kdto the conclusion that there may be refraction without.colour by means of two prisms, and that two lenaeimay converge white light to one focus even though theprisms and the lenses are made of the same kind of san*When one prism of a different angle is thus made tocorrect the dispersion of another prism, a tertiary trio'true is produced, wHich depends wholly on the anglesat which the light is refracted at the two surfaces of ^prisms. See Treatise on New Philosophical Instruments,p. 400.eiUP. X. ON LINES IN THE 8FE0TBUM. 85CHAP. X.ON THE Physical PROPERTIES OF THE SPECTRUM.(68,) In the preceding chapter we have considered onlydose general properties of the solar spectrum on which theconstruction of achromatic lenses depends. We shallnow proceed to take a general view of all its physicalproperties.On the Existence of Fixed Lines in the Spectrum.In die year 1802^ Dr. Wollaston announced that indie spectrum formed hy a fine prism of flint glass freeof veins when the luminous object was a slit the twentiethof an inch wide and viewed at the distance of 10or 12 feet dire were two fixed dark hnes^ one in diegreen and die other in the blue space. This discoverydid not excite any attention and was not followed out1^ its ingenious author.Without knowing of Dr. Wollaston's observations thelate celebrated M. Fraunhofer of Munich by viewingdutrai^ a telescope die spectrum formed from a narrowline (^ solar light by die finest prisms of flint glasscovered that the surface of the spectrum was crosseddmmg^out its whole length by dark lines of differentfanadths. None of these lines coincide with the boundariesof die coloured spaces. They are nearly 600 ininner : die largest of them subtends an angle of from5'' to 10'^ From their distinctness, and the facilitywith which they may be found, seven of these lines, viz.B, C, D, E, F, G, H, have been particularly distinguishedby M. Fraunhofer. Of these B lies in the red space,near its outer end ; C, which is broad and black, is beyondthe middle of the red; D is in the orange, au \& ^strong doable line, easily seen, the two lines bevtv^ wewV}G 3!, and separated b; a bright one ; End consJBtB of several, the middle oFis 55.being the strongest ; F i» in the blue, and ii a vay ibline ; G ia in the indigo, and H iD the inoM. Be*these lines there are others wbii^ deserve to be not!At A is a well defined dark line within the red ipand halfway; between A and B is a group of teen oreight, forming together a dark band. Between B andthere are 9 linea ; between C vaA D there are 30; betweenD and E there are 64> of difibteni dis. BetveeoiE and b there are 24, at b there are three very sliffiflines, with a fine clear apace between the two widest;between b and F there are 52 ; between F and G 185;and between G and H I90, many being aecmaalatidi^G.These linea are Been with equal distinctness in aptproduced by aU solid and fluid bodies, and, whatever be lbslengths of the spectra and the proportion of their ralonni'spaces, the lines preserve tie same relative position to Aboundaries of the coloured spaces ; and therefore thtproportional distance vary with the nature of the prinby which they are produced. Their number, howstheir order, and their intensity are absolutely invariablyprovided light coming either directly* or indirectly ttaa 'the sun be employed. Similar bands are percaJTedin the light of the planet* and jixei Han, of eviattmtflame, and of the electric spark. The spectra fltini lh«light of Mar* and from that of Tenu* contain tbs line*CHAP. X. ON LINES IN THE SPECTRUM. 8?D^ E, b, and F in the same positions as in sun-light. Inthe spectrum from the light of Sirius, no fixed lines couldbe perceived in the orange and yellow spaces ; but in thegreen there was a very strong streaky and two othercry strong ones in the blue. They had no resemblancehowever to any of the lines in planetary light. The starCaesar gives a spectrum exactly like that of Sirius, thertpoik in. the green being in the very same place. The4eBk8 were also seen in the Uue, but Fraunhofer couldnot ascertain their place. In the spectrum of Posturehere were many weak but fixed lines which looked likeJoie in Venus. It had the line D^ for examples in therain same place as in the light of the planets. In thespectrum of Capella the lines D and b are seen as in thenut's light. The spectrum of Betalgetis contains numerousfixed lines sharply defined and those at D and bue precisely in the same places as in sun-light. It re-Foibles the spectrum of Venus. In the spectrum ofFjtocyon Fraunhofer saw the line D in the orange ; butliioag^ he observed other lines yet he could not determinetheir place with any degree of accuracy. In theipectmm of electric light there is a great number of[mf^t lines. The .spectrum from the light of a lamptnUmnt none of the dark fixed lines seen in the spectrumfrom sun-light; but there is in the orange a bright linewhich is more distinct than the rest of the spectrum. Itis a double line and occurs at the same place where D isfind in the solar spectrum. The spectrum from the^f^t of a flame maintained by the blowpipe containsseveral distinct bright lines.*(69*) One of the most important practical results ofthe discovery of these fixed lines in the solar spectrumis, that they enable us to take the most accurate measuresof the refractive and dispersive powers of bodies and bymeasuring the distances of the lines B^ C, J), &c. Fraudscomputed the table of the indices of refraction ofdiluent substances, given in the Appendix No. III.SeeTAe Edinburgh Journal qf Science ^ No. XV. p.!.G 4^8 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PAI^-^f. ^From the numbers in the table here referred to we-^jurcompute the ratios of the disperse powers of any /*vof the substances by the method abr^y explained in tpreceding chapter.On the Illuminating Power of the Spectrum,(70.) Before the time of M. Fraunhofer the illuminatingpower of the different parts of the spectrum iiibeen given only from a rude estimate. By means of aphotometer he obtained the following results: —The place of maximum illumination he found to be itM,fig. 55., ao situated that D M was about one third orone fourth of D £ ; and therefore this place is at theboundary of the orange and yellow. Calling the illuminatingpower at M^ where it is a maximum 100,then the light of other points will be as follows : —Light at the red extremity 0*0B - - - 3-2C . - - 9-4D - - - 64-0Maximum light at M - 100*0Light at E - - - 48*0Light at F --170G - - S'J.H - - 0-Sfithe violet ei-1 ^^trinitytei-lCalling the intensity of the light in the brightest sptoeD £ 1 00^ Fraunhofer found the light to have the followingintensity in the other spaces:— >-Intensity of light inEFSS'8FGlft5GH S'5Intensity of light in BC - 2-1'• CD 29*9DE 100-0From these results it follows that in the spectrumexamined by Fraunhofer, the most luminous ray isnearer the red than the violet extremity in the proportionof 1 to 3-5, and that the mean ray is almost in themiddle of the blue space. As a great part, however, ofthe violet extremity of the spectrum is not seen underordinary circumstances, these results cannot be appliedto spectra produced under such circumstances.Chap. Z. HEATING RAYS IN THE SPECTRUM. SQOn the Heating Power of the Spectrum.•(71*) It had always been supposed by philosophers thatlie heating power in the spectrum wouki be proportional} the quantity of light; and Landriani^ Rochon, and Sen-sheerfound the yellow to be the warmest of the colouredlines. Dr. Herschel however, proved by a series of ex-momentsthat the heating power gradually increasednn the violet to the red extremity of the spectrum,e found also that the thermometer continued to riselen placed beyond the red end of the spectrum, wheret a single ray of light could be perceived.Hence he drew the important conclusion, that therete invisible rays in the light of the sun which had thewer of producing heat, and which had a less degree offeasibility than red light. Dr. Herschel was desirousascertaining the refrangibility of the extreme invisiblejr which possessed* the power of heating, but he foundis to be impracticable ; and he satisfied himself withtraining that, even at a point 1^ inches distant fromeextreme red ray, the invisible rays exerted a tolerableheating power, even though the thermometerIS placed at the distance of 52 inches from the prism.lliese results were confirmed by sir Henry Englefield,10 (Obtained the following measures : —Temperate.Red - - - 72°Beyond red - - 79Temperature.Hie - - - 5&^Green - - 58Below - - 62When the thermometer was returned from beyond theiinto the red, it fell again to 72°.M. Berard obtained analogous measures; but he foundat the maximum of heat was at the very extremity ofB red rays when the bulb of the thermometer was com-^y covered by them, and that beyond the red space3 heat was only one fifth above that of the ambient air.Sir Humphrey Davy ascribed Berard's results to hising thermometers with circular bulbs, and of too largedze j and he therefore repeated the experiments in Italy90 A Treatise ON OPTICS. FAST H.and at Geneva with very slender thermometers, not morethan one twelfth of an inch in diameter, with very longbulbs filled with air confined by a coloured fluid. TVresult of these experiments was a confirmation of AoKof Dr. Herschel.*M. Seebeck, who has more recently studied this object,has shown that the place of maximum heat in ikspectrum varies with the substance of which the puteis made. The following are his results : —Substance of the Prim. CoUmred»p« ceinwMd i tlwhtliWater - - . . Yellow.Alcohol . Yellow.Oil of turpentine - - Yellow.Sulphuric acid concentrated Orange.Solution of sal-ammoniac - Orange.Solution of corrosive sublimate Orange.Crown glass . Middle of the red.Plate glass - - - Middle of the red.Flint glass . Beyond the red.The observations on alcohol and oil of turpentinewere made by M. Wunsch.On the Chemical Influence of the Spectrum,(72*) It was long ago noticed by the celebrated Scinde,that muriate of silver is rendered much blacker by theviolet than by any of the other rays of the spectrum. In1801, M. Ritter of Jena, while repeating the experimentof Dr. Herschel, found that the muriate of silver believerssoon black beyond the violet extremity of tha qieo-true. It became a little leas blackened in the violetitself, still less in the blue, the blackening growing ktfand less towards the red extremity. When muriate ofsilver a little blackened was used, its colour was partlyrestored when placed in the red space, and still more inthe space of the invisible rays beyond the red. Hencehe concluded that there arc two sets of invisible rays inthe solar spectrum, one on the red side which favouroxygenation, and the other on the violet side whichSee Edinburgh EHru/opad/a, vol. x. ]). 69., where they were sint ptA*lied, ai communicated to mc by sir Humphrey.aOJUtk Z. Chemical Bate. 91favours dis oxygenation. M. Hitter also found thatphosphorus emitted white fumes in the invisible red;vfaile in the invisible violet phosphorus in a state offormation was instantly extinguished.In repeating the experiments with muriate of silverUs Seemed found that its colour varied with the coJnued space in which it was held. In and beyond thetkkt it was reddish brawn ; in the blue, it was bliie orM » m grey; in the yellow, it was white either unciiaiiged or faintly tinged with yellow; and in andbeyond the red it was red. In prisms of flint glass themuriate was decidedly coloured beyond the limits of theplectrum.Without knowing what had been done by HitterDr. Wollaston obtained the very same results respectingthe action of violet light on muriate of silver. In containinghis experiments, he discovered some new chemicaleffects of light upon gum guaiacum. Having dissolvedsome of this gum in alcohol, and washed a card with^ tincture, he exposed it in the different-colouredSfecea of the spectrum without observing any change ofcour. He then took a lens 7 inches in diameter, andhaving covered the central part of it so as to leave onlyA ring of one tenth of an inch at its circumference, heeonld collect the rays of any colour in a focus, the focaldistance being about 24^ inches for yellow light. Thecud washed with guaiacum was then cut in small pieces,iribidi were placed in the different rays concentrated by•tlie lens. In the violet and blue rays it acquired a$rm n colour. In the yellow no effect was produced. InIhe red rays, pieces of the card already made green losttheir green colour, and were restored to their originalhoe. The guaiacum card, when placed in carbonic addftSy could not be rendered green at any distance fromthe lens, but was speedily restored from green to yellowby the. red rays. Dr. Wollaston also found that theback of a heated silver spoon removed the green colouras effectually as the red rays.9^ A TREATISE ON OPTICS. Par D*On the Magnetising Power of the Solar Bay,(73.) Dr. Morichini^ more than twenty years ago^m*bounced that the violet rays of the solar spectrum hadthe power of magnetising small steel needles that woeentirely free of magnetism. This effect was producedhy collecting the violet rays in the focus of a ooiifezlens and carrying the focus of these rays from themiddle of one half of the needle to the extremities ofthat half, without touching the other half. When dmoperation had been performed for an hour the needlehad acquired perfect polarity. MM. Carpi and Ridolirepeated this experiment with perfect success ; and Dr.Morichini magnetised several needles in the presenceof sir H. Davy, professor Playfair^ and other Eng^philosophers. M. Berard at Montpelier M. NombreFirma at Alas, and professor Configliachi at Pavii,having failed in producing the same effects a don't writhescast over the accuracy of preceding researches.A few years ago Dr. Morichini's experiment was enteredto credit hy some ingenious experiments hy Min.Somerville. Having covered with paper half of tsewing needle about an inch long, and devoid of magnetism,and exposed the other half uncovered to theviolet rays, the needle acquired magnetism in about twohours, the exposed end exhibiting north polarity. The;indigo rays produced nearly the same effect and the!blue and green produced it in ai less degree. When theneedle was exposed to the yellow, orange red or calorificrays beyond the red, it did not receive the slightestmagnetism, although the exposures lasted for three daysPieces of clock and watch springs gave similar results ;and when the violet ray was concentrated with a lensthe needles, &c., were magnetised in a shorter time.The same effects were produced hy exposing the needleshalf covered with paper to the sun's rays transmittedthrough glass coloured 6/^6 with cobalt. Green reproducedthe same effect. The light of the sun transZ. Magnetic RATS. submittedthrough blue and green riband produced thesame effect as through coloured glass. When the needlesthus covered had hung a day in the sun's rays behind apane of glass their exposed ends were north poles asfinely.In repeating Mrs. Somerville's experiments M. Baum-partnerof Vienna discovered that a steel wire someparts of which were polished while the rest were withoutlustre became magnetic by exposure to the whitefight of the sun; a north pole appearing at each polishedpart, and a south pole at each unpolished part. TheeSBbct was hastened by concentrating the solar rays uponthe steel wire. In this way he obtained 8 poles on awife eight inches long. He was not able to magnetiseneedles perfectly oxidated^ or perfectly polished orhaving polished lines in the direction of their lengths.■ About the same time Mr. Christie of Woolwich founddut when a magnetised needle or a needle of copper org^bss^ vibrated by the force of torsion in the white lightof the sun the arch of vibration was more rapidlydiminished in the sun's light than in the shade. Theeffect was greatest on the magnetised needle. Hence heconcludes that the compound solar rays possess a veryiensthle magnetic influence.These results have received a very remarkable confirmationfrom the experiments of M. Barlocci and M.Zantedeschi. Professor Barlocci found that an armednatural loadstone which could carry 1^ Roman poundshad its power nearly doubled by twenty-four hours' exposureto the strong light of the sun. M. Zantedeschi£nd that an artificial horse-shoe loadstone which carried13^ oz.^ carried 3^ more by three days' exposureand at last supported 31 oz.^ by continuing it in theson's light. He founds that while the strength increasedin oxidated magnets it diminished in those which werenot oxidated^ the diminution becoming insensible whenthe loadstone was highly polished. He now concentratedthe solar rays upon the loadstone by means of alens; and he found thsit, both in oxidated and po^i^Evedi94 A TBBATm OK OFTIOI. part ILvuLgnets^ they acquire strength when their north pde isexposed to the sun's rays and lose strength when thssouth pole is exposed. He found likewise that thsaugmentation in the first case exceeded the diminutionin the second. M. Zantedeschi repeated the experimentof Mr. Christie on needles vibrating in the son's Uffiiiand he found that by exposing the north pole of •needle a foot long the semi-amplitude of the lastnation was 6° less than the first; while bythe south pole the last oscillation became greater dmthe first. M. Zantedeschi admits that he often encounteredinexplicable anomalies in these experiments.*Decisive as these results seem to be in £favour of Aemagnetising power both of violet and white light, yet Iseries of apparently very well conducted experimenthave been lately published by MM. Ries and Moeer|,which cast a doubt over the researches of preceding philosophers.In these experiments they examined Aenumber of oscillations formed in a given time b^finand after the needle was submitted to the influence ofthe violet rays. A focus of violet light concentrated bya lens 1*2 inches in diameter, and 2*3 inches in focallength, was made to traverse one half of the needle 900times; and though this experiment was repeated indifferentneedles at different seasons of the year, anddifferent hours of the day, yet the duration of a givennumber of oscillations was almost exactly the same afteras before the experiment Their attempts to verify theresults of Baumgartner were equally fruitless; and theytherefore consider themselves as entitled to refect totoBga discovery, which for seventeen years has at d\fferefUtimes disturbed science, " The small variations," theyobserve, ^' which are found in some of our experiments,cannot constitute a real action of the nature of that whichWas observed by MM. Morichini, Baumgartner^ &c, iftso clear and decided a manner."• Edinburgh Journal qf Science, New Series No. V., a 7Bl+ Id.No,lV. p.225.INFUEnOir OF LIGHT.CHAP. XI.mr THE INFLEXION OB DIFFRACTION OF LIGHT.(74<.) Having thus described the changes which light experienceswhen refracted by the surfaces of transparentbodies, and the properties which it exhibits when thusdecomposed into its cements we shall now proceed toooiurider the phenomena which it presents when passingnear the edges of bodies. This branch of optics is calledthe injection or the diffraction of light.This curious property of licht was first described byGihnaldi in 1665, and afterwards by Newton ; but it isto the late M. Fresnel that we are indebted for a mostsuccessful and able investigation of the phenomena.In order to observe the action of bodies upon thehest which passes near them, let a lens L L, of veryshort focus, ^.56., be fixed in the window-shutter, M N,Fig, 56.of a dark room; and let RLL be abeam of the sun's list,transmitted dmmgh the lens. This light will be collectedinto a focus at F, from which it will diverge inlines FC, FD, forming a circular image of light on theopposite wall. If a small hole, about the fortieth of aninch in diameter, had been fixed in the window-shutterin place of the lens, nearly the same' divergent beam ofli(^t would have been obtained. The shadows of allg6 A TREATISE ON Optics. FABT ILbodies whatever held in this light will be found to besurrounded with three fringes of the following cdooii^reckoning from the shadow : —First fringe, — Violet, indigo, pale blue, green, ydIoW|red.Second fringe. — Blue, yellow, red.Third fringe, — Pale blue, pale yellow, pale red.In order to examine these fringes, we may either reodiethem on a smooth white surface as Newton did, oradopt the method of Fresnd, who looked at them wista magnifying glass, in the same manner as if they haibeen an image formed by a lens. This last method iidecidedly the best, as it enables the observer to metsmfthe fringes, and ascertain the changes which they undergounder different circumstances.Let a body B be now placed at the distance B FfkoBthe focus, and let its shadow be received on the saccn€ D, at a fixed distance from the body B, and the followingphenomena will be observed : —1. whatever be the nature of the body B with regardto its density or refractive power, whether it isplatina or the pith of a rush, whether it is abashed orchromate of lead the fringes surrounding its shadow willbe the very same in magnitude and in colour, and thecolours .will be those given above.2. If the light R L is homogeneous light of diedifferent colours in the spectrum, the fringes will be ofthe same colour as the light R L ; and they will bebroadest in red light, smallest in viokt, and of intermediatesizes in the intermediate colours.3. The body B continuing fixed, let us either bringthe screen CD nearer to B, or bring the lens withwhich we view the fringes nearer to B, so as to seethem at different distances behind B. It will be foundthat they grow less and less as they approach the edgeof B, from which they take their rise. But if wemeasure the distances of any one fringe from the shadowat different distances behind B, we shall find that theline joining the same point of the fringe is not a strainsliar. XL, sermon op Ltwrr. 97Fee, but a hyperbola whose vertex is at the edge of theMj; 80 that the same fringe is not formed by the sameiig^ at all distances from the body but resembles aomtie curve formed by the intersection of differentUJ8. This curious fftct we have endeavoured to retreatin the figure by the hyperbolic curves joining thetight of the body B and the fringes which are shown byNamed Hues.4. Hitherto we have supposed that B has been held attbt some distance from F ; but let it now be broughttr bj much nearer F^ and let the screen C D be broughttoed, 80 that agis equal BG. In this new positionlAere nothing has been changed but the distance fromV,the fringes will be found greatly increased in breadth,their relative distances from each other and from the■laigin of the shadow remaining the same. The in-fkmaee of distance from the radiant point F on the sizeof file fringes, or on the quantity of inflexion, is shownin the following results obtained by M. Fresnel : —Dbtuee of the faafleetindbody B behind the radiantpetit F.IMttnoe B G or A; behindthe body B or b,where tibe inflexionwas measured.Angular inflexion oftie red rays of thefirst fringe.4 inches.20 feet.39 inches.12' 6"3 55When we consider that the fringes are largest in red,and smallest in violet list, it is easy to understand theerase of their colours in white light; for the colours seenIn this case arise from the superposition of fringes of alltte seven colours ; that is, if the eye could receive all theseven differently coloured fringes at once, these colourswould form by their mixture the actual colours in thefringes seen by white light* Hence we see why thecolour of the first fringe is violet near the shadow, andred at a greater distance ; and why the blending of thecolours beyond the third fringe forms white light, insteadof exhibiting themselves in separate tints.Upon measuring the proportional breadths of thefringes with great care, Newton found that they were astte numbers 1, V^, ^^, ^\, and their inttervals iiiflie same proportion.98 A TBBATm OS OVTIOi. ''^^* %.Besides the external fringes which surnrand aU bixfia^Grimaldi discovered within the shadows of long uinarrow bodies a number of parallel streaks or firingrifalternately light and dark. Their number grew smaflHT:as the body tapered ; and Dr. Young remarked that Ai.central line was always white so that there must almabe an odd number of white stripes and an even numberof dark ones. At the angular termination of bodiesthese fringes widen and become convex to the centniwhite line; and when the termination is rectangular;what are called the crested fringes of Grimaldi are pv»«duce.The phenomena exhibited by substituting apertmciof various forms in place of the body B are ytrj interesting.When the aperture is circular, such as thUformed in a piece of lead with a small pin, and whin tlens is placed behind it so as' to view the shadow at differentdistances the aperture will be seen surroundedwith distinct rings, which contract and dilate, and changetheir tints in the most beautiful manner. When theaperture is one thirtieth of an inch, its distance F B fromthe luminous point 6 feet 6 inches, and its distancefrom the focus of the eye lens, or B 6, 24 inches, thefollowing series of rings was observed : —List order. White, yellow, orange, dull red.2d order. Violet, blue, whitish, greenish yellow,yellow, bright orange.3d order. Purple, indigo blue, greenish blue, biig^green, yellow green, red.4th order. Bluish green, bluish white, faint red.6th order. Very faint green, very faint red.7 th order. A trace of green and red.When the aperture B is brought nearer to the eyelens whose focus is supposed to be at G, the central whitespot grows less and less till it vanishes, the rings grayduly closing in upon it, and the centre assuming insuccession the most brilliant tints. The following werethe tints observed by Mr. Herschel ; the distance betweenthe radiant point F and the focus G of the eye lentCHAP. XI.INFLEXION OF LIOHT.XjnnainiDg constant and the aperture supposed to be atBj being gradually brought nearer to G : —B24 in.?«13*59-259*108-758-368-O07'757-006-636<X)5-855-505-004-754«504-00S«853-50Cdemtifbmcmtaltpot.White.White.Yellow.Intense orange.Deep orange red.Brilliant blood red.Deep crimson red.Deep purple.Very sombre violetIntense indigo blue.Pure deep blue.Sky blue.Bluish white.Very pale blue.Greenish white.Yellow.Orange yellow.Scarlet.Red.Blue.Dark blue.{Character of the rfnga which tunoaiidthe oentnl spot.Rings as described above.Two first rings confused. Redof Sd, and green of 4th order,splendid.Inner rings diluted. Red andgreen of the outer rings good.AU the rings much diluted.Rings all very dilute.Rings all very dilute.Rings all very dilute.Rings all very dilute.A broad yellow ring.A pale yellow ring.A rich yellow.A ring of orange, with a sombrespace.Orange, red, with a pale yellowspace.A crimson red ring.Purple, vtdth orange yellow.Blue, orange.Bright blue, orange red, paleyellow, white.Pale yellow, violet, pale yellow,white.White, indigo, dull orange, white.White, yellow, blue, dull red.Orange, light blue, violet, dullorange.When two small apertures are used instead of oneand the rings examined by the eye lens as before twosystems of rings will be seen, one round each centre; but,besides the rings, there is another set of fringes which,"When the apertures are equal, are parallel rectilinealfringes equidistant from the two centres, and perpendicularto the line joining these centres. Two other setsof parallel rectilineal fringes diverge in the form of aSt. Andrew's cross from the middle point between \5ev^n 2100 A Treating ON OPTICS. PAMtlLtwo centres and forming equal angles between the Ibidset of parallel fringes. If the aperture axe imeqnal^i^two systems of rings are unequal and the first set dparallel fringes become hyperbolas concave towards thesmaller system of rings and having the aperture in dMVcommon focus.*The finest experiments on this aulgect axe those dFramihofer; but a proper view of them would leqidRmore space than we can spare, fCHAP. XII.ON THE COLOURS OF THIN FLATU.(75.) When light is either reflected from the mifiMiof transparent bodies or transmitted through portionedthem with parallel surfaces it is invariably white, fat ilthe different thicknesses of such bodies as we are in Abhabit of seeing. The thinnest films of blown glass, aidthe thinnest films of mica generally met with, will bothreflect and transmit white light If we diminish however,the thickness of these two bodies to a certain degreeswe shall find that instead of giving white liby reflexion and transmission the light is in both 00*coloured.Mr. Boyle seems first to have observed that ^bubbles of the essential oils, spirit of wine, tnrpentfai^and soap and water, exhibited beautiful colour; and 1*succeeded in blowing glass so thin as to show the stfi^tints. Lord Bretton had observed the colours of dtfthin oxidated films which the action of the weather producesupon glass ; and Dr. Hooke obtained filial i>equally thin that they exhibited over their whole mitethe same brilliant colour. Such pieces of mica may ^produced at the edges of plates quickly detached from 1Herald's Treated <m UgM, S735. ^ , ^, «,f See £dinlmrgh £iiq;clopiedio,«\-\n«Q»,N<*.To(.,^»aChap* im. GOUOUBS <KF Ibid PLATES. 101bat they nuit be more readily obtained by stickingone side of a plate of mica to a piece of sealing-waxylivid tearing it away with a sudden jerk. Some thin films will then be left on the wax whichjpfll exhibit &e liveliest cours by reflected light. Ifwe would produce a film of mica with only one tenthCof the thickness of that which produced a brightcolour this film would reflect no light at all andwould appear black if viewed by reflexion against a blackbody. But thou no such film has ever been obtainedor is likely to be obtained by any means with which weere acquainted, yet accent on one occasion producedsolid fibres as thin, and actually incapable of reflectinglig^L This y^ remarkable fact occurred in a crystalof quartz of a smoky colour, which was broken in two.The two surfaces of fracture were absolutely black; anddie blackness appeared, at first sight, to be owing to aJdn film of opaque matter which had insinuated itselfiBfto the crevice. This opinion, however, was untenable,m every part of the siu^ace was black, and the twoIkalres of the crystals could not have stuck together haddie crevice extended across the whole section. Upon ex-morningthis specimen with care, I found that the sur-ittwas perfectly transparent by transmitted light, andThat die blackness of the surfaces arose from their beingOBtirdy composed of a fine down of quartz, or of shortnd wonder filaments, whose diameter was so exceed-smallthat they were incapable of reflecting aray of the strongest light. The diameter of thesewas so small, that, from principles which We shallitaly explain, die could not exceed the one third ofthe millicmlh part of an inch. This curious specimen isill the cabinet of her grace the duchess of Gordon Ihowe another small specimen in my own possession; andI have no doubt diat fractures of quartz and otherGenerals will yet be found which shsdl exhibit a finedown of different colours depending on their size.The colours thus produced by thinness, and hence• See Eh An rgh Journal qfSciencCt Na I., p. 10&.h5102 A Treatise ON Optical. Pailcalled the colours of thin plates, are best observed influid bodies of a viscous nature. If we blow a soapbubble and cover it with a dear glass to protect it ironcurrents of air we shall observe after it has grown thinby standing a little a great many concentric-colonyrings round the top of it The colour in the centre tfthe rings will vary with the thickness; bat as Aebubble grows thinner the rings will dilate, the oenlnlspot will become white, idea Bluish, and then hk/k,after which the bubble will burst, from itsthinness at the place of the black spot. Thechange of colour with the thickness may be seen byplacing a thick film of an evaporable fluid upon a demplate of glass, and watching the effects of the diminatkmof thickness which take place in the course of efip<Hration.The method used by sir Isaac Newton for produdaga thin plate of air, the colours of which he intended toinvestigate, is shown in fig, 57; where L L is a plano-fig.57.convex lens, the radius of whose convex txahet it14 feet, and //a double convex lens, whose confesssurfaces have a radius of 50 feet sadi. The playside of the lens L L was placed downwards, so as torest upon one of the surfaces of the lens / /. Thwlenses obvious touch at their middle pints ; and ifthe upper one is dolly pressed against the Hndtfone, lliere will be seen round the point of contact asystem of circular coloured rings, extending wider andwider as the pressure is increased. In order to yyiwingthese rings under different trees of pressure, and whenthe lenses L L, / / are at different distances, three pavof damp screws, p,p,Py should be employed, as down infig, 58., by turning which we may produce a regabsand equal pressure at the point of contactChap. XU. Colour OF This PISTES. 103When ire look at these rings through the upper lens,O u to see those fanned by the light reeled Tom the^«- SS. pate of kii between the lenses, ireofaserre tenn rings, or mitherseven circular spectra or orders ofcolour, as described by Newton intwo first continue of the followingTable; the colours beg> very distinct in the three firstspectra, but growing more andDMxe diluted in the others, till they almost entirely disappearin the seventh spectrum.When we view the plate of air by looking thnnigfate under leas / / from below, we observe another set ofringa or spectra formed in the transmitted light. Onlyfive of these transmitted rings are distinctly seen, andtheir odours, as observed by Newton, are given in thethird cdumn of the following Table ; but they areBeach more faint than those seen by reflexion. Bycomparing the colours seen by reflexion with those seenby transmission, it will be observed that the colourtransmitted is always complementary to the one refleeted, or which, when mixed with it, would makewhile light.sub ifihe Cbhun of TUn Plata ^Jir, Water, and Gbui-'^^^l^^Trs?;s'£.'^,s^"'"1BlackWhitejliSpecific,or Osier ofColours.BlueWhileYellowOr,neeYellowish redBIsckVioletBlueSB6|IffSSA TBBATUB OK Omit."'■sasi;sr;''■^■■^^i-:^',tt^i:^^ rf'J'^""""]SlCOBDSpectrum,or Order of'Colours.ThirdSpe«n.m,or Order ofColours.FOUHHSpectrum,or Order ofColour,.Fifth "Spectrum,or Order ofColiiura.Sixth 'Spectrum,or Order ofSeyihth ■Spectrum,orOrdflrfColours.Wf.ileBelowRcAVioletBlue "if1.H:iGreenYellowOrangeBright redScarletPuT.leJlluTGreenYellowRedBluish redGreenYellowBluish greenif1**itYJ.0.1.U1RedBluish green35J40'letas)S3JR*<1RedS4JS9]Crccnihh 1blue JRedsa:<«1GreenishRuddyshireSmythepreceding colours are those which are Been whenlight is reflected and transmitted nearly perpeiidiciilari;>;but Bjr Isaac Newton found chat when the light wasreflected and transmitted obliquely, the rings increasedin size, the same colour requiring a greater thickoeig to^ffoduce it The colour of any film, theretbte, win de-todto a colour lower in', or nearer the beginning of,C Kale, when it is seen obliquely.aup. xn. oauoxmt of twat ^.i^tes. 1<UBab toe die gesenl pbeooraena of the coloured ringken leer by uiAtte light. When we place the lent inbMBOgtoeon* light, or mtlce the difl^roit colin of the^br qtectrom pass Id BuceeiEian oya the leOKs, the rings,mUeh are always of the same oolonr as the light, will lieftnnd to be largest in red tight, and to contract gradesu the; are seen io all the succeeding colours, tillAis reach their Bravest lise in the vices ray a. Upon■BMUiing their diameters, Newly found them to hareAe fidlow^ig ratio in the difierrat coIoucb at their boimd-tbux white light is composed of all the preceding cohams, the rings seen by it trill const of all the seendUfavntly coloured system of rings superposed as itwne, and forming, by their union, the different coloursla the Tate. In idler to explain this we have constructedthe annexed diagram, fig. son the that each ring or spectrum has the lame breadthFig. 59.in hcHDOgeiieous light which they actually have whenthey ais formed between surfaces nearly Bat, or whenlie thickness of the plate varies with the distance from4k point *rf Wffltact.* Let us then suppose that we> lUt nqiwiftJoi, K mid, jQ g^rie, lo „„p]i(j the dlmftOEL106* A Treatise ON OPTIOB. PART ILform such a system of rings with the seen coloun ofthe spectrum and that a sector is cut out of each systbn^and placed as in the figure round the same centre C.Let the angle of the red sector be 50^, of the orange30^, the yellow 40^ the green 60^, the blue 60', theindigo 40', and the violet 80^ being S60^ in all, so nto complete the circle. From the centre C set off thefirst, second, and third rings in all the sectors, withradii corresponding to the values in the preceding smitTable. Thus, since the proportional diameters of theextreme red and the extreme orange are 1 and 0^4^the middle of the red will be in the middle betweenthese numbers, or 0*962; and consequently the proportionaldiameter, or the radius of the first red ring ftrthe middle of the red space R, will be 0*924. In likemanner, the radius for die orange will be 0*904, for theyellow 0*855, for the green 0*794, for the blue 0*737,for the indigo 0*696, and for the violet 0*655. Let dwred rings be coloured red as they appear in the experiment,the orange rings orange, and so on, each cokxirresembling that of the spectrum as nearly as possible.If we now suppose all these coloured sectors to revdferapidly round C as a centre, the effect of them all thusmixed should be the production of the coloured rings nseen by white light. As the diameter of each ring variesfrom the beginning of the red space to the end of it,and so on with all the colours, the portion of the ringin each sector should be part of a spiral, and all theseseparate parts should unite in forming a single spiral, thered forming the commencement, and the violet thetermination of the spiral for each ring.This diagram enables us to ascertain the oppositionof any of the rings seen in white light. Let it be required,for example, to determine the colour of the ring atdie distance C m from the centre, m being in the middleof the second red ring. Round C as a centre, and with theradius C m, describe a circle, mop, and it will be seenfrom the different colours through which it passes whatis its composition. It ^asaea nearly through the veryObit. XU. OOLOUBS OF THIN PLATES. lOjbrightest * part of the second red ring at m, and througha pretty bright part of the orange. It passes nearlytfaroiigfa the bright part of the yellow at n ; throughdie brightest part of the green ; through a less brightpart of the blue ; through a dark part of the indigo atp; and through the darkest part of the third violet ringIf we knew the exact law according to which thehostess of any fringe varied from its darkest to itsivi^test pointy it would thus be easy to ascertain with accuracythe number of rays of each colour which enteredinto die composition of any of the rings seen by whiteIn order to determine the thickness of the plate of airby which each colour was produced Newton found thesquare of the diameters of the brightest parts of each tobe in the arithmetical progression of the odd numbersh S> ^i 7f 9^ &<^'9 Aid the squares of the diameters ofthe obscurest parts in the arithmetical progression ofthe even numbers 2, 4^ 6, S, 10 ; and as one of thepasses was plane and the other spherical their intervals1^ these rings must be in the same progression. He thenmeasured the diameter of the fifth dark ring and foundffaat the thickness of the air at the darkest part of thewiBtanr dark ring, made by perpendicular rays was the79>Wff P^"^ ^^ ^^ ^^' ^® ^^^ multiplied this by the progression 1,3,5, 7, 9> &c.^ and 2, 4^ 6, 8,•10, and obtained the following results : —ThlckncH of the air at the ThlckneMof theairattheOKMt luminous part.most obscure part.Multa Ring"175005- Trims or isJ^SiooKD RingTp&saTTBimThud Ring1TB«QoT75.5OTFourth RingTTmISOTnjmWhen Newton admitted water between the lenses hefind the colours to become fainter and the ringssmaller ; and upon measuring the thicknesses of waterat which the same rings were produced he found them-to be nearly as the index of refraction for air is to the• In tbeagun^ the fariigiitett part b the mcwt ihad«au108 A Treats ON Option. PABaf l|*index of refraction for water that is nearly as I'OOO to1*536. From these data he was named to composethe three last columns of the Table given in pages 103 sod104.^ which show the thicknesses in millionth parts ofan inch at which the colours are produced in plates of mt,water and glass. These columns are of extensive jm,and may be regarded as presenting us with micrometerfor measuring minute thicknesses of transparent faoduiby their colours, when all other methods would be iiapplicable.We have already seen that when the thickness of thefilm of air is about ty^.V^T^dth of an inch, which correspondsto the seventh ring, the colours cease to becomevisible, owing to the union of all the separate ccJoonforming white light; but when the rings are seen inhomogeneous light they appear in much greater numbersa dark and a coloured ring succeeding each other to aconsiderable distance from the point of contact. In thiscase, however, when the rings are formed between objectglasses, the thickness of the plate of air increases sorapidly that the outer rings crowd upon one another,and cease to become visible from this cause. This effectwould obviously not be produced if they were formed hfa solid film whose thinness varied by slow gradation.Upon this principle, Mr. Talbot has pointed out a verybeautiful method of exhibiting these rings with platesof glass and other substances even of a tangible thickness.If we blow a glass ball so thin that it bursts*,and hold any of the fragments in the light of a spiritlamp with a salted wick, or in the light of any of themonochromatic lamps which I have elsewhere described,^ of which discharge a pure homogeneous yellow light,the surface of these films will be seen covered withfringes alternately yellow and black, each fringe markingout by its windings the lines of equal thickness inthe glass film. Where the thickness varies slowly, thefringes will be broad and easily seen ; but where the vanation takes place rapidly, the fringes are crowded toge• Fllmt of nioK antwec tha pupoie ctlll better.soup. sui. offsjoxjua or TtaoK plates. 109ibcr^ to 88 to require 8 microscope to render them viaiblBkIf we suppose any of the films of glass to be only the.dMHuanddi part of an inch thick the rings which it ez«lAits will belong to the 89th order; and if a large roofate of this glass could be got with its thickness descendingto the milUondi part of an inch by slow gradationsAe whole of those 89 rings and probably many moretried be distinctly visible to the eye In order to producesuch eSsctB, the light would require to be perfectlyhomogeneous.The rings seen between the two lenses are equallyfoible whether air or any other gas is used and even.iriien there is no gas at all; for the rings are Visible indie exhausted receiver of an air pump.CHAP. XIII.*0N THE Colours OF THICK Plates.(76.) The colours of thick plates were first observed anddescribed by sir Isaac Newton as produced by concaveglass mirrors. Admitting a beam of solar lights R^ into adark room through an aperture a quarter of an inch indiameter formed in the window shutter M N^ he allowedit to hH upon a glass mirror A B^ a quarter of an inchFig. 60.thick quicksilver behind having its axis in the directionR r, and the radius of the curvature of both itssurfaces being equal to its distance behind the aperture.When a sheet of paper was placed on the widow ^&»XMsl110 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. .' PART AM N> with a hole in it to allow the sun-beam to piohe observed the hole to be surrounded with /mr orjSwcoloured rings with sometimes traces of a sixth md Jseventh. When the paper was held at a greater or aless distance than the centre of its concavity the rin^i ■became more dilute and gradually vanished. The oh >lours of the rings succeeded one another like those in the ,transmitted system in thin plates as given in column Si •ofthe Table in pages 103 and 104. When the light Rwmred the rings were red and so on with the other cdoiii%the rings being largest in red and smallest in violet lig^ :Their diameters preserved the same proportion as thonseen between the object glasses; the squares of the diametersof the most luminous parts (in homogeneouslight) being as the numbers 0^ 2, 4s, 6, &c., and thesquares of the diameters of the darkest parts as theintermediate numbers 1, 3, 5, 7, &c. With ninonof greater thickness the rings grew less and their diametersvaried as the square roots of the thickness of themirror. When the quicksilver was removed the ringsbecame fainter; and when the back surface of the minorwas covered with a mass of oil of turpentine they disappearedaltogether. These facts clearly prove that theposterior surface of the mirror concurs with the anteriorsurface in the production of the rings.When the mirror A B is inclined to the incident beamR r, the rays grow larger and larger as the inclinationincreases and so also does the white round spot ; andnew rings of colour emerge successively out of theircommon centre and the white spot becomes a whitering accompanying them and the incident and reflectedreturns always fall upon the opposite parts of this whitering, illuminating its perimeter like two mock suns inthe opposite parts of an iris. The colours of these newrings were in a contrary order to those of the former.The duke de Charles observed similar rings uponthe surface of the mirror when it was covered with gauzeor muslin, or with a skin of dried skimmed milk ; andair W, Herschel noticed aiva\o^o\]A \\i<&XLQime.\vaL when heOCHbOUm OF THICK PLATES.Illscattered hair powder in the air before a concave mirroron niddi a beam of light was incident, and received theneeded U^t on a screen.(77.) The method which I have found to be the mostample for exhibiting these colours, is to place the eye immediatelybehind a small flame from a minute wick fedwith oil or wax, so that we can examine them even at aperpendicular incidence. The colours of thick platesmay be seen even with a common candle held before theeye at the distance of 1 or 12 feet from a common paneof crown glass in a window that has accumulated a littlefine dust upon its surface, or that has on its surface afine deposition of moisture. Under these circumstancesthey are very bright, though they may be seen even whenthe pane of glass is dean.the colours of thick plates may, however, be best displayed,and their theory best studied, by using two platesof glass of equal thickness. The phenomena thus produced,an which presented themselves to me in 1817>are highly beautiful, and, as Mr. Herschel has shown,are admirably fitted for illustrating the laws of this classof phenomena. In order to obtain plates of exactly thesame thickness, I formed out of the same piece of parallelglass two plates, A B, CD, and having placed betweenthem two pieces of soft wax, I pressed them toFig. 61.the distance of about one tenthof an inch from each other; andby pressing above one piece ofwax more than another, I wasable to give the two plates anysmall inclination I chose. LetA B, C D then be a section ofthe two plates thus inclined atright angles to the commonsection of their surfaces, andlet R S be a ray of light incidentnearly in a vertical directionand proceeding from a candle, or, what is better, from acircular disc of condensed light subtending an aisle of112 A Treatise OH OFTIOI. PABTft99 or 3^. If we place the eye behind the plates, whitherare parallel we shall aee only an image of ibe doocular disc; but when they are indited as in the ilgo^we shall observe in the direction V R several reflaekiimages in a row besides the direct image. The finttfthe brightest of these will be seen crossed with filmor sixteen beautiful fringes or bands of colour. Hithree central ones consist of blackish or whitish stripe;and the exterior ones of brilliant bands of red and grmlist. The direction of these bands is always panUdlithe common section of the inclined plates. Timeooloiired bands increase in breadth by diminishing Alinclination of the plates and diminish by increasing Aiseinclination, ^^en the list of the luminous dieidvobject falls obliquely on the first plate so that the |dsieof incidence is at right angles to the section of the platothe fringes are not distinctly visible across any of tteimages ; but their distinctness is a maximum when tteplane of inddenceis parallel to that section. The reflectedimages of course become more bright and the tints morevivid as the angle of incidence becomes greater ; when theangle of incidence increases from (f to 90^^ the imagestfaathave suffered the greatest number of reflexions are criedby other fringes inclined to them at a small ange. If neconceal the bright light of the first image so as to p9>cave the image formed by a second reflexion within diefirst plate and if we view the image through a smitaperture we shall observe coloured bands across d»first image far surpassing in precision of outline mlrichness of colouring any analogous phenomenon. Whathese fringes were again concealed others were soonthe image immediately behind them and formed byithird reflexion from the interior of the first plate. *If we bring the plate C D a little farther to the ligfaihand and make the ray R S fall first upon the pate OB,and be afterwards reflected back upon die first plate A B»from both the surfaces of C D^ the same coloured bandswill be seen. The progress of the rays through the twodates is shown in the figure.4VAK.XIV. «OIiOVB6 Of Furies. 118te'two plates have the form of concave andlenses and are combined as in the double andti achromatic olgect glass a series of the most splendidsystems of rings are developed ; and these are crossed ^by others of a different kind. I have notyi^-^^^ kisure to publish an account of the numerous made on this curious class of phenomena.in Viewing films of blown glass in homogeneous yelllists and even in common day-lights Mr. Talbothii^ibserved that when two films are placed tc^ether^hrii^t and obscure fringes or coloured Mnges of an irregularlonn^ are produced between them though exhibitedif neither of "them separately.CHAP. XIV.Mr THE COLOURS OF FIBRES AND GROOVED SURFACES.(78.) Wbjsn we look at a candle or any other lu.vinous body through a plate of glass covered withpoor or with dust in a finely divided state it issurrounded with a corona or ring of colours like a halomind die sun or moon. These rings increase withthe size of the particles which produce them; andiimr brilliancy and number depend on the uniformnice of these particles. Minute fibres such as those«f silk and wool produce the same series of ringswtdeh increase with the diameter of the fibres; andhence Dr. Young proposed an instrument called an erio-meier, for measuring the diameters of minute particlesnd fibres by ascertaining the diameter of any one ofsae series of rings which they produce. For this ,he selected the limit of the first red and greenling as the one to be measured. The eriometer i^Ibimed of a piece of card or a plate of brass, li«vm% ^waperture about the Bfdeth of an inch in diaTaet^x XvJ114 A TREATISE ON Optics. . part ILthe centre of a circle about half an inch in diameterand perforated with about eight small holes. The filmor particles to be measured are fixed in a slider and tkeriometer being placed before a strong lights and the eftassisted by a lens applied behind the small hows idlerings of colours will be seen. The slider must then bedrawn out or pushed in till the limit of the red odgreen ring coincides with the circle of perforations andthe index will then show on the scale the size cf teparticles or fibres. The seed of the lycoperdon 60OM9was found by Dr. Wollaston to be the 8500dth partisaninch in diameter ; and as this substance sure liaf^which indicated 3^ on the scale it follows that 1 on thesame scale will be the 29750th part of an inch or the30,000dth part. The following Table contains some ofDr. Young's measurements in thirty-thousandths of toinch : —Milk diluted indistinct - 3 t Shawl wool --19Dust of lycoperdon vista 3^Bullock's blood - - 4|Smut of barley - - 6^Blood of a nuu^ - - 6\Human blood diluted withwater - - - 6Pus - - - - 74Silk - - . - 12Bearers wool - - 13Mole's fur - - - 16Saxon wool • - SSLionezawool - - 25Alpaca wool - - 26Farina of laurentius - 26Ireland Merino wool - 27Merino South Down - 28Seed of lycopodium - - S8South Down ewe - - S9Coarse wool - - 46Ditto from some worsted 60(79«) By observing the colours produced by reflexionfrom the fibres which compose the crystalline lenses of theeyes of fishes and other animals I have been able to tracethese fibres to their origin and to determine the numberof poles or septa to which they are related. The samemode of observation and the measurement of the distanceof the first coloured image from the white image)has enabled me to determine the diameters of the fiteSjand to prove that they all taper like needles Himini^ii^gradually from the equator to the poles of the len aoas to allow them to pack into a spherical superficies tfthey converge to thei power 01 i^\Tkt& of orion. Thesecoloured im^es^ produced \y^ \5afc ®at«^ ^i ^t&^ssA^^s^CHAP. Ziy. COLOURS OF Mother-of-pearl. 115in a line perpendicular to the direction of the fibres,and hy taldng an impression on wax from an induratedlens the colours are communicated to the wax. In■ tevenl lenses I observed coloured images at a great dis.canoe from the common image but lying in a direction.coincident with that of the fibres ; and from this I in.ferrets that the fibres were crossed by joints or lineswhose distance was so small as the ll^OOOdth part of aninch ; and I have lately founds by the use of very powerfulmicroscopes that each fibre has in this case teethMke those of a rack of extreme minuteness the coloursbeing produced by the lines which form the sides ofeach tooth.(80.) . In the same class of phenomena we mustrank the principal colours of mother-of-pearl. Thissubstance obtained from the shell of the pearl oyster hasbeen long employed in the arts and the fine play of itscolours is therefore well known. In order to observeits colours take a plate of regularly formed with its surfaces nearly parallel and grind thesesurfaces upon a hone or upon a plate of glass with thepowder of schists till the image of a candle reflectedfrom the surfaces is of a dull reddish white colour. Ifwe now place the eye near the plate and look at thisreflected image C^ we shall see on one side of it a pris-fig.62.MA C Bstatic image A^ glowing with all the colours of therainbow and forming indeed a spectrum of the candle asdistinct as if it had been formed by an equilateral prismof flint glass. The blue side of this image is next theimage C, and the distance of the red part of the imageis in one specimen 7^ 22^; but this angle varies even infile same specimen. Upon first looking into the xaoiiSofix-I 2Il A TREATISE ON OPTIOB. Pax ILof.pcarl^ the image A may be above or blow C^ or teany side of it ; but by turning the specimen rounds itmay be brought either to the right «r left hand of CThe distance A C is smallest when the hffbt of tecandle falls nearly perpendicular on the snrfaoe^ and ikcreases as the inclination of the incident ray is IncraHd.In one specimen it was 2^ 7' 9X nearly a perpendicularincidence and 9^ 14' at a very great obliquity.On the outside of the image A There is inrariafalfbeen a mass M^ of coloured lights whose distance Misnearly double A C. These three images are alw^vnearly in a straight line but the angular distance of Mvaries with the angle of incidence according to a kwdifferent from that of A. At great angles of incidencethe nebulous mass is of a beautiful crimson odour; Uan angle of about 37^ it becomes green ; and nearer ifeperpendicular it becomes yeUovdsh-white, and very kkminous.If we now polish the surface of the mother-of-peiilthe ordinary image C will become brighter and idlewhite but a second prismatic image, "B, wil Hart vpon the other side of C, and at the same chance from iLThis second image has in all other respects die tuneproperties as the first. Its brightness increases with ^polish of the surface till it is nearly equal to that of A,the lustre of which is slightly impaired by polishing.This second image is never accompanied like the fintjwith a nebulous mass M. If we remove the pdiih,the image B vanishes and A resumes its brilHaney.The lustre of the nebulous mass M is improved ifpolishing.If we repeat these experiments on the opposite sideof the specimen the very same phenomena will be observedwith this difference only that the images A andM are on the opposite side of C.In looking through the mother-of-pearl^ when gnnmiiextremely thin nearly the same phenomena will be observed.The colours and the distances of the imagestore the same ; but the nebulous mass M is never hobbytransmission. When the Second image B^ is .coLOiOM of mother-of-pearl. .117Tinge by inflexion. k is exceedingly bright when seenif tnnsmiisioQy and once verge.In making these experiments I had occasion to fixAe mother.o£.pearl to a goniometer with a cement of!■» and bees' wax ; and upon removing it I was sus.friend tx see the whole surface of the wax shining withAe granitic colours of the mother-of-pearl. I at firstttBO^^t that a small fin of the substance had been leftVfoa the wax; but this was soon found to be a mistake,mA it became manifest that the mother-of-pearl reallykyiiHMed upon the cement its own power of producingikt coloured spectra. When the unpolished mother-o£.fmi was impressed on the wax the wax gave only onetags, A ; and when the polished surface was used itgne both A and B : but the nebulous image M was.UBwe* exhibited by the wax. The images seen in the«BL axe always on the opposite side of C, from whatdie ore in the surface that is impressed upon it.The colours of mother-of-pearl^ as communicated to anft gur£su», may be best seen by using black wax ; butI base transferred them also to balsam of Tolu realgarIhe fiuiUe metal and to dean surfaces of lead and tinbjr hard pressure or the blow of a hammer. A solutiona£ gnm arable or of isinglass when allowed to indurateUnion a surface of mother-of-pearly takes a most perfectbipreaaion from it and exhibits all the communicablecolour in the finest manner when seen either by re-flexion or transmission. By placing the isinglass betweentwo finely polished surfaces of good specimensflC mother-of-pearl^ we shall obtain a film of artificialmother-of-pearl which when seen by single lights suchas that of a candle or by an aperture in the windowwill shine with the brightest hues.Ifs in this experiment we could make the grooves ofU^ one surface of mother-of-pearl exactly parallel tothe grooves in the other as in the shell itself, the imagesA and B^ formed hy each surface would coincide andbody two would be observed by transmission and re-iflsdon : but as this cannot be done four images areI 3118 A TREATISE ON Optics. Past D*seen through the isinglass film and also four hj n-flexion ; the two new ones being fanned by leflezioDfrom the second surface of the film.From these experiments it is obvious that the ooknuiunder our consideration are produced by a particularconfiguration of surface, which, like a seal, can convey *reverse impression of itself to any substance capable ofreceiving it By examining this surface with niicrosoope%I discovered in almost every specimen a grooved structure,like the delicate texture of the skin at the top of aainfant's finger, or like the section of the annual growthof wood, as seen upon a dressed plank of fir. Thtmay sometimes be seen by the naked eye, but they areoften so minute that 8000 of them are contained in aninch. The direction of the grooves is always at nofjutangles to the line MAC B,flg, 62,; and hence in irregularlyformed mother-of-pearl, where the grooves are oftencircular, and having every possible direction, the ouloured images A, B are irregularly scattered round thecommon image C. If the grooves were, according,circular, the series of prismatic imi^s, A B, w«ddform a prismatic ring round C, provided the groovesretained the same distance. The general distance of thegrooves is from the 200th to the 5000th of an inch,and the distance of the prismatic images from C increasesas the grooves become closer. In a speeunenwith 2500 in an inch, the distance A C was 39 41' ;and in a specimen of about 5000 it was about 7° 22^*These grooves are obviously the sections of all theconcentric strata of the shell. When we use the actualsurface of any stratum, none of the colours A, B areseen, and we observe only the mass of nebulous lipsM occupying the place of the principal image C.Hence we see the reason why the pearl gives none ofthe images A, B, why it communicates none of itscolours to wax, and why it shines with that delicatewhite light which gives it all its value. The pearl iaformed of concentric spherical strata, round a centralnucleus, which sir Everard Home conceives to be one ofthe ova. of the fish, sone oi Xh<& ^<s& of its strata areOUF.Xiy. OQLOVIM OF Mother-of-pearl. 119fiiibfe^ and as the strata have parallel surfaces the massof light M is reflected exactly Uke the image C^ andoccupies its place ; whereas in the mother-of-pearl it isinflected from surfaces of the strata inclined to the ge-didsurface of the specimen which reflects the imageC. The mixture of all these diffuse masses of nebulousflg^ of a pink and green hue constitutes the beautifulnote of the pearls. In bad pearls where the coloursve too blue or too pink one or other of these coloursiras predominated. If we make an oblique section of apearl, so as to exhibit a sufficient number of concentricsbatay with their edges tolerably dose, we should observeaU the communicable colours of mother-of-pearl.*These phenomena may be observed in many otherbells besides that of the pearl oyster ; and in everycue we may distinguish communicable from incommunicablecolours, by placing a film of fluid or cementbetween the surface and a plate of glass. The communicablecolours will all disappear from the filling up ofthe grooves, and the incommunicable colours will berendered more brilliant.(81.) Mr. Herschel has discovered in very thin platesof. mother-of-pearl another pair of nebulous prismaticimages, more distant from C than A. and B, and also apair of hunter nebulous images, the line joining whichis always at right angles to the line joining the firstpair.-|> These images are seen by looking through athin piece of mother-of-pearl, cut parallel to the naturalsurface of the shell, and between the 70th and the 300dthof an inch thick. They are much larger than A and B;and Mr. Herschel found that the line joining them wasalways perpendicular to a veined structure which goesthrough its substance. The distance of the red part ofthe image from C was found to be l6° 29^ and theveins which produced these colours were so small that^00 of them were contained in an inch. We haverepresented them in fig. 63, as crossing the ordinary• See Ediitimrgh JounuUqf Science, Na Nil, p. 277.f In a specimen now before us. the line joining the two faintest nebulousimages is at right angles to the line joining A and B.I 4190 A TBBATICB ON OPTKK FAST lbgrooves which give ^te communicable calann. Mr.Reached described there ai ennsisg these grooves wildangles, " giving the whole Surface n)a(^ the appeuwee'ftf t piece of twilled oik, or the larger waves of Uw dirtFig 63The second pair rfnebulous images seen bj traaBminion must arise booa veined Btnictuie exactly perpendicular to the tut,though the stricture has not yet been recognised by dnmicroscope. The structure which produces the l^htMtpair Mr. Herschel has found to be in all cases coinsdent with the plane passing through the cmtrea of dfetwo systems of polarised rings.The principle of the production of odour by groovedsurfaces, and of the comnianicability of these colours bypressure to various substances, has been happily appliedto the arts by John Barton, esq. By roesns of a d^cate engine, operating by a screw of the most accountworkmanship, he has succeeded in cutting grottoupon steel at the distance of from the 2000th to theIO,0O0th of an inch. These Unes are cut vrith thepoint of a diamond ; and such is their perfect paraJMiraand the unifiinnity of their distance, that while in mother'of.pearl we see only one prismatic image. A, on sadiside of the common image, C, of the candle, in tlwgrooved steel Surfaces 6, 7i ot ^ ^tnscaVnK. \maf^ n*OBAP. any. colours of rooted surf ages. 121Ken, coBristiilg of spectra as perfect as those pro.dttoed by the finest prisms. Nothing in nature or inaft oasis iiupaft' this Inilllant display of colours; andMr. Barton conceived the idea of forming buttons forgentlemen's dress and articles of female ornamentcovered with grooves beautlMly arranged in patternsand shining in the light of candles or lungs with all thehues of the prism. To these he gave the appropriate nameof /m ornaments. In forming the buttons the patternswere drawn on steel dies and these when dulyhardened were used to stamp their impressions uponpolished buttons of brass. In daylight the colours onthese buttons are not easily distinguished unless whenthe surface reflects the margin of a dark object seenagainst a light one ; but in the light of the sun and thatof gas-flame or candles these colours are scarcely if atall surpassed by the brilliant flashes of the diamond.The grooves thus made upon steel are of course alltransferable to wax, isinglass, tin, lead, and other substances;and by indurating thin transparent films ofisinglass between two of these grooved surfaces, coveredwith lines lying in all directions, we obtain a plate whichproduces by transmission the most extraordinary displayof prismatic spectra that has ever been exhibited.(82.) In examining the phenomena produced by someof the finest specimens of Mr. Barton's skill, which hehad the kindness to execute for this purpose, I have beenled to the observation of several curious properties oflight In mother-of.pearl well polished the centralimage, C^ of the candle or luminous object is alwayswhite, as we should expect it to be, in consequence ofbeing reflected from the flat and polished surfaces betweenthe grooves. In like manner, in many specimensof grooved steel the image C is also perfectly white,and the spectra on each side of it, to the amount of sixor eight, are perfect prismatic images of the candle ; theimage A, which is nearest C, being the least dispersed,and all the rest in succession more and more dispersed,as if they were formed by prisms of greater and g;ceaA£cdiqiendve power, or greater and greater refractive aiv^e*.1S2L Beatus OK OTTIOI'*tfThese spectra cmiUiu the fixed licet and all themmtic colour; but the red or let refrmngiUe qere greatly expanded, and the violet or niort lefruqiuea greatly cmUmcted, even more than in the tf[induced hj sulphuric acid.In examining some of these pragmatic images iseemed to be defective in particular nati, I was sarito find that, in the spedmenB which produced thenimage C reflected from the polished original snrfithe steel was itself tightly coloured; that its tint t-with the angle of incidence, and had some relationthe defalcation of colour in the prismatic importerto observe these phenomena through a great iof incidence, I substituted for the candle a long nirectangular aperture, formed by nearly closing Ifedow flutters, and I then saw at one view HaFig. 64.r*T", A/}>H'r'^s t^i."s' a/of the onUnary image and all the prismatic in:Jn order to understand Mi, set k%i f^- ^-i bORAY.ZIV. OOUOVBS OP CmOOVED SURFACES.otdiiiAry image of the bertie elected from the flatmfttuoe of it item iHuch Sees between the grooves anda ftj nT &'> a^' b'^f Sci the prismatic images on each side ofcity every one dT tfarae images forming a complete specnun. with all its different colours. The image A B was€Xomed in a direction perpendicular to its length withhioad doomed fringes varying in their tints from 0°to 90^ of incidence. In a specimen with 1000 groovesin an incb^ the following were the colours distinctly seenat dissent angles of incidence: —ikngtoofinddcnoe.White • - - 90^ (yTdlovr - - - 80 SOReddish orange - 77 SOPink - - - 76 20Junction of pink and 1 7 e 4qblue . . JBrilliant blueWhitish .YellowFink- 74 30-71- 64 45- 59 45Junction of pink and \ -„ 1/1blue - . J 58 10ikngtoeriiiddnM.Blue- 66''0'Bluish green -- 54SOYellowish green- 59Whitish green- 51Whitish yellow- 49Yellow - -- 47Pinkish yellow .- 41Pink red - -- 36Whitish pink -- 31Green- 24Yellow - -- 10Reddish - --These colours are those of the reflected rings in thinplates. If we turn the steel plate round in azimuth thevery same colours appear at the same angle of incidenceand they suffer no change either by varying the distanceqf the steel plate from the luminous aperture, or thedistance of the eye of the observer from the grooves.In the preceding Table there are four orders of colours;but in some specimens there are only three in otherstwo in others one and in some only one or two tints ofthe first order were developed. A specimen of 500grooves in an inch gave only the yellow of the firstorder through the whole quadrant of incidence. A specimenof 1000 grooves gave only one complete order,with a portion of the next. A specimen of 3333 groovesgave only the yellow of the first order. A specimen of5000 gave a little more than one order ; and a specimenl!3!4 A Beati oir omoB. vabtilof 10^000 grooves in an inch gave also a little more dmone order.In fig. 64. we have represented the portion of tkquadrant of incidence from about 22° to 'J&^. In dcfirst spectrum, abash, o o b the violet side of it, andrr the red side of it and between these are wingedall the other colours. At m, at an incidence of 74^die violet light is obliterated from the spectrum a h; tndat n, an incidence of ^6^, the red rays are obliterated;the intermediate colours, Uue, green, &&, being obliteratedat intermediate points between m and n. In dssecond spectrum, a'h'ah'y the violet rays are obliteratedat m' at an incidence of Q&^ 2(y, and the red at n' at inincidence of 56°. In the third spectrum, a^'b'^ a 'I/*, dsviolet rays are obliterated at tn' at 57^9 and the red atn'^'^at 41° 35^ ; and in the fourth spectrum, the violetrays are obliterated at m'" at 401 ^, and the red at fiT' at23^ 30'^. A similar succession of obliterated tints talonplace on all the prismatic images at a lesser intense,as shown at sav, f/v^; the violet being obliterated at fiand [a/, and the red at v and y^, and the intermediatecolours at intermediate points. In this second successionthe line /a v begins and ends at the same angle of incidenceas the line n/^nf^ in the third prismatic image af^lf,and the line [// in the second prismatic image correspondswith m'^^v!^* on the fourth prismatic image. Inidl these cases the tints obliterated in the direction m %ft. y, &c., would, if restored, form a complete primatespectrum whose length ismnfAv, &c.Considering the ordinary image as white, a simikrobliteration of tints takes place upon it. The ii€ikt uobliterated at o about 76°, leaving pink, or what theviolet wants of white light ; and the red is obliteratedat p at 74°, leaving a bright blue. The violet is obliteratedat q and #, and the red at r and t, as may beinferred iron the preceding Table of colours.The analysis of these curious and apparently complicatedphenomena becomes very simple when they aieexamined by homogeneous light. The effect produced onred light is represented inj^. 65., where AB b the imagej-ig- es.of die narrow aperture reflectedtntm the origiiud surface of the steel,and the fburinagea on each side ofit correspond with the prismaticimages. All there nine )ni^[ei,however, consist of homogeneousred light, which ia obliterated, ornearly so, at the fifteen shaded rectangles,which are the minima ofthe new series of periodical colourswhich cross both the ordinary andthe lateral images. The centres p,T, t, n, r, &c, of these rectanglescorrespond with the points markedwith the same letters in jig. 64. ;and if we had drawn the same figurefor violet light, the centres of therectangles would have been ailhigher up in the figure, and wouldhave corresponded with o, q, c, in,fi, .&c. in fig. 64. The rectangle*should have been shaded off to re-ena accurate, but the only otgect«f the figure is to show to the eye the position and re-lions of the "i"'"" *If we cover the surface of the grooved steel with aftdd, 80 as to <li"ii "with the refractive power of the aurawe developed more orders of colours on the ordinaryimages and a greater number of minima on the lateralioMgea, hi|^ier lints being produced at a given incidence.Bnl, what is very remarkable, in grooved surfaces whenthe ordinary image is perfectly white, and when thespectra are complete without any obliteration of tints,Ae application of fluids to the grooved surface developedtsionrs on the ordinary im^;e, and a corresponding oUutaxation of tints on the lateral images. The followingTable contains a few of the results dative .to the octot the phenoA TREATISE OX OPTICS.PARXILNumber of groovesin an inch.312.Maximum tintwithout a fluid.Perfectly waitsOamboffe yellowof the first order.Maximin tint wHh flsUbk»1. Water, tinge of yellow.2. Alcohol, tinge of yellow.S. Oilofcawia, fldntreddiAyalBK1. Water, pinkish red (fintovta)^2. Alcohol, reddish dUul3. OUofcaMia, bright lilae(ieoHdOlder). ^^Phenomena analogous to those above described tikeplace upon the grooved surfaces of goid^ silver, and mLcarious spar ; and upon the surfaces of Hn, ismffam,realgar, &c.^ to which the grooves have been transferredfrom steel. F<A* an account of the phenomena exhibitedby several of these substances I must refer the readerto the original memoir in the Philosophical Transactionsfor 1829.CHAP. XV.ON FITS OF REFLEXION AND Transmission AND ONTHE INTERFERENCE OF Light.(83.) In the preceding chapters we have described a veryextensive class of phenomena all of which seem to havethe same origin. From his experiments on the colounof thin and of thick plates Newton inferred that theywere produced by a singular property of the particles oflights in virtue of which they possess at different pointof their path fits or dispositions to be reflected fromor transmitted by transparent bodies. Sir Isaac doesnot pretend to explain the origin of these fits or gibecause which produces them ; but we may form a tolerableidea of them by supposing that each particle oflights after its discharge from a luminous body revolvesround an axis perpendicular to the direction of itsmotion and presenting alternately to the line of itsmotion an attractive and a repulsive pole in virtue ofmAP.TY. THCcfAT OF FITS. 12?'• which ii wdl be refracted if the attractive pole is nearestaaj detecting surface on which it falls and reflected ifdir Mpolsiye pole is nearest that surface. The dispositionto be reacted and reflected will of course in-roetse and diminish as the distance of either pole fromife surface of the body is increased or diminished. Aless scientific idea may be formed of this hypothesis byreposing a body with a sharp and a blunt end passingAzoogh space and successively presenting its sharp andWant ends to the line of its motion. When the sharpend encounters any soft body put in its way it willpenetrate it; but when the blunt end encounters thesure body, it will be reflected or driven back.To explain this more clearly, let R,^^. 66., be a ray ofhet falling upon a refracting surface M N, and tranS"Fig. 66. mitted by that surface. It is clear thatit must have met the surface MN whenit was nearer its fit of transmissionthan its fit of reflexion ; but whetherit was exactly at its fit of transmission,or a little from it, it is put, by theaction of the surface, into the samestate as if it had begun its fit of transmissionat t. Let us suppose that,after it has moved through a spaceequal to ^r, its fit of reflexion takes place, the fit oftransmission always recommencing at 1 1' , &c., and thatof le&exion at rr, &c.; then it is obvious, diat if theny meets a second transparent surface at it, &c., itwOl be transmitted, and if it meets it at r /, &c., itwill be reflected The spaces <^, t*t" are called theintervals of the fits of transmission, and rr, rr'' theintervals of the fits of reflexion. Now, as the spaces U\r /, &c, are supposed equal for light of the same co-bars,it is manifest that, if M N be the first surface ofa body, the ray will be transmitted if the thickness ofdie body istt%tf',&c.; ihBtis,tt',2te,3tt',^tt%or any multiple whatever of the interval of a fit of easy128 A Treatise 4N OPTICS. FAWrVktransmission. In like manner the raj will' be lefleeledif the thickness of the body is tr, tr'; or, since t{^equal to r r\ if the sickness of the body is^tf, l^tft2ltt',3^tt\ If the body M N^ theiefQEe^ bad pttcaUdsurfaces and if the eye were placed above it so as t>receive the rays reflected perpendicularly, it would inevery case see the surface M N by the portion of liuniformly reflected from that surface; but when thethickness of the body was tt, 2ify 3 tt, 4f tf, a1000 1 1' , the eye would receive no rays from the secondsurface because they are all transmitted : and in libmanner if the sickness was ^tt\ \\ti , 2^ tif,Oi1000^ 1 1\ the eye would receive aU the light reflectedfrom the second surface, because it is all reflectedWhen this reflected light meets the first surface M Monits way to the eye, it is all transmitted, because it kdien in its fits of transmission. Hence, in the first casthe eye receives no light from the second surface, aid inthe second csLse, it receives all the light £rom the seeomisurface. If the body had intermediate thicknesses between1 1' and 2 1 1\ &c., as } ^ ^', then a portion of ttlight would be reflected from the second surface, increasingas the thickness increased from ^ ^^ to \\tityand diminishing again as the thickness increased fromli ta to 2 tt".But let us now suppose that the plate whose suifMtis M N is unequally thick, like the plate of air betweenthe two lenses or a film of blown glass. Let it haveits thickness varying like a wedge M N P>^. 67. Ldt f, rr be the intervals of the fits, and let the eyebiplaced above the wedge as before. It is quite dear limitnear the point N the light that falls upon the recoilsurface N P will be all transmitted, as it is in a fit dftransmission ; but at the thickness t r the light R wiHbe reflected by the second surface, because it is then inits fit of reflexion. In like manner the light 'wiH betransmitted at f, again reflected at r% and again tradnutted at t'^; so that the eye above MN will see aseries of dark and luimiio\u& bands, the middle of thefpA oaa bang it K, t', r in the line N P, ind of tli.^«t r, t', &C. in the iiine line. Let usFig. 67.I NI^MMe that the figure is Bulled to red homt^eneoiuI list, (('bdng the internal of a fit for that species ofnj; then in violet light, V, the interval of the fits«0I be les, as T|. If we therefore use violet light,the interval of wbou fits is t ;, a sniaUer series ofwillet and obiciire band or fringes will be been, whoseobacmeft points are at N, t', t", &c., and whosefittest points are at p, ^', &c. In like manner, with theintermediate cours of the spectrum, hands of intermediatemagnitudes will be formed, having their ob-deniespoints between t' and (', t^ and f", and theirhri^lest points between } and r, / and r', &c. ; andwhen white light is used, all these different]' colouredbands will be seen forming fringes of the lUfi'erentorder of coloun given in the Table in pages 103■aad lOi. If M N F, in place of being the section of afinn, were the section of one half of a plane concaveLens, whose centre is N, and whose concave surface has an-oblique direction somewhat like N P, the direction of the-cfdonred bands nile always be perpendicular to the radiusN P, or will be regular circles. For the same reason,Ae coloured bands are circular in the concave lens ofair between the olgect glasses; the same colours alwaysappearing at the same thickness of the medium, or atthe same distance from the centre.Bf the sane means sir Isaac Newton explained the130 A Treatise ON.OmOB. VA^IILcolours of thick plates with this difference, that theifringes are not in that case produced by the loffiiregularly refracted and reflected at the two virtues ofthe concave mirror but by the lig^ irregularly acattewdby the first surface of the mirror in consequence of illimperfect polish ; for as he observes, " there im boglass or speculum, how well soever polished, but, beadttthe light which it refracts and reflects regularly, scatterevery way irregularly a faint light, by means ofthe polished surface, when illuminated in a darkby a beam of the sun's light, may be easily seen in aUpositions of the eye."The same theory of fits affords a ready explanation dthe phenomena of double and equally thick plates, whii^we have described in another chapter. There are otherphenomena of colours, however, to which it is not equaD|applicable; and it has accordingly been, in a great met»isure, superseded by the doctrine of interference, whi(^we shall now proceed to explain.(83.) In examining the black and white stripeswithin the shadows of bodies as formed by inflexion,Dr. Young found that when he placed an opaque screeneither a few inches before or a few inches behind oneside of the inflecting body, B, fig. 56., so as to interceptall the light on that side by receiving the edge ofthe shadow on the screen, then all the fringes in theshadow constantly disappeared, although the light stirpassed by the other edge of the body as before. Hencehe concluded that the light which passed on both sideswas necessary to the production of the fringes ; a conclusionwhich he might have deduced also from theknown fact, that when the body was above a certainsize, fringes never appeared in its shadow. In reasoningupon this conclusion, Dr. Young was led to theopinion, that the fringes within the shadow were producedby the interference of the rays bent into the shadowby one side of the body B wiUi the rays bent into theshadow by the other side.In order to explain the law of interference indicatedin this experiment, let us suppose two pencils of light toflBAT.XY. ON THB UTTEBFERENOE OF LIGHT. iSlfinn two points very close to each other anditt diis light falls upon the same spot of a piece ofiii held parallel to the line joining the points so thatwt tipot is directly opposite the point which insects thefrance between the two radiant points. In this casettej may be said to interfere with one another ; becauseAe pendls would cross one another at that spot if theser were lemoyed^ and would diverge from one an.pilfer. The spot will therefore be illuminated with theflm of their lights; and in this case the length of thepaths of the two pencils of light is exactly the same thespot on the paper being equally distant from both theMdiaDt points. Now it has been found that whenfloe is a certain minute difference between the lengthscf the paths of the two pencils of lights the spot upondie paper where the two lights interfere is still a brightspot illuminated by the sum of the two lights. If weandiis difference in the lengths of their paths d, brightpets will be formed by the interference of die twopendls when the difference in the lengths of the pathsvery 2d, 3dy ^ d, &c. All this is nothing more thanwhat is consistent with daily observation ; but what istruly remarkable and altogether unexpected it has beendearly demonstrated that if the two pencils interfere atintermediate points or when the difference in the lengthsof the paths of the two pencils is d, li d, ^^ d, Sj^ d,kt. instead of adding to one another's intensity andproducing an illumination equal to the sum of theirlights they destroy each other , and produce a dark spot.lliis curious property is analogous to the beating of twoinimical sounds nearly in unison with each otho: ; thebeats taking place when the e^ct of the two sounds isequal to the sum of their separate intensities correspondingto the luminous spots or fringes where the effect ofthe two lights is equal to the sum of their separate in.densities and the cessation of sound between the beatswhen the two sounds destroy each other correspondingto the dark spots or fringes where the two lights producedarkness.K 2132 A Treatise ON Option. Valleythe aid of this doctrine the phenomena of the is.flexion of lists and those of thin and thick plates, miyhe well explained. With regard to the interior fringe,or those in the shadow it is clear that as the niid&of the shadow is equally distant from the edges of Aeinflecting body B^ fig. 56.^ there will be no differencein the length of the paths of the pencils coming fromeach side of the body and consequently along the middleof the whole length of every narrow shadow thereshould be a white stripe illuminated with the sum of thetwo inflected pencils ; but at a point at such a distancefrom the centre of the shadow that the difference of thetwo paths of the pencil from each side of the body isequal to ^d the two pencils' will destroy each other,and give a dark stripe. Hence there will be a dirkstripe on each side of the central bright one. In lifemanner it may be shown that at a point at sudi a distancefrom the centre of the shadow that the differencein the lengths of the paths is 2 d, 3 d, there will bebright stripes; and at intermediate points whsate thedifference in the lengths of the paths is 1^ d, 2^ d, iSbfoewill be dark stripes.In order to explain the origin of the external fringes,both Dr. Young and M. Fresnel ascribed them to theinterference of the direct rays with other rays reflectedfrom the margin of the inflecting body ; but M. Fresndhas found that the fringes exist when no such reflexion cantake place ; and he has besides shown the insufficiencyof the explanation even if such reflected rays did existHe therefore ascribes the external fringes to the interferenceof the direct rays with other rays which passat a sensible distance from the inflecting body andwhich are made to deviate from their primitive direction.That such rays do exist he proves upon the undulatorytheory which we shall afterwards explain.The phenomena of thin plates are admirably explainedby the doctrine of interference. The light reflectedfrom the second surface of the plate interferes with thelight reflected from the flat, vnd «a tkeoe two pendli ofQBAF.Xy. ON THE Interference OF LIGHT. 13Slight come item different points of space they mustletdi the eye with different lengths of paths. Hencetfaey wiU^ by their interference form luminous fringesdien the difference of the paths is d, 2d, 3 d, &c,, andobscure fringes when that difference is ^ d, 1^ d, 2^ d.In accounting for the colours of thick plates observedby Newton the light scattered irregularly from everypoint of the first surface of the concave mirror fallsdiverging on the second surface and being reflectedfrom this surface in lines diverging from a point behindthey will suffer refraction in coming out of the first surviveof the mirror being made to diverge as if from apoint still nearer the mirror but behind its surface.Fran this last pointy therefore the screen Mn in%. 60,, is illuminated by the rays originally scattered onentering the first surface. But when the regularly reflectedlights after reflexion from the second surfaceanergic from the flrst^ it will be scattered irregularlyfrom each point on that surface, and radiating fromthese points will illuminate the paper screen M N. Everypoint, therefore, in the paper screen is illuminated bytwo kinds of scattered light, the one radiating from eachpoint of the first surface, and the other from points behindthe second surface ; and hence bright and obscurebands will be formed when the differences of the lengthsof their paths are such as have been already described.The colours of two equally thick and inclined platesare also explicable by the law of interference. althoughthe light reflected by the different surfaces of theplate emerges parallel as shown in fig, 6l., yet in consequenceof the inclination of the plates it reaches theeye by paths of different lengths.The colours of fine fibres, of minute particles, of mot.tied and striated surfaces, and of equidistant parallellines, may be all referred to the interference of differentportions of light reaching the eye by paths of differentlengths ; and though some difficulties still exist in theapplication of the doctrine to particular phenomena \)cv»X.K 3134 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. part Uhave not been sufficiently studied yet there can be nodoubt that these difficulties will be removed by daminvestigation.As all the phenomena of interference are dependentupon the quantity d, it becomes interesting to aaoertiiiiits exact magnitude for the differently coloured rays ind,if possible to trace its or^in to some primary clue.It is obvious as Fraunhofer has remarked that tfaiiquantity (f is a real absolute magnitude and watermeaning we may attach to it it is demonstrable dutone half of it in reference to the phenomena producedby it is opposed in its properties to the other half; mthat if the anterior half combines accurately with flieposterior half or interferes with it in this manner undera small angle the effect which would have been inducedby each separately is destroyed whereas the sameeffect is doubled if two anterior or two posterior haheiof this magnitude combine or interfere in a sindkrmanner.(84.) In the Newtonian theory of light or thetheory of emission as it is called in which light is supposedto consist of material particles emitted by luminousbodies and moving through space with a velocity of192^000 miles in a second the quantity d is double theinterval of the fits of easy reflexion and transmission ;while in the undulatory theory it is equal to the breadthof an undulation or wave of light.In the undulatory theory an exceedingly thin andelastic medium called ether is supposed to fill all spaceand to occupy the intervals between the particles of allmaterial bodies. The ether must be so extremely rareas to prevent no appreciable resistance to the planetarybodies which move freely through it.The particles of this ether are like those of air capableof being put into vibrations by the agitation of theparticles of matter so that waves or vibrations can bepropagated through it in all directions. Within refractingmedia it is less elastic than in vacuo and its elasticityis less in proportion to the le&active power of thebodjr.CHAP. XV. VirDULATOBT THEORY. 135■ 'When any vibrations or undulations are propagatedfliiou^ this ether and reach the nerves of the retinaflies excite the sensation of lights in the same manner asthe sensation of sound is excited in the nerves of theear by the vibrations of the air.XNJfer^noes of colour are supposed to arise from differencesin the frequency of the ethereal undulations; redbeing produced by a much smaller number of undulationsin a given time than blue, and intermediate coloursb^ intermediate numbers of undulations.Each of these two theories of light is beset with difficultiespeculiar to itself; but the theory of undulationshas made great progress in modem times and derives■dch powerful support from an extensive class of phenomena,that it has been received by many of our mostdi.tii>gd8hed philosophers.in a work like this it would be in vain to attempt togive a particular account of the principles of this theory.It may be sufficient at present to state that the doctrineof interference is in complete accordance with the theoryof undulation. 'Then similar waves are combined sothat the elevations and depressions of the one coincidewith those of the other a wave of double magnitude willbe produced ; whereas when the elevations of the onecoincide with the depressions of the other both systemsof waves will be totally destroyed. " The spring andneap tides" says Dr. Young, " derived from the com.Nation of the simple soli-lunar tides afford a magnificentexample of the interference of two immense waveswith each other ; the spring tide being the joint resultof the combination when they coincide in time and place,and the neap tide where they succeed each other at thedistance of half an interval, so as to leave th effect oftheir difference only sensible. The tides of the port ofBashaw described and explained by Halley and Newton,exhibit a different modification of the same opposition ofundulations ; the ordinary periods of high and low waterbeing altogether superseded on account of the differentlengths of the two channels by which the tides arriveK 4A TREATISE OK OPnOI.PABTIbaffording exactly the half integral which caius the disappearanceof the alternation. It may also he veryeasily observed hy merely throwing two equal stoneinto a piece of stagnant water that the circles of waveswhich they occasion obliterate each other and leavethe surface of the water smooth in certain lines of ahyperbolic form while in other neighbouring parts thesurface exhibits the agitation belonging to both seriesunited."The following Table given by Mr. Herschel ooiupains the principal data of the undulatory theory:—Colon of the Spectrum.Lengths of an Undulationin partsXiimbar ofUndulationsNumber eiVmbd^tkmUof an Inch.in an Inch.■ seoaoaaExtreme red -0-0000266458,000000,000000Red -0-0000256477,000000,000000Intermediate -495,000000,000000Orange0-0000240506^000000,000000Intermediate -0-0000235517,000000^000000Yellow535,000000,000000Intermediate -0-0000219555,000000,000000Green -0-0000211577,000000,0000001 Intermediate -0-0000203600,000000,000000Blue -0-0000196622,000000,000000Intermediate -0-0000189644,000000,000000Indigo -658,000000,000000Intermediate -0-0000181672,000000,000000Violet0-0000174699,000000,000000Extreme violet0-0000167727,000000,000000'' From this Table," says Mr. Herschel, '^ we see thatthe sensibility of the eye is confined within much narrowerlimits than that of the ear ; the ratio of the extremevibrations being nearly 1*58 : I, and thereforeices than an octave, and about equal to a minor aixdi.That man should be able to measure with certainty sudiminute portions of space and time is not a little wonderful; for it may be observed, whatever theory of light weadopt, these periods and these spaces have a real existence,being in fact deduced by Newton from directmeasurements, and involving nothing hypothetical batthe names here given them."CBAPaXn. Ambition OP LIGHT. 137CHAP. XVI.027 THE Absorption OF LIOHT.(85.) One of the most curious properties of bodies intheir action upon lights and one which we are persuadedwill yet perform a most important part in the explanationof optical phenomena and become a ready instrumentin optical researches is their power of absorbinglight. Even the most transparent bodies in nature airand watery when in sufficient thickness, are capable ofabtoMng a great quantity of light. On the summit of(lie highest mountains, where their light has to passthrong a much less extent of air, a much greater numberof stars is visible to the eye than in the plains below ;and through great depths of water Objects become almostinfiaibfe. The absorptive power of air is finely displayedin the colour of the morning and evening clouds;and that of water in the red colour of the meridian sun,when seen from a diving bell at a great depth in thelea. In both these cases, one class of rays is absorbedmore readily than another in passing through the absorbingmedium, while the rest make their way in the onecase to the clouds, and in the other to the eye.Nature presents us with bodies of all degrees of absorptivepower, as shown in the following brief enumeration: —CharcoaLCoat of all kinds.Metals in generaLSilver.GoldBlack hornblende.Black pleonaste.Obsidian.Rock crystal.Selenite.Glass.Mica.Water and transparent fluids.Air and gases.Although charcoal is the most absorptive of all bodies,yet when it exists in a minutely divided state, as insome of the gases and flames, or in a particular stateof combination, as in the diamond, it is highly transparent.In like manner all metals are transi^sxeiiX m138 A TREATISE ON OVTIOB. Paha state of solution; and even sever and gdd, nlMibeaten into thin films are transparent, the formersitting a beautiful blue and the latter a beatificlight.Philosophers have not yet ascertained the nature rfthe power by which bodies absorb list. Some bilkthought that the particles of light are reflected in ildirections by the particles of the absorbing body tfturned aside by the forces resident in the particles ; irtftothers are of opinion that they are detained by the bodfiand assimilated to its substance. If the parties flightwere reflected or mercy turned out of their digestionby the action of the particles it seems to be qnSlidemonstrable that a portion of the most opaque mattff,such as charcoal would when exposed to a strong boniof lights become actually phosphorescent during its illuminationsor would at least appear white ; bat as all Atlight which enters it is never again visible we traitbelieve till we have evidence of the contrary that tffelight is actually stopped by the particles of the body,and remains within it in the form of impondetabkmatter.Some idea may be formed of the law according towhich a body absorbs lights by supposing it to consist ofa given number of equally thin plates at the r e C act i Bgsurfaces of which there is no light lost by reflexion.If the first plate has the power of absorbing-j^th of Arlight which enters it or 1 00 rays out of 1 000 ; then-^tlvof the original lights or 900 rays will fall upon fliesecond plate ; and-uti of these or 90^ being absorbed,810 will fall upon the third plate and so on. Henceit is obvious that the quantity of light absorbed by anynumber of films is equal to the light transmitted throngone film multiplied as often into itself as there are fifaoi.Thus since 1000 rays are transmitted by one fibs,Ax-5%x-j% equal to /^^#^, or 729 rays, winbelhequantity transmitted by three films; and therefore Amquantity absorbed will be 271 rays. Of the Taziaiifbodies which absorb light copiously there are few thatabsorb all the coloured la.^^ oi Vik& v^fts^rossk-YDL ^n^al-OHAP. XVI. ABSORPTION OF XJOHT. 139ijcoportioiuu While certain doada absorb the blue raysnid transmit the red there are others that absorb all theAyg in equal proportions and exhibit the sun and thenoon when seen through them perfectly white. Inki^Qnted is a fine example of a fluid which absorbs all thecolonized rays in equal proportions ; and it has on thisiiKooont been implied by sir William Herschel as adarkening substance for obtaining a white image of theMOL Black pleonaste and obsidian afford examples ofiplid substances which absorb all the colours of thei^ectram proportionally.(86.) AU odioured transparent bodies howeverirfaeUier solid or fluids necessarily do not absorb thettdoiira proportionally ; for it is only in consequence ofan unequal absorption that they could appear coloured\gy transmitted light. In order to exhibit this absorptivepower, take a thick piece of the blue glass that isused fair finger glasses and which is sometimes metlith in cylindrical rods of about ^^^jths of an inch indiameter and shape it into the form of a wedge. Formaprismatic image of the candle or what is better of anarrow rectangular aperture in the window by a prismand examine this prismatic image through the wedge ofMlomed glass. Through the thinnest edge the spectrumwin be been nearly as complete as before the interpositionof the wedge ; but as we look at it through greaterand greater thicknesses we shall see particular partsor colon of the spectrum become fainter and fainterfid gcadnaUy disappear while others suffer but a slightdiminution of their brightness. When the thicknessif about the twentieth part of an inch, the spectrumwffl have the appearance shown in fig, 68,, where themiddle Rqfthe red space is entirely absorbed, the interredthat is left is weakened in intensity ; the orange isentirely absorbed ; the yellow Y is left almost insulated ;lig. 68. the green G on the side of theI i I BHi I yellow is very much absorbed;1 1 Mm and a slight absorption takes^ ^ ^ ^ place along the green and bluei^aoe. At a greater thickness stilly the inner le ^\--V140 A Treatise ON OPTICS. part Simingles rapidly, and also the yellow green and Une;till at a certain thickness all the middle colours of ^spectrum are absorbed, and nothing left but the tii|extreme colours, the red R and the viokt V^ as shovein fig, 6*9* As the red light R has much greater iDte»rFig. 69. city than th? violet, the £^has at this thickness the ^appearance of being a red ism;whereas at small thicknesses ithad the appearance of being a blue glass.Other coloured media, instead of absorbing the spectrumin the middle, attack it, some at one extremity,some at another, and others' at both. Red glasses, ftiexample, absorb the blue and violet with great force.A thin plate of native yellow orpiment absorbs the violetand refrangible blue rays very powerfully, and leaves thered, yellow, and green but little affected. Sulphate ofcopper attacks both ends of the spectrum at once, absorbingthe red and violet rays with great avidity. Inconsequenceof these different powers of absorption, avery remarkable phenomenon may be exhibited. If welook through the blue glass so as to see the spectrum infig 69v And then look at this spectrum again with a thinplate of sulphate of copper, which absorbs the extremerays at R and V, the two substances thus combinedwill be absolutely opaque, and not a ray of light wireach the eye. The effect is perhaps more striking ifwe look at a bright white object through the two mediatogether.(87.) In attempting to ascertain the influence heat <8ithe absorbing power of coloured media, I was surprisedto observe that it produced opposite effects upon differentglasses, diminishing the absorbing power in-someand increasing it in others. Having brought to a redheat a piece of purple glass, that absorbed the greaterpart of the green, the yellow, and the interior or mostrefrangible red, I held it before a strong light; andwhen its red heat had disappeared, I observed that thetransparency of the glass was increased, and that itr.ffBAPm ZVX. ABSORPTION OF LIGHT. 141tniunnitfced fred the green the yellow and the interiornd, all of which it had formerly in a great measureabsorbed. This efBict, however, gradually disappearedand it recovered its former absorbent power when completelycold.When yellowish-green glass was heated in a similarmamier^ it lost its transparency almost entirely. In re-covering its green colour it passed through variousshades of olive green; but its tint, when cold, continuedless green than they were before the experiment.A part of the glass had received in cooling a polarisingrtrnctuie^ and this part could be easily distinguishedfrom the other part by a difference of tint.A plate of deep red glass, which gave a homogeneousred image of the candle, became very opaque whenIteated^ and scarcely transmitted the light of die candleafter its red heat had subsided. It recovered, however,its transparency to a certain degree ; but when cold, itwas more opaque than the piece from which it wasIsoken. I have observed analogous phenomena in mineralbodies. Certain specimens of topaz have theirabsorbing power permanently changed by heat. Inneglecting the Balas ruby to high degrees of heat, Iobserved that its red colour changed into green, whichgradually fitted into brown as the cooling advanced, andresumed by degrees its original red colour. In likemanner Berzelius observed the spindle to becomebrown by beat, then to grow opaque as the heat in.creased and to pass through a fine olive green beforeit recovered its red colour. A remarkable change ofabsorbent power is exhibited by heating very consider.aby, but so as not to inflame it, a plate of yellow nativeofpiment, wien absorbs the violet and blue rays. Theheat renders it almost blood red, in consequence of itsnow absorbing the greater part of the green and yellowrays. It resumes its absorptive colour, however, by cooling.A still more striking effect may be produced withpure phosphorus, which is of a slightly yellow colour,transmitting fiery almost all the coloured xv. WVieci142 . A Treatise OK omok PAinrnmelted and gradually cooled it acquired the power ttabsorbing all the colours of ^e spectrum at thicknessat which it formerly transmitted them all. The Ladsness produced upon pure phosphorus was first observedby Thenard. Mi'. Faraday observed that glass tilpurple with manganese had its absorptive power alumby the mere transmission through it of the solar rays; ^By the method above described of absorbing padocular colours in the spectrum I was led to propose §new method of analysing white light. The experimentswith the blue glass incontestably prove that the orangeand green colours in solar light are compound colourswhich though they cannot be decomposed by the prism,may be decomposed by absorption by 'which we mayexhibit alone the red part of the orange and the bluepart of the green or the yellow part of the orange andthe yellow part of the green; and by submitting theother colours of the spectrum to the scrutiny of absorbentmedia I was led to the conclusions respecting the spectrumwhich are explained in Chapter VII.We have already seen that in the solar spectrum asdescribed by Fraunhofer there are dark lines as if raysof particular refrangibilities had been absorbed in discoursefrom the sun to the earth. The absorption isnot likely to have taken place in our atmosphere oilier-wisethe same lines would have been wanting in thespectra from the fixed stars and the rays of solar listreflected from the moon and planets would probably)have been modified by their atmospheres. But as this iinot the case it is probable that the rays which are wantingin the spectrum have been absorbed by the son'satmosphere as Mr. Herschel has supposed.(88.) Connected with the preceding phenomena itthe subject of coloured flames, which, when examine!by a prism, exhibit spectra deficient in particular rays,and resembling the solar spectrum examined by colouredglasses. Pure hydrogen gas bums with a blue flamein which many of the rays of light are wanting. Thiflame of an oil lamp contains most of the rays which anivantfng in sun-light. Mco\vo\xsivxe^Vv^^«!y5st,'«^TOpfAB* ZVU. Double Reaction. liSbetted and burned affords a flame with no other rays\^ yellow. Afanott all salts communicate to flames apfy^jw colour as may be seen by introducing the pow-ifs,of these salts into the exterior flame of a candle or1||» the wick of a spirit lamp. The following results,explained by different authors have been given by Mr.Herschel : —Salts of soda, . Homogeneous yellow.« . . potash, - - - - Pale violet.lime, . Brick red.—— ^— strontia, - - - Bright crimson.lithia, - - - Red.baryta, Pale apple green.—— ^— copper, . - - Bluish green.According to Mr. Herschel the muriate succeed beston account of their volatility.CHAP. XVII.ON THE DOUBLE REFRACTION OF LIGHT.(sein the preceding chapters of this work it hasalways been supposed when treating of the refraction oflights either through surfaces lenses, or prisms, that thetransparent or refracting body had the same structure,the same temperature, and the same density in everypart of it, and in every direction in which the raycould enter it. Transparent bodies of this kind aregases fluids, solid bodies, such as different kinds ofglass, formed by fusion, and slowly and equally cooled,and « numerous class of crystallised bodies, the form ofwhose primitive crystal is the cube, the regular octoberand the rhomboidal dodecahedron. When any ofthese bodies have the same temperature and density, andare not subject to any pressure, a single pencil of lightincident upon any single surface of them, perfectlyplane, will be refracted into a single pencil according tothe law of the sines explained in Chapter III.144 A Treatise ON Optics. PailIn almost all other bodies inducting taste and ajt-tallied minerals not having the primitive finns $bmmentioned; animal bodies such as hair horn, abA,bones lenses of animals and elastic integuments ;table bodies such as certain leaves stalks andand artificial bodies such as resins gtuns^ jeUiea^quickly and unequally cooled and solid bodies hsviagunequal density either from unequal temperature or m-quid pressure; — in all such bodies a single pencflcflight incident upon their surfaces will be rtfraeied kUftwo different pencils, more or less inclined to one another,according to the nature and state of the bodjiand according to the direction in which the pencil iiincident. The separation of the two pencils is aonifr-times very great, and in most cases easily observed andmeasured; but in other cases it is not visible, and idexistence is inferred only from certain effects whichcould not arise except from two refracted pencils. Therefraction of the two pencils is called double rtfra^imi,and the bodies which produce it are called doubly n-acting bodies or crystals.As the phenomena of double refraction were firstdiscovered in a transparent mineral substance calledIceland spar, calcareous spar, or carbonate of lime, andas this substance is admirably fitted for exhibiting tho]we shall begin by explaining the law of double refractionas it exists in this mineral. Iceland spar is composedof 56 parts of lime, and 44 of carbonic add. It iifound in almost all countries, in crystals of various shapes,and often in huge masses; but, whether found in crystalor in masses, we can always leave it or split it intoshapes like that represented in fig, 70., which is calebFig* 70. a rhomb of Iceland spar, a sicbounded by six equal and similar xham-f- — ^cboidal surfaces, whose sides are paralleland whose angles B A C, A C D are1^\ / 101° 55' and 78° 5'. The incarnationB* D 0^ *°y ^^^ A B C D to any of Aeadjacent faces that meet at A is 105° 5', and to anyOBAP. xm. DOUBLE REFRACTION. 145of the adjacent faces that meet at X 74° 55^ The lineA X^ called the tuis of the 'rhomb or of the crystal is•qiiany inclined to each of the six faces at an angle of45° 23'. The angle between any of the three edgesItt meet at A^ or of the three that meet at X^ and theais A X is 66^ 44' 4S", and the angle between anyof die six edges and the faces is 113^ 15' 14'' and66^ 44' 46".(90.) Iceland spar is very transparent and colourless. Its natural faces when it is splits arecommonly even and perfectly polished ; but when theyne not so we may by a new cleavage replace the face by a better one or we may grind and polishtny imperfect face.Having procured a rhomb of Iceland spar like thatin the figure with smooth and well polished faces andso Lu that one of the edges A B is at least an inchbng^ place one of its faces upon a sheet of paper andhaving a black line M N drawn upon the paper asshown in fig. 71* If we then look through ^e upperFig, 71.forsake of the rhomb with the eye about R^ we shallprobably see the line M N double; but if it is not itirish become double by turning the crystal a little round.Two lines M N, i» n, will then be distinctly visible; andupon taming the crystal rounds preserving the samehide always upon the paper the two lines will coincidewith one another and appear to form one at two o^i^o-file points during a whole revolution of ih& zrj^^A\ casa.146 A TREATIGOB ON Option. PAST ILat two other opposite points nearly at right angle tothe former the lines will be at their greatest diitsnoe.If we place a hhek spot at O^ or a heinous apertm^sadi as a pin-hole in a wafer with light passing ikno^the bole the spot or aperture will appear doiAle, ts ttO and E; and by taming the cystic round as befit,the two images will be seen separate in all poitou;the one E^ revolving, as it were round the oder, 0.Let a ray or pencil of li^^ R r^ ftU upon ^Sbt smftceof the rhomb at r, it will be refracted 1^ tie action ofthe surface into two pencils rO, r E^ each of wellbeingagain refracted at the second surface at the pointO^ E^ win move in the directions O o^ E e, {lanJld toone another and to the incident ray R r. The xmy B rhas therefore been dory refracted by ^Sbt rhomb.If we now examine and measure the angle of refractionof the ray r O corresponding to different angleof incidence we shall find that at 0^ of incidence, or aperpendicular incidence it suffers no reflection, butmoves straight through the crystal in one unbroken line;that at all other angles of incidence the sine of the angleof refraction is to that of incidence as 1 to 1*654; andthat the refracted ray is always in the same plane assat of the incident ray. Hence it is obvious that thelay r O is refracted according to the ordinary km qfre*fraction, which we have already explained. If we nowexamine in the same way the ray re we shall findthat at a perpendicular incidence or one of 0^^ theangle of refraction in place of being 0^^ is acUiaHy6^ 12'; that at other incidence the angle of reflectionis not such as to follow the constant ratio of the sines;and what is still more extraordinary that the refractedray r E is bent to one side, and lies entirely out of theplane of incidence. Hence it follows that the penalr £ is refracted according to some new and extraordinarylaw of refraction. The ray r O is therefore oiledthe ordinary ray, and r £ the extraordinary ray.If we cause Uie ray R r to be incident in various differentdirections either on the natural faces of the rhombCBA7. Syn. Double REFRACTION. 14? 'or cm fuses cat and polished artificially we shall findAt in Iceland par libere is one direction namely A X,along which if the refracted penal passes it is notretract e d into two pencils, or does not suffer doublerefraction. In other crystals there are two such directionsforming an angle with each other. In thefarmer case the crystal is said to have one axis of doublerefraction and in the latter case two axes of doublexctmctioin. These lines are called axes of double re-htOdoa, because the phenomena are related to theseNea. In sine bodies there are certain planes alongwinch if the refracted ray passes it experiences no doublerefraction.An axis of double refraction however is not, like theaxis of the earthy afiaed line within the rhomb or crystalIt is only a fixed directed: for if we divide as wecan do, the rhomb A B C^ fig, 70.^ into two or moreihomb^ each of these separate rhombs will have theiraxis of double refraction; but when these rhombs areagain put together their axes will be all parallel toA X. Every line therefore within the rhomb parallelto A X, is an axis of double refraction ; but as theseHues have all one and the same direction in space thecrystal is still said to have only one axis of double refraction.In making experiments with different crystals, it isfind that in some the extraordinary ray is refractedtmBordf the axis Ax while in others it is refractedflam the axis A X. In the first case the axis is calleda positive axis of double refraction, and in the secondanegative axis of double refraction.On Crffsials wiA one Axis of Double Refraction.(91.) In examining the phenomena of double refractionin a great number of crystallised bodies, I foundthat all those crystals whose primitive or simplest formhad only one axis of figure or one pre-eminent lineround which the figure was symmetrical had also oneof double refraction; and that their axis of figureL 2WIS s]ao (he axis of double refraction. The priefinns which yoeaeas this property are aa fbllowB:-The rhomb with an obtiue nunmit.The rhomb with an acute nuDinit.The regular hexaedral prism.The octahedron with a square base.The right prism with a square. base.(9S.) The following Table contains the crystals whithave one axis of double refraction, arranged under theirrespective primitive forma, the sign + being prefixed todose that have positive double refraction, and — 'those that have Negative double refraction,rtg. 72. Fig. 73. Fig. n1. Rhomli Chilli oblunCarbonate of lime (IcelandBpar)-Carbonate of lime and iron.Carbonate of lime and lead.Carbonate of zinc.Nitrate of soda.2. JUomi tmth acute^Trtmil.^. 72.Phosphate of lead.Ruby BilTcr.Tour ■■-Rubeltite.■ Quam.umniii, Jig. 7-Cinnabar.3. Regular SttaedmiEmerald.-Beryl.- Phosphate of lime (apatitePrism, fg. 74.Nepheline.Arseniate of lead.Hydrate ofCHAP. XVII. NEGATIVE DOUBLE BEFBAOnON.4. Octokedron wUh a square base. Jig. 75.+ Zircon.+ Oxide of tin.+ Tungstate of lime.^ Nellie.Fig. 75.Molybdate of lead.Octobedrite.Prussiate of potash.Cyanuret of mercury.Fig. 76.5. Bight Prism with a square base. Jig. 76-— Idocrase.Temerity.Amaranthine.Maronite.Somerville.Edingtonite.Arseniate of potash.Sub-phosphate of potash.• Phosphate of ammonia andSulphate of nickel and copper.Hydrate of strontites.+ Apophyllite of upon.+ Oxahverite.+ Superacetate of copper andlime.+ Titania.+ Ice (certain crystals).magnesia.In all the preceding crystals and in the primitivefinns to which they belongs the line A X is the axis offigure and of double refraction or the only directionalong which there is no double refraction.On the Law of Double Refraction in 'Crystals with oneNegative Dans.(93.) In order to give a familiar explanation of theFig. 77.law of double refraction, let^ us suppose that a rhomb of'^ Iceland spar is turned in alathe to the form of a sphere,as shown in Jig. 77 .y AXbeing the axis of both therhomb and the sphere.If we now make a ray passL 3150 ▲ nuBATm w omni wlshvualong the axb A X^ after grinding or p«]iafaing a snipflat surface at A and X^ perpendicular to A X, nvahaVfind that there is no double refraction; die m d a^jand extraordinary ray forming a single ray. HenoeiThe index of refraction along 1 1 *654 for orcHnry rsy.the axis A X will be - J 1 '^^^ for extraordinary.0*000 difference.If we do the same at any points a, about 45^ fromthe axis we shall haveThe index of refraction along the line 1 1 •654 for ordinary ,which is nearly serpent 1*572 for extraordinarydicular to the face of the rhomb J ray.0082 difference.If we do the same at any point of the equator C J),inclined ^^ to the axis we shall haveThe index of refraction per- 1 1 *654 for ordinary raja*lenticular to the axis, J 1-483 for extraordinary n$*0-171 difference.Hence it follows that the index of extraordinary refractionincreases from the axis A X to the equator C Dorto a line perpendicular to the axis where it is thegreatest. The index of extraordinary refraction isthe same at all equal angles with the axis AX; andhence in every part of a circle described on ibe surfaceof the sphere roimd the pole A or X^ the index of extraordinaryrefraction has the same value and consa-^ quench the double refraction or separation of the rayswill be the same. In crystals therefore with one axis ofdouble refraction, the lines of equal double refraction arecircles parallel to the equator or circle of greatest doublerefraction.The celebrated Huygens to whom we owe the discoveryof the law of double refraction in crystals withone axis, has given the following method of determiningthe index of extraordinary refraction at any point of thesphere, when the ray of light is incident in a planepasdng through the axis oi ^"^ cr^«\ai K^^*. —e&iVi xni. pensive wnmtM mmwmAcnoN. 151"L$t it ben^BUtd^ iirexsiiiple^ to determine the index9tmGmfttkm§miba esJanuatdkuary ray Rab,Jig^77.,AXbeing the axis and C D the equator of the crystal; theordinary inn of refraction being known and also theleast or extraordinary index of refraction or that whidiitakaa place in the equator. In calcareous spar thesenumbers are 1*654 and 1*483. From O set off in theUne O C\ O D continued, O c, O d, ao that O C orODiatoOoorOdaa-j.-j^ is to f.^V?^ or as *604is to '674 ; and through the points A^ c, X, d, draw anellipses whose greater axis i& cd, and whose lesser axisis A X. The radius O a of the ellipse will be what iscalled the reciprocal of the index of refraction at a; and aswe can find O a, either by projecting the ellipse on a largescale or by calculation we have only to divide 1 by O ato haTe that index. In the present case O a is 'esq,and .^^7 ^ equal to 1*572> the index required.As the index of extraordinary refraction' thus foundalways diminishes from the pole A to the equator C J),and is always equal to the index of ordinary refractionfmnu8 another quantity depending on the differencebetween the radii of the drde and those of the ellipsethe crystals in which this takes place may be properly saidto have negative double refraction.In order to determine the direction of the extraordinaryrefracted ray when the plane of incidence is obliqueto a plane passing through the axis the process eitherby projection or calculation is too troublesome to begiven in an elementary work.In every case the force which produces the doublerefraction exerts itself as if it proceeded from the axis.Every plane passing through the axis is called a principalsection of the crystal.On the Law qfDwJble Refraction in Crystals with onePositive Ans,(94.) Among the crystals best fitted for exhibitingthe phenomena of positive double refraction is rock£. 4yi152 A Treatise ON OPTIGB. PABT'D-Vcrystal or quartz, a mineral which is generally found iBFig. 78. six-sided prisms like. 78.^ terminated withj^ six-sided pyramids E, F.v/f\ If we now grind down the summits A andT-X^ X^ and replace diem by faces well polished, and^ perpendicular to the axis AX; and if we tnnt-mit a ray through these faces so that it maypass along the axis A X, we shall find that thereis no double refraction, and that the index ofrefraction is as follows: —Index of refraction along"! 1-5484 for ordinary ray.the axis AX - - J 1 *5484 for extraordinary lay.0<XXX) difference.If we now transmit the ray perpendicularly throng*the parallel faces E F, which are inclined 38** 20' tothe axis A X, the plane of its incidence passing tfarou^A X, we shall obtain the following results : —Index of refraction serpent ^ .^^g^ ^^^ ^^dicular to the faces "♦^ *^ ^ ^^, ., I 1*5544 tor extraordinary ray.the pyramid - - J -^ '0-0060 difference.In like manner, it will he found that when the raypasses perpendicularly through the faces C D, perpendicularto the axis A X, the index of extraordinary refractionis the greatest, viz.idea of refraction serpent .5484 for ordinary univdicular to the faces of the >,.p,^„« r ,. '•Index of refractiondicular to the faces w* vuc /-. 00 xu -* j«^ -Q I 1 '5582 for extraordinary ray.0<X)98 difference.Hence it appears that in quartz the index of extraordinaryrefraction increases from the pole A to theequator C D, whereas it diminished in calcareous spar,and the extraordinary ray appears to he drawn to theaxis.In this case the variation of the index of extraordi-••txm. DOUBLE Refraction. 153TefiractkA will be represented by an ellipse Ae, Xd,whose greater axis coincides withthe axis A X of double refractionas in >^. 79v and O C will be to^« *8 T-Tb* is to T-3iff?, or as•6458 is to '6418. By determiningtherefore the radius Oa ofthe ellipse for any ray Kb a, anddividing 1 by it we shall have thec of extraordinary refraction for that ray.3 the index of extraordinary refraction is alwaysI to the indes of ordinary refraction pltu anothercity depending on the difference between the radiile circle and the ellipse the crystals in which thisI place may properly be said to have positive doubleaction.>n Crystals with two Axes of Double Refraction.I5.) The great variety of crystals, whether theymineral bodies or chemical substances, have twoof double refraction, or two directions inclined toother along which the double refraction is nothing,property of possessing two axes of double refractioncovered in 1815, and I found that it belonged totecrystals which are included in the prismatic syst£Mobs, or whose primitive forms areA right prism, base a rectangle.base a rhomb.^ base an oblique parallelogram*Oblique prism, base a rectangle.— — ^^— base a rhomb.-^-— base an oblique parallelogram.Octohedron, base a rectangle.base a rhomb.all these primitive forms there is not a single presentline or axis round which the figure is sym-cal.le following is a list of some of the most importantals, with their primitive forms accoidm^ to H«vsl^ ^154 A TRBAnOB ON •MOOi* FAST. IV.and the iociiiiatioii of the two lines or axes along whick.^there is no double refraction-«- ,■Glauberite - - 2^ or S^ Obl^oe prism, bate a riiomb. ;Nitrate of potash - ^2ff Octofaedron, base a recta:;Arragooite - • 18 18 OctobedroDy base a rectan|^ .Sulphate of barytes - S7 42 Right prism, base a recta JMica - - 45 Bight prism, base a rectanglesSulph^cflim. -«. o{^|^^;^«»*^Topaz - - 65 O Octohedn>n,baseaiectBO|^Carbonate of potash 80 30 Prismatic system of MonkSulphate of iron - 90 Oblique prism, base a ihomb.In crystals with one sans of double refraction the.axis has the same position whatever be the colour of thpencil of light which is used ; but in crystals with tmaxes the axes change their position according to tkcolour of the light employed so that the intrusion ofthe two axes varies with differently coloured rays. Thisdiscovery we owe to Mr. Herscbd^ who found that intartrate of potash and soda (Rochelle salts) the inclinationof the axis for ^kt light was about 56^, while m rdlight it was about 76^- In other crystals such as idlnithe inclination of the axes for the viokt rays is greaterthan for the red rays ; but in every case the line joiningthe extremity of the axes for all the different rays i& tstraight line.In examining the properties of Glavberite, I francthat it had two aaoesfor red light inclined about 5^^ tndonly one axis for viokt light.It was at first supposed that in crystals with twoaxes one of the rays was refracted according to the ordinarylaw of the sines and the other by an extraordinarylaw; but Mr. Fresnel has shown that both the raysare refracted according to laws of extraordinary refraction.On Crystals with innumerable Axes of DovAkRefraction.(96.) In the various doubly refracting bodies hithertomentioned the double refraction is related to one orUF. viz. BoiiBUi ttwwmifrmiK. 155me tCMem ; hA I hmwt found diat m onakiMe Were toeivcsal planes, tloag wMdi if die refrained raj pancsj.trill not anffir diable defections however Tarieua fatA dipectk»s in wl»ch it ia indent. Hence we maymidcr each of these plane aa containing an infiniteumber of area of double refraction or rather linea inhigh iSbete ia no double refraction. When the rayardent in any other direction, so that the refractedij 18 not in one of these planes it is divided into twolyt by dale zefractum. No other suhatanee has yeteen fraud poaaeaaing the same property.)» Bodies to which Double Refraction may he communicatedby Heat, rapid Cooling, Pressure, and Induration.(970 If we .take a cylinder of glass, C D^ fig. 80.,^. ao. and having brought it to a red heat roll italong a plate of metal upon its cylindrical sur*foot till it ia cold it will acquire a permanentdolly refracting structure and it will becomeI a cylinder with one positive axis of double re-fraction, A X^ coinciding with the axis of theY cylinder, and along which there is no doublerefraction. This axis differs from that invarta^ aa it ia a fixed line in the cylinder while it laonly a i|xed direction in the quartz; that is, any otherfine parallel to A X, fig. 80., is not an axis of doublefraction, but the double refraction along that line in-reaaea^ as it approaches the circumference of the china.The double refraction ia a maximum in thedirection C D^ being equal in every line perpendicular» the asia, and sang tiirou^ it.If in place of heating the glass cylinder, we hadjaded it in a vessel and surrounded it with boiling mlr boiling water it would have acquired the very samedoubly refracting structure when the heat had reachedbe asia AX; but this structure is only transient as itdaaj^ieara when the cylinder is uniformly heated.If we had heated the cylinder uniformly m )Dnii^^I -156 A TRBATI8B Wolf OPTICS. PABTX 1-oil or at a fire so as not to soften the grasse and \m i=placed it in a cold fluids it would have acquired a Ml kbsent doubly refracting structure as before when At Cicooling had reached the axis AX ; but its axis of doolki ir-refractionA X will now be a negative one, like that of ^calcareous spar.Analogous structures may be produced by preflnm >and by the induration of soft solids such as ammL ^jellies isinglass &c.If the cylinder in the preceding explanation is not ftregular one, but has its section perpendicular toneaxis every where an ellipse in place of a circle, it w3have two axes of double refraction.In like manner, if we use rectangular plates of ^Minstead of cylinders in the preceding experiment, 1Rshall have plates with two planes of double refraction;a positive structure being on one side of each plainsand a negative one on the other.If we use perfect spheres, there will be axes of doublerefraction along every diameter and consequently aninfinite number of them.The crystalline lenses of almost all animals, whetherthey are lenses, spheres, or spheroids have one or moreaxes of double refraction.All these phenomena will be more fully explainedwhen we treat of the colours produced by double refraction.On Substances with Circular Double Refraction,(98.) When we transmit a pencil of light along theaxis A X, fig. 73., of a crystal of quartz, it suffers nodouble refraction ; but certain phenomena, which will beafterwards described, are seen along this axis whichinduced M. Fresnel to examine the light which passedalong the axis. He found that it possessed a new kindof double refraction, and he distinctly observed therefraction of the two pencils. This kind of double refractionhas, from its properties been called Hrcukr;eBAP.ZYin. POLABTHATIOy OF LIGHT. 157lind it is divided into two kinds — positive or ,and n^gaHve or left-handed.The following substances possess this remarkablejwperty :—Positive Std>stances» Negative Substances*Bock crystal, certain specimens.Camphor.(HI of turpentineSolution of camphor in alcoholEssential oil of laurel.Vapour of turpentine.In e^ftminiTig this class of phenomena I found thatdie amethyst possessed in the same crystal both the'posture and die negative circular double refraction.'this subject will be more fully treated when we cometo that of circuit polarisation.Rock cristal, certain specimens.Concentrated syrup of sugar.Essential oil of lemon.CHAP. XVIII.ON THE POLARISATION OF LIOHT.If we transmit a beam of the sun's light through acircular aperture into a dark room and if we reflect itfrom any crystallised or crystallised body, or transmitit through a thin plate of either of them, it will bereflected and transmitted in the very same manner andwith the same intensity, whether the surface of thebody is held above or below the beam, or on the rightside or left, or on. any other side of it, provided that inaU these cases it falls upon the surface in the samemanner ; or, what amounts to the same thing, the beamof solar light has the same properties on all its sides ;and this is true, whether it is white light as directlyemitted from the sun, or whether it is red light, or lightof any other colour.The same property belongs to light emitted from a▲ Beatus OK OVTICB.euidk^ or any barniiig or idf-faimiiMiBS body., md dsuch light is called common light A Mcdon of octbeam of hf^ will be a drde, like AC B J>,fig. SL,miJF^. 81.we shall distinguish the section of a beam of eommiilight by a drde with two diameters Ab C D, atii|^angles to sadi other.If we now allow the same beam of light to fiH 19Ma rhomb of Iceland spar as mfy. 71 •> and examine dietwo circular beams O 0^ £ 6^ formed by doable leflM*tion, we shall find1. That the beams Oo,'Ee, laye different propertieson different sides ; so that each of them differs, in tuirespect from the beam of common list.2. That the beam O differs from £ e in nothing,excepting that the former has the same properties at diesides A^ and B' that the latter has at the sides C and Jf,as shown in. 76.; or, in general, that the diameters efthe beam, at the extremities of which the beam has idrmilan properties, are at right andes to each other, asA' B' and C D', for example.These two beams, O 0, £ e,fig. 81., are therefore saidto be polarised, or to be beams of polarised Hght, becamethey have sides or poles of different properties ; and planespassing through the lines A B, C D, or A' B', C P,are said to be the planes of polarisation of each beam,because they have the same property, and one which noother plane passing through the beam possesses.Now, it is a curious fact, that if we canse the twopolarised beams O 0, £ to be united into tie;, or ifwe produce them by a thin plate of Iceland spar, "MAIB not capable of sepsxatiln^ them, we obtain a beanAnti Xym. POiiARISATKW OF LIGHT. 159iflh has exactly the aaaae properties as the lieamB C D of common liiHence we infer, that a beam of common hg^A,BCD, consists of two beams of polarised light, whoselies of polarisation, or whose diameters of similarparties, are at right angles to one another. If O o is1 above £ e, it will produce a figure like A B C D,1 we shall therefore represent polarised light by suchgore. If we were to place O o above E 6, so thatplanes of polarisation A^B^ and CD' coincide,n we should have a beam of polarised light twice asninoos as either O o or E e, and possessing exactly theae properties; for the lines of similar property in theibeam coincide with the lines of similar property inother.Bene it follows that there are three ways of convertbeam of common light, A B C D, into a beam orms of polarised light1. We may separate the beam of common light,BCD, into its two component parts, O o and E e,2. We may turn round the planes of polarisation,3^ C D, tin they coincide or are parallel to each other.3. We may absorb or stop one of the beams, andire the other, which will consequently be in a state ofagitation.rhe first of these methods of producing polarisedit is that in which we employ a doubly refractingBaal, which we shall now consider.On the Polarisation of Light by Docile Hef ruction,{99') When a beam of light suffers double refrainfrom a negative crystal, as in Iceland spar, fig, 71 •>ere the ray R r is incident in the plane of die primalsection, or, what is the same thing, in a planewing through the axis, the two pencils r O, r E are•h polarised; the plane of polarisation of the ordinaryr r O being in the principal section, or in a verticale, and the plane of polarisation of Uie esx.ttaot^^'as^r rE being at right angles to the princes?! «ftc^o\3L,A Treatise ON OPTICS.n.or in a horizontal line as shown in fig. 82., Where isa section of the ordinary beam rO, fig. 71 •> intersectionof the extraordinary beam r E.Fis 82. J^. 83.O E .0 SIf the beam of light R r is incident upon a fOiittwcrystal, like quartz the plane of polarisation of the ordinaryray, O, fig, 83., is horizontal, and the plane ofthe extraordinary ray, E, vertical.The phenomena which arise from this opposite polarisationof the two pencils may he well seen in Iceland sir.For this purpose let A r X he the principal section da rhomh of Iceland spars. 84., through the axis A X,and perpendicular to one of the faces, and let A' F X'he another similar section, all the lines of the one beingparallel to all the lines of the other. A ray of list,R r. Incident perpendicularly at r, will he divided intotwo pencils; an ordinary one, r D, and an extraordinaryFig, 84. Fig, 85.Oo xJ oeone, r C. The ordinary ray falling on the second crystalat 6, again suffers extraordinary refraction, and emergemup. xym. polarisation of light. 161at K an ordinary ray O Oy with its plane of polarisationvertical as at O, fig. 82. In like manner the extraordinaryray t C, falling again on the second crystal atF^ suffers extraordinary refraction and emerges at H an 'extraordinary ray £ e, with its plane of polarisationhorizontal. These results are exactly the same as if thetwo crystals had formed a single crystal hy being unitedat their surfaces C X^ A^ G, either hy natural cohesionor hy a cement.Let the upper crystal A X now remain fixed withthe same ray R r falling upon it and let the secondcrystal Ax' he turned round 90°, so that its principalsection is perpendicular to that of the upper one,m shown in fig. 85. ; then the ray D G ordinarily re-directed hy the first rhomh will he extraordinarily refractedhy the second, and the ray C F extraordinarilyrefracted hy the first rhomh will he ordinarily refractedby the second.The pencils or images formed from the ray R r, inthe two positions shown in figs, 84. and 85., may hethus descried as marked in the figures : —O is the pencil refracted ordinarily by the firstbomb.is the pencil refracted extraordinarily by the firstrhomb.o is the pencil refracted ordinarily by the secondrhomb.6 is the pencil refracted extraordinarily by the secondrhomb.O o is the pencil refracted ordinarily by both rhombsin fig. 84.e is the pencil refracted extraordinarily hy bothrhombs in. 85.O « is the pencil refracted ordinarily by the first, andextraordinarily by the second rhomb in fig. 85.£o is the pencil refracted extraordinarily by thefirst, and ordinarily by the second rhomb in fig. 85.In body the cases shown in figs. 84. and 85., bikiniAe planes of ibe principal sections of the two i^cnx^ul62 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PAST H.are either parallel as in fig, 84.^ or perpendicular toeach other as in fig, 85.^ the nearest rhomh is not capableof doubly refracting or dividing into two any ofthe pencils which fall upon it ; bat in every other portionbetween the parallelism and the perpendicularsof the principal sections the two pencils formed by diefirst rhomb will be refracted doubly by the second.In order to explain the appearances in all intermediatepositions let us suppose that the ray R r proceedsfrom a round aperture like one of the chides at A^ f§,SQ,, and that the eye is placed behind the two rhomlBAB CJ%. 86.D E F G HIK• •;• ;• • •: •:••at H K,fig, S5,, so as to see the images of this aperture.Let the two images shown at A be the appearance ofthe aperture at R^ seen through one of the rhombs byan eye placed behind C J), fig, 84.^ then B will representthe images seen through the two rhombs in the positionin fig. 84f.3 their distance being doubled from sufferingthe same quantity of double refraction twice. If wenow turn the second rhomb or that nearest the eys^from left to rights two faint images will appear as at C|between the two bright ones, which will now be a Ktflefainter. By continuing to turn the four images will beall equally luminous, as at D ; they will next appear Mat E; and when the second rhomb has moved round 90^,as in fig. 85.y there will be only two images of equalbrightness, as at F. Continuing to turn the secondrhomb, two faint images will appear, as at G ; by a fartherrotation, they will be all equally bright, as at H ;farther on they will become unequal, as at I; and at180° of revolution, when the planes of the principalsection are again parallel, and the axes A X, A^ X^ atright angles nearly to each other, all the images willcoalesce into one biiglit im«^, «a at K^ having double■ OBAP. ZynX. Polarisation OF LIGHT* ismthe brightness of either of those at A^ B, or F^ and fourtimes the faintness of any one of the four at D and H.If we now follow any one of the images A^ B fromthe position in fy. 84.^ where the principal sections areincluded (f to one another to the position in Jig, 85.when it disappears at F^ we shall find that its )brightnessdiminishes as the square of the cosine of the anglefarmed by the principal sections while the brightnessof airy image from its appearance between B and C^J^. 8d.^ to its greatest brightness at F^ increases as theagitate of the sine of the same angle.By considering the preceding phenomena it will appearsthat whenever the plane of polarisation of a polarisedray whether ordinary or extraordinary, coincideswith or is parallel to the principal section the ray willbe refracted ordinarily; and whenever the plane of polarisationia perpendicular to the principal section, it willbe refracted extraordinarily. In all intermediate portionsit will sues both kinds of refraction, and will bedoubly refracted ; the ordinary pencil being the brightestIf the plane of polarisation is nearer the position of parallelismthan that of perpendicularity, and the extraordinarypencil the brightest if the plane of polarisationSs nearer the position of perpendicularity than that ofparallelism. At equal distances from both their positions,the ordinary and extraordinary images are equallybright.(100.) It does not appear from the preceding experimentsthat the polarisation of the two pencils is theerect of any polarity force resident in the Iceland spar,or of any change produced upon the light. The Icelandspar has merely separated the coition light into its twoelements, according to a different law, in the same manneras a prism separates all the seven colours of thespectrum from the compound white beam by its powerof refracting these elementary colours in different degrees.The re-union of the two oppositely polarisedpendls produces common light, in the same manner as there-union of all the seven colours produces white U^t.m2l64 ▲ Treatise ON OPTICS. PAST itThe method of producing polarised light by doablerefraction is of all others the best as we can procure lythis means from a given pencil of light a stronger polarisedbeam than in any other way. Throng a thicknessof three inches of Iceland spar we can obtain twoseparate beams of polarised light one third of an inch Iddiameter; and each of these beams contains half thelig^of the original beam excepting the small quantity of listlost by reflexion and absorption. By sticking a Madwafer on the spar opposite either of these beams we canprocure a polarised beam with its plane of polarisationeither in the principal section or at right angles to it Inall experiments on this subject the reader should recollectthat every beam of polarised Hght^ whether it is producedby the ordinary or the extraordinary refraction,or by positive or negative crystals has always the sameproperties provided the plane of its polarisation has diesame direction.CHAP. XIX.ON THE POLARISATION OF LIOHT BY BEFUBZION.(101.) In the year 1810, the celebrated French philosopherM. Malus, while looking through a prism ofcalcareous spar at the light of the setting sun reflectedfrom the windows of the Luxembourg palace in Paris,was led to the curious discovery, that a beam of Hetreflected from glass at an angle of 56°, or from waterat an angle of 52^ 45^, possessed the very same propertiesas one of the rays formed by a rhomb of c^ct-rebus spar ; that is, that it was wholly polarised, havingits plane of polarisation coincident with or panUd tothe plane of reflexion.This most curious and important fact, which he foundto be true when the "hel ^^ icAfi5:^ed from all otherCHAP. XIX. POLARISATION BY Reflexion. lestransparent or opaque bodies excepting metals gavefaith to all those discoveries which have in our own4ay^ rendered this branch of knowledge one of the mostinteresting »( well as one of the most perfect of thephysical sciences.In order to explain this and the other discoveries ofMahis^ let C D Jtg, SJ; be a tube of brass or woodhaving at one end of it a plate of glass A^ not quick.Fig. 87.severed and capable of turning round an axis so that itmay form different angles with the axis of the tube.Let D6 be a similar tube a little smaller than the otherand carrying a similar plate of glass B. If the tubeD G is pushed into C D^ we may by turning the oneor the other round; place the two glass plates in anyposition in relation to one another.Let a beam of lights Ber, from a candle or a hole in thewindow-shutter fall upon the glass plate A^ at an angleof 56P 45^ j and let the glass be so placed that the reflectedray r s may pass along the axis of the two tubesand fall upon the second plate of glass B at the point s.If die ray r s falls upon the second plate B at an angleof 56^45^ also and if the plane of reflexion from this .pute or the plane passing through s E and s r, is atriot angles to the plane of reflexion from the first plateor a plane passing through r R^ rs, the ray r 8 will nota^ffer reflexion from B^ or will be so faint as to bescarcely visible. The very same thing will happen ifr« is a ray polarised by double refraction, and having •its plane of polarisation in the plane pa;s&m^ \!bxQ\x^u 3A TtLBAnse off OtTUXUFabricrHy r9. Here then we have a new property or teet ofpolarised lights — that it will not sufl^ reflexion from tfplate of glass B^ when incident at an angle of 56^/and when the plane of incidence or reflexion is at rigangles to the plane of polarisation of the ray. If ntfnow turn round the the DG with the plate B^ withotfimoving the the Cd the last reflected ray «£ willbecome brighter and brighter till the the has bettturned round 90°, when the plane of reflexion £ram Bis coincident with or parallel to that from A. In thisposition the reflected ray «£ is brightest. By continuingto turn the tube Dg the ray «£ becomes ftEdnterand fainter till after being turned 90^ farther the ny« £ is faintest or nearly vanishes which happens whenthe plane of reflexion from B is perpendicular to thtfrom A. After a farther rotation of espy the ray «£will recover its greatest brightness; and when by a itiHfarther rotation of 90^ the tube D G or plate B arebrought back into their first position the ray 9 £ wiSagain disappear. These effects may be arranged in atable as follows : —Inclination ef the plana of the two reflections*or the planes R r « and r « E,or animates of the planes r « E.State of brightness of thereflected from the seooad plateornrflIsoAt angles between 90° and 180^180° ■ .At angles between Iso and 270°270OAt angles between S70° and 3&PS60Pm(P - - - .At angles between (P and 9(P\9V>Scarcely visibleThe image grows brighter and tarightoiBrightestThe image ^ws linter and fidntarScarcely visible ,The image grows brighter andteii^taBrightestThe image grows fitter and fitterScanty visibleIf we now substitute in place of the ray r 9 one ofthe polarised rays or beams formed by Iceland spar, sothat its plane of polarisation is in the plane Rr, itwill experience the very same changes as the ray B fdoes when polarised by reflexion from A at an angleof 56^ 45^ Hence it is manifest, that a ray reflectedat 56^ from glass has all the properties of polarisedlight as produced by double refraction.(102.) In the preceding observations, the ray Rf 11Soup. XIZ. POLARISATION BT Reflexion. l67oqipoaed to be reflected only from the first surface oflie glass ; but Malus found that the light reflected fromthe second surface of the glass was polarised at the sametime with that reflected from the firsts although it obviouslysuffers reflexion at a different angle viz. at anequal to the angle of refraction at the first surface.The angle of 56° 45'^ at which light is polarised byKflodon from ^ass, is called its maximum polarisingngley because the greatest quantity of light is polarisedat that angle. When the light was reflected at anglesgreater or less than 56°, Malus found that a portion ofit only was polarised the remaining portion possessing alltint p properties of common light. The polarised portiondiminished as the angle of incidence receded on eitherode fi:om 56^ , and was nothing at 0^^ or a perpendi-oikr incidence, and also nothing at 90^> or the most^Uiqne incidence.In continuing his experiments on this subject Malusfind that the angle of maximum polarisation variedwith different bodies ; and, after measuring it in varioussubstances, he concluded that it follows neither the ordercfthe refractive powers nor that of the dispersive powers,but that it is a property of bodies independent of themither modes of action which they exercise over light. Afterhe had determined the angles under which completepolarisation takes place in different bodies, such as glassand water, he endeavoured to ascertain the angle atwhich it took place at their separating surfaces whenidiey were put in contact. In this enquiry, however, hedid not succeed ; and he remarks, ^' that the law accord,fng to which this last angle depends on the two firstremains to be determined."If a pence or beam of light reflected at the maximumpolarising angle from glass and other bodies were ascompletely polarised as a pencil polarised by double refraction,then the two pencils would have been equallyinvisible when reflected from the second plate, B, at theazimuth 90^ and 270^ ; but this is not the case : thepencil polarised by double refraction «ani«Kes en^i^^M 4les A Treatise ON OPTICS. PAftTlLwhen it passes through a second rhomh, even if it is tbeam of the sun's direct light; whereas the pencilpolarised hy reflexion vanishes only if its light is fsdnt,and if the plates A and JB have a low disperse power.When the sun's light is used there is a large quantityof polarised lights and this polarised light is readyincreased when the plates A and B have a high dispersivepower. This curious and most important factwas not observed hy Mains.A very pleasing and instructive variation of the generalexperiment shown in fig, 87* occurred to me inexamining this subject. If, when the plates of glass Aand B have the position shown in the figure where ^luminous body from which the ray s E proceeds is invisiblewe breathe gently upon the plate B, the ray«Bwill be recovered, and the luminous body from which itproceeds will be instantly visible. The cause of this isobvious : a thin film of water is deposited upon the glassby breathing, and as water polarises light at an angle aHabout 52^ 45^ the glass B should have been inclined atan angle of 52° 45' to the ray r*, in order to be inaable of reflecting the polarised ray*; but as it is inclinedo6° to the incident ray r s, it has the power of reflectinga portion of the ray r s.If the glass B is now placed at an angle of 52° 45'to the ray r s, it will then reflect a portion of the polarisedray r « to the eye at E; but if we breathe uponthe glass B, the reflected light will disappear, becausethe reflecting surface is now water, and is placed at anangle of 52° 45', the polarising angle for water. If wetherefore place two glass plates at B, the one inclined56^ 4<5', and the other 52° 45', to the beam r 8, sufficientlylarge to fall upon both, the luminous object willbe visible in the one but not in the other ; but if webreathe upon the two plates, we shall exhibit the paradoxof reviving an invisible image, and extinguishing avisible one by the same breath. This experiment willWe neglect the consideration of the separating surface of the wttec udgiau, and suppose the g\3«s B to be o^c^e.BAT. XIZ. Polarisation BY BEFIJSXION. leemore striking if the ray rs is polarised by doubleinfraction.Qa <&« Law of the Polarisation of Light by Reflexion,(103.) From a very extensive series of experimentstate to determine the maximum polarising angles ofuioas bodies both solid and fluid, I was led in 1814^• the following simple law of the phenomena : —The indeai of refraction, is the tangent of the angle ofAmotion.In order to explain this law and to show how to findpolarising angle for any body whose index of refirac-m is known let M N be the surface of any transplantbody such as water. From any pointy r, draw r Aipendiculai^ to M N^ Jig. 88.^ and round r as a centredescribe a circle, M A N D.From A draw A F, touching thecircle at A, and from any scaleon which A r is 1 or 10 set offA F equal to 1-336 or 13-36, theindex of refraction for water.From F draw F r, which will betheincident ray that will bepolarised by reflexion from theter in the direction r S. The angle A r R will be^ 11^^ or the angle of maximum polarisation for theter. This angle may be obtained more readily by lookfor 1-336 in the column of natural tangents in a>k of logarithms, and there will be found opposite tothe corresponding angle of 53° 11^ If we calculateangle of refraction T r D, corresponding to the^ of incidence A r R, or determine it by project,we shall find it to be 36° 49'.From the preceding law we may draw the followingillusions:— r-1. The maximum polarising angle, for all substanceslatever^ is the complement of the angle of refraction.r170 A Treatise ON 0PTIC8. part OleThuB^ in water the complement of S6^ ^ is 5^ 11^.the polarising angle. -^2. At the polarising angle the sum of the an flj[jincidence and refraction is a right angle or 90°. Thn^yin water the angle of incidence is 53° 1 \\ and thatof refraction36° 49 > and their sum is 90°.3. When a ray of lights R r^ is polarised by reflezki^the reflected ray r S^ forms a right angle with ^ iftijfracted ray, r T. , -^When light is reflected at the second surface of bodicethe law of polarisation is as follows : — jThe index of refraction is the cotangent of the angeof polarisation.In order to determine the angle in this case, let M Ifbe the second surface of any body such as water. Fion .r draw r A perpendicular to M N,j||^S9; and round r describe the chidesM A N D. From A draw A P,;touching the circle at A, and upon tscale in which r N is 1 or 10 tikeA F equal to 1-336 or 13-36, tk,index of refraction, and from Fdraw F r; the ray R r will be polarisedwhen reflected in the directedr S. The maximum polarising angle A r R will beS6° 49^ exactly equal to the angle of refraction of diefirst surface. Hence it follows,1. That the polarising angle at the second surface ofbodies is equal to the complement of the polarising anat the first, or to the angle of refraction at the first surface.The reason is, therefore, obvious why the potionsof a beam of light reflected at the first and secondsurfaces of a transparent parallel plate are simultaneouslypolarised.2. That the angle which the reflected ray r S finnswith the refracted ray r T is a right angle.The laws of polarisation now explained are amiableto the separating surfaces of two media of differrefractive powers. If the uppermost fluid is water, andliBtAF.VQIcABlftATION BY REFLEXION.le undermost glass then the index of refraction ofheir separating surface is equal to ^ .^^^ to the greaternez divided by the lesser which is 1*1415* Byfag this index it will be found that the polarising^ is 48«> 47'.When the ray moves from the least refractive into the greatest as from water to ^ass, as inlie preceding case we must make use of the law andle method above explained for the first surface ofindies ; but when the ray moves from the greatest re-active body into the least as from oil of cassia to glassemost use the law and method for the second surfacesbodies.If we lay a parallel stratum of water upon glasshose index of refraction is 1*508^ the ray reflectedem the refracting surfaces will be polarised when the1^ of incidence upon the first surface of the water(104.) The preceding observations are all applicable tobite lists or to the most luminous rays of the spectrum ;It, aa every different colour has a different index of re-action the law enables us to determine the angle ofpolarisation for every different colour, as in the followingUe, where it is supposed that the most luminous ray^ the spectrum is the mean one : —PtAXK GlassOklot Cassia •Red raysMean raysViolet raysRed raysMean raysViolet raysRed raysMeanesViolet raysIndex ofRefraction1-3301*8361-3421-5151-5251-5351-5971-6421-687MaximinPolariftingAn§fiit»53° 4'53 1153 1956 3456 4556 5551 5758 4059 21Difference betweenthe gmtot andleast PalliatingAngles.15'21'10 24'The circumstance of the different rays of the spectrumbeing polarised at different angles, enables us to explainlie existence of polarised I^ht at the inaKimvuDci "^^172 A Treatise ON OFTIOB. PAST E.arising angle or why the raj « £^ in fig, 82.^ neicrwholly vanishes. If we were to use red light, and letthe two plates at angles of b^^ S4i\ the polarising anfor red lights then the pencil a E would vanish entire.But when the light is white, and the angle at which Aiplates are set is 5^^^ ^5', or that which belongs to micaor yellow rays then it is only the yellow rays that nHvanish in the pencil « E. A small portion of red and ismall portion of violet will be reflected because teglasses are not set at their polarising angles; and Atmixture of these two colours will produce a piD|kcolour which will be that of the polarised light idddiremains in the pencil 8 E. If we place the plates at Ae fangle belonging to the red ray then the rid only irisvanish and the colour of the polarised light wm kbluish green. If we place the plates at the an correspondingwith the blue lights then the hltie only ifi&vanish and the polarised light will be of a recUUkcast. In oil of cassia, diamond, chromate of lead, reaXgaTispecular iron, and other highly dispersive substancesthe colour of the polarised light is extremely brilliantand beautiful.Certain doubly refracting crystals such as Icdaaispar, chromate of lead, &c,, have different polarisingangles on different surfaces and in different directionson the same surfaces; but there is always onedirection where the polarisation is not affected by thedoubly refracting force or where the tangent of thepolarising angle is equal to the index of ordinary refraction.On the partial Polarisation of Light by Reflexion,(105.) If, in the apparatus in fig, 87., we make theray R r fall upon the plate A at ^n angle greater or k»than 5&^ 45', then the ray s E will not vanish entirely;but, as a considerable part of it will vanish like polarisedlight. Mains called it partially polarised light, and consideredit as composed of a portion of light perfectlypolarised, and of another portion in the state of commonOHAP. ImpartialPOLARISATION.ii^t. He found the quantity of polarised light .todiminish as the angle of incidence receded from that offtaximnm polarisation.M. Biot and M. Arago also maintained that partiallypolarised Het consisted partly of polarised and partlyof common list; and the latter announced that at'regular angular distances above and below the maximumarising angle the reflected pencil contained the sameproportion of polarised light. In jS^^. Robin's glass hefranc that the same proportion of light was polarisedit an an of incidence of 11° 40' as at 60° 18' ; inwater he found that the same proportion was polarised at8* 29' as at 73° 48'; hut he remarks, " that the mathematicallaw which connects the value of the quantity ofpdariBed light with the angle of incidence and the re-active power of the body has not yet been discovered.'In the investigation of this subject*! found thattfaoDgh there was only one angle at which light couldbe completely polarised hy one reflexion, yet it mighthi polarised at any angle of incidence by a sufficientnumber ofrefleaions, as shown in the following Table.blow Tm 70LARI8INO ANGLE.ABOVE THE POLARISING ANGLE.li^cc^Angle at wych the LightUpcdarlaed.Reflexion.Angle at which the Li|^tis polarised.56^45'56° 45'50 2662 3046 3065 334 •43 5167 3341 4369 1€70 938 3371 537 2071 51In polarising light hy successive reflexions, it is notnecessary that the reflexions be performed at the sameVDfjie. Some of them may be above and some belowthe polarising angle, or all the reflexions may be per-fanned at different angles.From the preceding facts it follows as a uecesMT]174 A TREATISE ON OPTIOB. PABTILconsequence that partially polarised lights or Hg^ nu bfleeted at an angle different from the polarising an ihas suffered a physical change which enables it to bemore easily polarised hy a subsequent reflexion. Thelights for examples which remains polarised after fifereflexions at 70^^ in place of being common lights hissuffered such a physical change that it is capable ofbeing completely polarised by one reflexion more it70°.This view of the subject has been rejected by M.Argos as incompatible with experiments and specof* ;nations of his own ; and, in estimating the value of pitttwo opinions Mr. Herschel has rejected mine as the kmprobable. It will be seen however from the flowingfacts that it is capable of the most rigorous denotestation.It does not appears from the preceding enquiries hoira beam of common light is converted into polarityHght by reflexion. By, a series of experiments made k1829> I have been able to remove this difficulty. ft.has been long known that a polarisecfbeam of list Iwits plane of polarisation changed by reflexion frombodies. If its plane is inclined 45° to the plane of »•flexion its inclination will be diminished by a reflexionat 80°^ still more by one at 70°^ still more by one at60^ ; and at the polarising angle the plane of the polarisedray will be in the plane of reflexion the indignationcommencing again at reflexions above the polishingangle, and increasing till at OP, or a perpendicular incidence,the inclination is again 45°.* I now conceiveda beam of common light, constituted as in. 76.^ to beincident on a reflecting surface, so that the plane of reflexionbisected the angle of QO^ which the two plainsof polarisation, A B, C D, formed with each other, tfshown in fig, 90., No. 1., where M N is the plane ofreflexion and A B, C D the planes of polarisation ofThe rule for finding the inclination is this : — Find the sum of the 0^of incidence and refraction, and also their difference ; cUvide the cam*of the former b^ the cosine of the latter, and the quotient «|U be the tfl^gent of the inclination required.slap. XXX. PARTIAL POLARISATION. 175tibe beam of white fig sadi inclined 45^ to M N. Byft reflexion from glass where the index of refraction= No. 1. ^- «>•NashC®kV9Z5, at SOP, the inclination ofABtoMNwiUbe83^ 13'^ as in No. 2., instead of 45® ; and in like manetthe inclination of C D to MN will be 33^ 13', inplace of 45°; so that the inclination of A B,to C D inpitoe of 90^ is 66^ 26% as in No. 2. At an incidenceaf eS"" the inclination of A B to C D will be 25^ 3&,m in No. 3.; and at the polarising angle of 56^ 45^ theplanes A B^ C D of the two beam will be parallel orppinddent, as in No. 4. At incidence bebw 56^ ^b'k planes will again open and their inclination vdllincrease till at O^of incidence it is 90^^ aa in No. 1.^hitting been 25^ 3%' at an incidence of about 48^ 15^^ asin No. 3,y and 6^^ 26^ at an incidence of about 30^^ asinNo^ 2.In the process now described we see the manner inwldch eomvMm light, as in No. 1.^ is converted intopolarised light, as in No. 4t,, by the action of a reflectingm£ioe. Each of the two planes of its component polarisedbeams is turned round into a state of parallelismso as to be a beam with only one plane of polarisationas in No. 4.; a mode of polarisation essentially differentin its nature from that of double refraction. The numberin fig. 90. present us with beams of light in differentMages of polarisation from common light in No. 1. topolarised light in No. 4. In No. 2. the beam has madea certain approach to polarisation having suffered aphysical change in the inclination of its planes ; and inNo. 3. it has made a nearer approach to it. Hence wediscover the whole mystery of partial polarisation, andA TREATISE OK OPTICS.fABTItIwe see that partially polarised light is light whose pbmSIof polarisation are inclined at angles less than 90^. Theinfluence of successive reflexions is therefore obvious.A reflexion at 80^ will turn the i^ianes^ as in j^. 90^No. 2.; another reflexion at 80^ will bring them closer; tthird still closer; and so on: and though they never canlifthis process be brought into a state of exact paralysisas in No. 4. (which can only be done at the planningangles yet they can be brought infinitely near it so iiithe beam will appear as completely poised as if it Ubeen reflected at the polarising angle. The correctedof my former experiments and views is therefore d^demonstrated by the preceding analysis of common U^It is manifest from these views that partially polarisedlight does not contain a single ray of comjpkll^polarised light; and yet if we reflect it from the seooadplate B, in fig, 87; at the polarising angle a certain portionof it will disappear as if it were polarised list, iresult which led to the mistake of Malus and other.The light which thus disappears may be called apt*gently polarised light ; and I have explained in anotherplace* how we may determine its quantity at any angeof incidence and for any refractive medium. The followingTable contains some of the results for glass iduMeindex of refraction is 1*525. The quantity of reflectedlight is calculated by a rule given by M. Fresnel.Angles ofInclination of the Planesof PcdaiiMtkm. AB.Quanti of reflectedQuntttyorMladiadIncidence.C D, fy(. 90.Rays oat of 1000.Ki^ out of 1000.0«»90® 0'43-2380 2643-417-2247 2249-1033-2556 45'79-579-537 4162-67129-866 26391-71.56-678 24616-28123-751000-0.See Phil TransacHotu, 18S9, p. 76., or Edinburgh Journal itfSdmettNew Series, Naw. p. leo.Polarisation OF REFRACTION.CHAP. XX.ON THE POLARISATION OF LIGHT BT ORDINARYREFRACTION.rt 06.) Although it might have been presumed that theSt refracted by bodies suffered some change correspondingto that which it receives iron reflexion yet it wasnot till 1811 that it was discovered that the refractedlotion of the beam contained a portion of polarisedHght.*To explain this property of light, let R r,fig. 91., be9 beam of light incident at a great angle between 80^ittid 90^ on a horizontal plate of glass No. I. ; a portionof it will be reflected at its two surfaces r andFig, 91.a, and the refracted beam a is found to contain a smallportion of polarised light.If this beam a again falls upon a second plate. No. 2.,parallel to the first, it will suffer two reflexions ; and therefracted pencil b will contain more polarised light thano. In like manner, by transmitting it through theplates Nos. 3, 4, 5, and 6., the last refracted pencil, /, willl)e found to consist entirely, so far as the eye can judge,of polarised light. But, what is very interesting, thebeam fg is not polarised in the plane of refraction orreflexion, but in a plane at right angles to it ; that is,This discovery-vaa made by independent observation by Malus, Biot,<&nd the author of this work.NA TREATISE ON OPTIOB.PAsrn.its plane of polarisation in place of being vertical, likethat of the ordinary ray in Iceland spar or that of lig^polarised by reflexion is horizontal like that of the extraordinaryray in Iceland spar. From a great numbffof experiments I found that the light of a wax candle itthe distance of 10 or 12 feet was polarised at the fcdlov^ing angles by the following nmnber of plates of crownglass.No. of Plates ofCrown Glass.Observed AnsleB atwhich thePencUis polarised.No. of Plates ofCrownUlaM.ObkcrrcdAiHiaMvhich&ePtacUUpoUilnd.79° 11'57° icy53 2869 450 563 214.5 3560 841 41It follows from the above experiments that if wedivide the number 41*84 by any number of crown fmplates we shall have the tangent of the angle at laothe beam is polarised by that number.Hence it is obvious tiiiat the power of polarising dierefracted light increases with the angle of inddeDee,being nothing or a minimum at a perpendicular intense,or 0^^ and the greatest possible or a maximum at 90^ ofincidence. I found likewise by various experiment,that the power of polarising the light at any given angleincreased with the refractive power of the body, exodconsequently that a smaller number of plates of a hisrefracting body was necessary than of a low refractingbody, the angle of incidence being the same.As Malus, Biot, and Arago considered the beams a,b, &c., before they were completely polarised, as pat'tidily polarised and as consisting of a portion of polarisedand a portion of polarised light ; so, on the otherhand, I concluded from the following reasoning that thepolarised light had suffered a physical change, whichmade it approach to the state of complete polarisation'For since sixteen plates are required to polarised completelya beam of light incident at an angle of 69^, it isclear that eight plates will not polarised die whole beamIAhab. ZZ. FOLABIBATIOir OF BBFBAOTION.at the tame angle, but will leave a portion unpolluted.flow, if this portion were absolutely unpolished likeforamen lights it would require to pass through otheriiaLteen jiLaieA, at an angle of 69^^ in order to be completelypraised ; but the truth is that it requires tojMMB throng only eight plates to be completely polarised.Hence I conclude that the beam has been nearly halfpolarised by the first eight plates, and the polarisationcompleted by the other eight. This conclusion, thouerected by both the French and English philosophers iscapable of rigid demonstration as will appear from theflowing observations.In order to determine the change which refractionproduced in the plane of polarisation of a polarised ray,I used prisms and plates of glass, plates of water, and aplate of a highly Refractive metalline glass ; and I found-lluit a refracting surface produced the greatest change at'die most oblique incidence, or that of 90^; and that thediange gradually diminished to a perpendicular incidence,cr 0^3 where it was nothing. I found also that thegreatest effect produced by a single plate of glass wasshout 16^ 39^ at an angle of 86°; that it was 3° 5' at an■ng^ of 53^, l^ I9f at an angle of 30^ and 0^ at anangle of 0^.*A beam of common light, therefore, constituted as in/^, 92.y No. 1., with each of its planes A B, C D in-Fig. 92.dined 45^ to the plane of refraction, will have theseIslands opened l6P Sff each, by one plate of glass at anThe rule for finding the inclination is as follows : •— Find thediflfbrencebetween the angles of incidence and refraction, and take the cosine of this(Florence This number will be the cotangent of the inclination required ;and twice this inclination will be the inclination of A B to C D.N 2A TREATISE ON OPTICS.PABTUfincidence of 86° ; that is their indications in place of90°, will be 123° 18', as in No. 2. By the action rfthe other two or three pates they will be opened wider,as in No. 8. ; and by 7 or 8 plates they will be openedto near 180°, or so that A B, C D nearly coincide, as inNo. 4., so as to form a single polarised beam, whoseplane of polarisation is perpendicular to the plane ofrefraction. I have shown, in another place*, that theseplanes can never be brought info mathematical coincidenceby any number of refractions; but they approachso near to it that the pencil is, to all appearance, okdei-pleteiy polarised with lights of ordinary strength. AUthe light polarised by refraction is only partially polarisedand it has the same properties as that wych 11partially polarised by reflexion. A certain portion ofthe light of a beam thus partially polarised, will disappearwhen reflected at the polarising angle from theplate B,fig. 87*; and this quantity, which I have elsewhereshown how to calculate, is given in the followingtable for a single surface of glass, whose index of refractionis 1*525An^IenfIncidence.Inclination of the Plainof Polarisation C D,Quantity of transmittedRa7*outofl(NX).Quantity of potarindRajaoutof lUUO*0°90" 0'956-7790 26956-597-22950-9033-2556 45'94 58920-579-598 56837-33129-8104 55608 -S156-6108 44383-72123-75112 58Although the quantity of light polarised by refractionas given in the last column of this Table, is calculated bya formula essentially different from that by which 4equantity of light polarised by reflexion was calculated ;yet it is curious to see that the two quantities are preciselyequal. Hence we obtain the following law: — •When a ray of common light is reflected and refradei•See Pla. Transactions, 1829, ix 137. or Edinburgh Joumai (^ ScknettNurseries, No. VI.p.218.flap; XX. POlABlBAtlON BY REFRACTION. 181hf any surface, the quantity of light polarised by refrainis eaeacthf equal to that polarised by reflexion.This law is not at all applicable to plates as it appearedto be from the experiments of M. Arago.When the preceding method of analysis is applied toIbe light reflected by the second surfaces of plates weobtain the following curious law: —A pencil of light reflects from the second surfaces oftransparent plates, and reaching the eye after two retraceand an intermediate reflexion, contains at all anglesqf incidence, from 0^ to the maximum polarising angle, aportion of light polarised in the plane of reflexion. AboveAe polarising angle, the part of the pencil polarised inA« pkme of reflexion diminishes, till the incidence becomes78^ 7' in glf^^f when it disappears, and the whole pencilhoM the character of common light. Above this last angleUie pencil contains a quantity of light polarised perpendicularlyto the plane of reflexion, which increases to awnaxtmum, and tien diminishes to nothing at 90^.^(107«) As a bundle of glass plates acts upon lights andpolarises it as effectually as reflexion from the surface offjLsLSB at the polarising angle we may substitute a bundle ofglass plates in the apparatus fig, SJ; in place of the platesof glass A^ B. Thus if A (fig, 93.) is a bundle of glassFig, 93,#^-jfc;plates which polarises the transmitted ray s t, then if theBj^cond bundle B^ is placed as in the figure with the.planes of refraction of its plates parallel to the planes ofrefraction of the plates of A, the ray s t will penetratethe second bundle ; and if st is incident on B at thepolarising angle, not a ray of it will be reflected by theplates of B. If B is now turned round its axis thetransmitted light v w will gradually diminish and moreand more light will be reflected by the plates of the• See Phil. Trans. 1830, p. 145. ; or Edinburgh Journal of Science,Ka VI. p. 234. New Series.N 3182 A Treatise ON OPTIOS. FABT ILbundle till, after a rotation of 90^, the ray v w will dii-appear,and all the light will be reflected. By continuingto turn round B, the ray v w will re-appear, andreach its maximum brightness at 180^, its minimum tt270^, and its maximum at 0^, after having made onecomplete revolution.By this apparatus we may perform the very same experimentswith refracted polarised light that we did withreflected polarised light in the apparatus of fy. 87*We have now described two methods of convertingcommon light into polarised light : 1st, By separatingby double refraction the two oppositely polished beamswhich constitute common light ; and, 2dly, By turninground, by the action of the reflecting and refractingforces, the planes of both these beams till they ccnndde,and thus form light polarised in one plane. Anothermethod still remains to be noticed ; namely, to dispenseor absorb one of the oppositely polarised beams whichconstitute common light, and leave the other beam polarisedin one plane. These effects may be produced hfagate and tourmaline, &c.1 08.) If we transmit a beam of common light throoj^a plate of agate, one of the oppositely polarised beamswill be converted into a nebulous light in one position,and the other polarised beam in another position, so thatone of the polarised beams with a single plane of polarisationis left. The same efibct may be produced byIceland spar, arragonite, and artificial salts prepared inaparticular manner, to produce a dispersion of one ofthe oppositely polarised beams.*Wlien we transmit common light through a thin plateof tourmaline, one of the oppositely polarised beamswhich constitute common light is entirely absorbed inone position, and the other in another position, one ofthem always remaining with a single plane of polarisation.Hence plates of agate and tourmaline are of great use,• See Edinburgh Encyclopaedia, vol xv. pp. 600, 601. ; PML Trans. Wp.146.Chap. ZXI. COLOURS OF OBYgTALLISED PLATES. 183either in affording a beam of light polarised in one planeer in dispersing and absorbing one of the pencils of acompound beam when we wish to analyse it or to examinethe colour or properties of one of the pencils seenCHAP. XXI.ON THE COLOURS OF CRYSTALLISED PLATES INPOLARISED LIGHT.(109*) The splendid colours and systems of colouredrings, produced by transmitting polarised light throughTransparent bodies that possess double refraction areundoubtedly the most brilliant phenomena that can beexhibited. The colours produced by these bodies werefirst discovered by independent observations by M. Aragoand the author of this volume; and they have beenstudied with great success by M. Biot and other authors.In order to exhibit these phenomena let a polarisingparatus be prepared similar in its nature to that inJ^ 87* ; but without the tubes as shown in fig 9^.,Where A is a plate of glass which polarises the rayFig. 94.rR r, incident upon it at an angle of 56^ 4^5' ^ and reflectsIt polarised in the direction r 8, where it is received bys second plate of glass B, whose plane of reflexion is atright angles to that of the plate A, and which reflects itto the eye at O, at an angle of 56^ 45^ In order that thepolarised pencil r s may be sufficiently brilliant, ten ortwdveplates of window glass, or, what is better stills thinn4J184 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. part ILplates of well-annealed flint glass should be substituted inplace of the single plate A. The plate or plates at A arecalled the polarising plates, because their only use is tofurnish us with a broad and bright beam of polarisedlight. The plate B is called the analysing pUUe, becauseits use is to analyse or separate into its parts, the lig^transmitted through any body that may be placed betweenthe eye and the polarising plate.If the beam of light R r proceeds from the sky, whichwill answer well enough for common purposes, then aneye placed at O will see, in the direction O s, the part ofthe sky from which the beam Rr proceeds. But as r fwill be polarised light if it is reflected at 56^ 45' fromA, almost none of it will be reflected to the eye at Efrom the plate B; that is, the eye at O will see, upon die'part of the sky from which B r proceeds, a black spot?and when it does not see this black spot, it is a proofthat the plates A and B are not placed at the proper inclinationsto each other. When a position is found,either by moving A or B, or both, at which the Ladspot is darkest, the apparatus is properly adjusted.(110.) Having procured a thin film of sulphate oflime or mica, between the 20th and the 60th of an inchthick, and which may be split by a fine knife or lancetfrom a mass of any of these minerals in a transparentstate, expose it, as shown at C £ D F, so that the polarisedbeam r s may pass through it perpendicularly.If we now apply the eye at O, and look towards Aeblack spot in the direction O s, we shall see the surfaceof the plate of sulphate of lime entirely covered with themost brilliant colours. If its thickness is perfectlyuniform throughout, its tint will be perfectly unifbnn ;but if it has different thicknesses, every different thicknesswill display a different colour — some red, somegreen, some blue, and some yellow, and all of the mostbrilliant description. If we turn the film Cederound, keeping it perpendicular to the polarised beam,the colours will become less or more bright withoutchanging their nature, and two lines C D, £ F at rij^tChap. ZXl. COLOURS OF Crystallised PLATES. 185angles will be founds so that when either of them is inthe plane of reflexion rsO, no colours whatever areperceived and the black spot will be seen as if the sulphateof lime had not been interposed or as if a pieceof oimiinon glass had been substituted for it. It willabo be observed by continuing the rotation of the sulphateof lime that the colours again begin to appear;and reach their greatest brightness when either of thelines G H, L K, which are inclined 45° to C D, E F,are in the plane of reflexion rsO, The plane R r «^or the plane in which the light is polarised is called^ plane of primitive polarisation; the lines C D^ £ F,ife neutral axes; and G H^ K L^ the demoralising axes,because they polarised or change the polarisation of thepolarised beam r s. The brilliancy or intensity of thecolours increase gradually from the position of no colourto that in which it is the most brilliant.Let us now suppose the plate C £ D F to be fixed inthe position where it gives the brightest colour ; namelywhen GH is parallel or perpendicular to the plane ofprimitive polarisation R r «^ or to the plane rsO, andlet the colour be red. Let the analysing plate B bemade to revolve round the ray r s, beginning its motionat QPy and preserving always the same inclination to theray r*, viz. 56^ 45'. The brightest red being nowvisibLe at QP, when the plate B begins to move from itsposition shown in the figure its brightness will graduallydiminish till B has turned round 45°^ when the redeolonr will wholly disappear and the black spot in theaky be seen. Beyond 45° a faint green will make itsappearance and will become brighter and brighter till itattains its greatest brightness at 90°. Beyond 90° thegreen becomes paler and paler till it disappears at 135°.Here the red again appears and reaches its maximumbrightness at 180^. The very same changes are repeatedwhile the pUte B passes from 180° round to itsfirst position at 360° or 0°. From this experiment itappears that when the film C £ D F alone revolves onlyone colour is seen ; and when the plate B only revolvestvDo colours are seen during each half its revolution.186 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. Pablo.If we repeat the preceding experiment with fins ofdifferent thickness that give different colours we hillfind that the two colours are always complementary toeach other or together make white light.(111.) In order to understand the cause of timebeautiful phenomena let the eye be placed between diBfilm and the plate B^ and it will be seen that the lig^transmitted through the film is white whatever be dispositionof the film. The separation of the conic iitherefore produced or the white light is analysed \yfreflexion from the plate B. Now sulphate of lime is idoubly refracting crystal ; and one of its neutral axeC D, is the section of a plane passing through its axii^while £ F is the section of a plane perpendicular to theprincipal section. Let us now suppose either of dieplanes viz. £ F^ to be placed as in the figure in the ■plane of polarisation R r « of the polarised light ; thaithis ray will not be doubled but will pass into the ordinaryray of the crystallised film ; and falling upon C, itwill not suffer reflexion. In like manner if C D isbrought into the plane R r «^ it will pass entirely into theordinary ray which falling upon C^ will not suffer reflexion.In these two positions of the film therewithit forms only a single image or beam ; and as the planeof polarisation of this image or beam is at right anto the plane of reflexion from B, none of it is reflectedto the eye at O. But in every other position of thedoubly refracting film C E D F^ it forms two images ofdifferent intensities as may be inferred from fig, 86.; andwhen either of the demoralising axes GHorKLisintheplane of primitive polarisation the two images are ofequal brightness and are polarised in opposite planes ;one in the plane of primitive polarisation and the otherat right angles to it. Now, one of these images is red,and the other greedy for reasons which will be afterwardsexplained ; and as the green is polarised in the plane ofprimitive polarisation Rrs, it does not suffer reflexionfrom the plate B; while the red, being polarised at riangles to that plane, is reflected to the eye at O, and iiOUA XZI. COLOURS OF Crystallised Plats. 18?Before alone seen. For a similar reason, when B istamed round 9^^, the red will not suffer reflexion fromit ; while the green will suffer reflexion, and be transmittedto the eye at O. In this case the plate Banalyses the compound beam of white light transmittedAroa^ the film of sulphate of lime, by reflecting thehalf of it which is polarised in the plane of its reflexionmd Rising to reflect the other half, which is polarisedb an opposite plane. If the two beams had been eachflute l^t^ as they are in thick plates of sulphate oflime in place of seeing two different colours during thedemolition of the plate B, the reflected pencil s O wouldhtTe undergone different variations of brightness, acDoting as the two oppositely polarised beams of whiteBg^t were more or less reflected by it ; the positions ofneatest brightness being those where ^e red and greenBoloiirs were the brightest, and the darkest points beingArose where no colour was visible. ■(1 12.) The analysis of the white beam composed of twobeams of red and green light, has obviously been effectedby the power of the plate to reflect the one and to tracesrnU or rrfraet the other ; but the same beam may beanalysed by various other methods. If we make it passdinah a rhomb of calcareous spar sufficiently thick toseparate by double refraction the red from the greenbound we shall at the same time see both the colouredbeams, which we could not do in the former case ; theae forming the ordinary, and the other the extraordinaryimage. Let us now remove the plate B, and substituteSbt it a rhomb of calcareous spar-with its principalDion in the plane of reflexion reO, or perpendicularo the plane of primitive polarisation Rrs, and let thelimb have a round aperture in the side farthest fromhe eye, and of such a size that the two images of theventure, formed by double refraction, may just touchme another. Remove the film C £ D F, and the eyedeed behind the rhomb will see only the extraordinarymage of the aperture, the ordinary one having vanishedReplace the film, with its neutral axis as in the figureA TREATISE ON OPTICS.PABTILparallel and perpendicular to the plane Rr#^ and doeffect will be produced ; but if either of the depolariaiDgaxes are brought into the plane KrSy the ordinary imageof the aperture will be a brilliant red, and the extraordinaryimage a brilliant green ; the double refraction ofthe rhomb having separated these two differently cometand oppositely polarised beams. By turning round diefilm, the colours will vary in briskness ; but the sameimage will always have the same colour. If we now keepthe film fixed in the position that gives the finest colonyand move the rhomb of calcareous spar round, so that itsprincipal section shall make d complete revolution, weshall find that, after revolving 45° from its first position,both images become white. After revolving 90**, the ordinaryimage that was formerly red is now green, and theextraordinary image that was formerly green is now reLThe two images become again white at 135^, 225®, and315° ; and at Iso, the ordinary image is again red, andthe extraordinary one green ; and at 270°, the ordinaryimage is green, and the other red.If we use a large circular aperture on the face of therhomb, the ordinary and extraordinary images O, £ willoverlap each other, as in. 95. ; the overlapping partsFig. 95.O Eat F G being pure white light, and the parts at C andD having the colours above described. This exponentaffords ocular demonstration that the two coon'at C and D are complementary, and form white lightThe analysis of the compound beam transmitted bythe sulphate of lime may also be effected by a plate ofagate, or any of the other crystals, artificially preparedfor die purpose of dispersing one of the componentbeams. The agate being placed between the eye andOHAP. XXI. Colours OF CRYSTALLISED PLATES. 189die film C E D F^ it will disperse into nebulous lightthere's bean, and enable the green one to reach the eye ;while in another position it will scatter the green beam,and allow the red light to reach the eye. With a properpiece of agate this experiment is both beautiful andinstinctive ; as the nebulous lights scattered round thebright image will be green when the distinct image isred, and red when the distinct image is green.The analysis may also be effected by the absorptionof tourmaline and other similar substances. In oneposition the tourmaline absorbs the green beam andallows the red to pass; while in another position it absorbsthe red, and suffers the green to pass. The yellowcolour of the tourmaline however is a disadvantage.The analysis may also be performed by a bundle oflass plates such as A or B^ fig. 93. In one positioneach a biddle will transmit all the red, and reflect all&e green; while in another position it will transmit allthe green, and reflect all the red, in the opposite mannerhot according to the same rules as the analysing plateB, j^. 94^.(113.) In all these experiments the thickness of thesulphate of lime has been supposed such as to give ared and a green tint ; but if we take a film 0*00046 ofan English inch thick and place it at C E D F in fig.94.^ it will produce no colours at all and the black spotin the sky will be seen, whatever be the position of thefilm. A film 0*00124 thick will give the white of thefirst order in Newton's scale of colours, given in p. 103,104.; and a plate 0*018 18 of an inch thick, and all platesof greater thickness, will give a white composed of all theodours. Piles or plates of intermediate thicknessesbetween 0-00124 and 0*01818 will give all the intermediatecolours in Newton's Table between the white ofIhe first order and the white arising from the mixture«f all the colours. That is, the colours reflected to the<y^ at O will be those in column 2d, while the colours<^ryed by turning round the plate B will be those in(iplunm 3d ; the one set of colours corresponding to the190 A TREATISE ON OPTIOB* FABTILreflected tints and the other to the transmitted tints ofthin plates. In order to determine the thickness of tfin of sulphate of lime which gives any particularcour in the Table, we must have recourse to the num*hers in the last column for glass which has nearly thesame refractive power as sulphate of lime. Suppose itis required to have the thickness which corresponds tothe red of the first spectrum or order of colours. Thenumber in the column for glass opposite red, is 5^; then,since the white of the first order is produced by a film0*00124 of an inch thick, the number corresponding towhich is 3} in the column for glass, we say as 3^ is to5^, so is 0*00124 to 0*00211, the thickness which willgive the red of the first order. In the same manner, hfhaving the thickness of any film of this substance, wecan determine the colour which it will produce.Since the colours vary with the thickness of theplate, it is manifest, that if we could form a wedge ofsulphate of lime, with its thickness varying firoaD0*00124 to 001818 of an inch, we should observe itonce all the colours in Newton's Table in parallel stripes.An experiment of the same kind may be made in thefollowing manner : — Take a plate of sulphate of limeMN, fig, 96., whose thickness exceeds 0*01818 of anFig. 96.ABinch. Cement it with isinglass on a plate of glass;and placing it upon a fine lathe, turn out of it with avery sharp tool a concave or hollow surface betweenA and B, turning it so thin at the centre that iteither begins to break or is on the eve of breaking. Ifthe plate M N is now placed in water, the water willafter some time dissolve a small portion of its substance,and polish the turned surface to a certain degree. IfCHAP. XXI. OOLOUBS OF 0BYSTALU8ED PLATES. IQlthe plate is now held at C E D F^ fig. 9^^ we shall seeall the colours in Newton's Table in the form of concentricrings, as shown in the figure. If the thicknessdiminishes rapidly the rings will be closely packedtogether but if die turned surface is large, and thedarkness diminishes slowly, the coloured bands will bebtMuL In place of turning out the concavity, it mightbe done better by grinding it out, by applying a convexmr&ce of great radius, and using the finest emery.When the plate M N is thus prepared, we may give themost perfect polish to the turned surface by cementingi^on- it a plate of glass with Canada balsam. Thebalaam wHl dry, and the plate may be preserved forany length of time.By the method now described, the most beautifulpatrons, such as are produced in bank notes, &c., may betamed upon a plate of sulphate of lime 0*01818 of aninch thick, cemented to glass. All the grooves or lines thatcompose the pattern may be turned to different depths, sotsto leave different thicknesses of the mineral, and thegrooves of different depths will all appear as differenteokmrs, when the pattern is held in the apparatus infg. Q4s, Coloured drawings of figures and landscapes mayin like manner be executed, by scraping away the mineralto the thickness that will give the required colours ; orthe effect may be produced by an etching ground, andusing water and other fluid solvents of sulphate of limeto reduce the mineral to the required thicknesses. Adpher might thus be executed upon the mineral ; andif we cover the surface upon which it is scratched, or cut,or dissolved, with a balsam or fluid of exactly the samerefractive power as the sulphate, it will be absolutelylegible by common light, and may be distinctly read inpraised light, when placed at C £ D F in ^. 94.As the colours produced in the preceding experimentsvary with the different thicknesses of the body which producesthem, it is obvious that two films put together, asthey lie in the crystal with similar lines coincident orparallel, will produce a colour corresponding to the semiof their thicknesses, and not the colour which arises from192 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PABTIbthe mixture of the two colours which they produce separately.Thus if we take two films of sulphate of lime,one of which gives the orange of the first order whosenumber in the last column in Newton's Table p. 103.,is 5^y while the other gives the red of the 2d order,whose number is 11|^ j then by adding these numbers,we get 17j which corresponds in the Table to green ofthe 3d order. But if the two plates are crossed, so dissimilarlines in the one are at right angles to similar finisin the other then the tint or colour which they proMwill be that which belongs to the difference of their thicknessesThus, in the present case the difference of ^above numbers is 6|, which corresponds in the Tale tiareddish violet of the second order. - If the platesare thus crossed are equally thick and produce thecolours, they will destroy each other's effects and Badnesswill be produced ; the difference of the numbers kthe Table being 0. Upon this principle we may prodtacolours by crossing plates of such a thickness as to giftno colours separately provided the difference of ti^#thickness does not exceed 001 818; for if the differedof their thickness is greater than this, the tint will bwhite, and beyond the limits of the Table.If the polarised light employed in the preceding experimentsis homogeneous, then the colours reflected firmthe plate B will always be those of the homc^eDeoo]light employed. In red light, for example, the coloozjor rather shades which succeed each other, with differentthicknesses of the mineral, will be red at one thicknessblack at another, red at another, and black at another Wi80 on with all the different colours.If we place the specimen shown in fig, 96. in reilight, the rings A B will be less than in violet light ; ancienintermediate colours they will be of intermediate magnitudes,exactly as in the rings of thin plates fieri]described. When white light is used, all the differedsets of rings are combined in the very same manner awe have already explained, in thin plates of air, and wilform by their combinations the various coloured rings i]Newton's Table.XXn. RINCHS IN Crystals WITH ONE AXIS. 193CHAP. XXII.FEE SY8TBH OF COLOURED RINGS IN CRYSTALSWITH ONE AXIS.In all the preceding experiments the film C £ D Fbe held at such a distance from the eye or fromite B^ that its surface may be distinctly seen and'apparatus used by different philosophers this dis-wasconsiderable. In the year 1813 I adoptedsr method namely that of bringing the film orL to be examined as close to the eye as possible asmall plate B^ not above one fourth of an inchinterposed as in Jig, 94*,, between the crystal andre,to reflect the light transmitted through theL By this means I discovered the systems offormed along the axes of crystals with one andles, which form the most splendid phenomena inL science and which by their analysis have ledsphere to the most important discoveries.Discovered them in ruby, emerald, topaz, ice, nitre,great variety of other bodies, and Dr, Wollastonarts observed them in Iceland spar.order to observe the system of rings round a singlef double refraction, grind down the summits orangles A X of a rhomb of Iceland spar, fig, 72.,place them by plane and polished surfaces per-mar to the axis of double refraction A X. But■p,.^ g^ as this is not an easy operationwithout the aid of a lapidary,I have adopted the followingmethod, which enablesus to transmit light along theaxis A X without injuring the^ rhomb. Let C D E F, fig, 97.,be the principal section of the^ rhomb; cement upon its surfaces?Bj with Canada balsam, two prisms, D L K jo•6'194 A TBBATUB ON OmC*. Pa O.FGH, having the angles LDK,GF II e&6h equal toabout il; and by letting fall a raj of light perpendicularlyupon die face D L, it will put along the «tiA X, and emerge perpendicularly through the face FG.Let the rhomb thus prepared be held in the polarisedbeam r t, fig. 94., lo that r « may papa along the asiaX, and let it be held as near the plate B as poetae.When the eye it held very near to B, and Idbka along« as it were thigh the reflected image of therhomb C E, it will perceive along ita axis A X a sgka-did ayatem of coloured ringa resembling that shownin fig. gS., intersected by a rectangular black ckm,AB C D, the arms of which meet at the cede ofthe ringas. The colours in these ringa are ezacfiy itsame aa those in Newton's Table of colours, and coisequently the same as the ayatem of ringa seen by n-flexion from the plate of air between the object glsMfcIf we turn the rhomb round ita axis, the rings wiHsuffer no diange ; but if we fix the rhomb, or hold itsteadily, and turn round the plate B, then, in the ui'rauths 0°, 90°, 180°, and 270° of its revolution, mshall see the same system of ringa ; but at die intermediateazimuth of 45°, 135", 225°, and 315°, weshall see another system, like that in fy. 9$., in wbi.diC8jU>. XZn. RINflB IN CBTBTAL8 WITH ONE AXIS. 195tO the Loan are complementary to those in fig, QS.,bong the same as those seen in the rings formed byFig, 99.tnnsmismon through the plate of air The superpositionof these two systems of rings would reproduce whitelist.If in place of the glass plate B^ we substitute a prismof calcareous spar that separates its two images greatlyor a rhomb of great thickness we shall see in the or.binary image the first system of rings and in the extraordinaryimage the second system of complementaryrings when the principal section of the prism or rhombii in the plane r « O as formerly described.As the light which forms the first system of rings ia{Kdarised in an opposite plane to that which forms thesecond system we may disperse the one system by^tfote, or abwrb it by tourmaline, and thus render theother Visible the first or the second system being dispersedor absorbed according to the position of the agate«r,the tourmaline.If we split the rhomb of calcareous spar, fig, 97*> intotwo plates by the fissure M N^ and examine die ringspiddueed by each plate separate we shidl find that therings produced by each plate are larger in diameter thanthose produced by the whole rhomb and that the ringsincrease in size as the thickness of the plate diminishesIt will also be found that the circular area containedwithin any one ring is to the circular area of any otherring, as the number in Newton's Table corresponding too2196 A TREATISE ON OPTIOB. ' PABTILthe tint of the one ring is to the number correspondingto the tint of the other.If we use homogeneous lights we shall find that therings are smallest in red light and largest in violet Hj^t^and of intermediate sizes in the intermediate cuban,consisting always of rings of the colour of the light eifr*played separated by black rings. In white light all therings formed by the seven different colours are ooift*binds and constitute the coloured system above describedaccording to the principles which were fbflyexplained in Chapter XI.(115.) All the other crystals which have one axis ofdouble refraction give a similar system of rings alongtheir axis of double refraction ; but those produced bythe positive crystals such as zircon, ice, &c., though toleeye they differ in no respect from those of the negationcrystals yet they possess different properties. If we takea system of rings formed by ice or xircon, and comUHBit with a system of rings of the very same diameter vformed by Iceland spar, we shall find that the two 8)ft-tens destroy one another, the one being negative and theother positive ; an effect which might have been expectedfrom the opposite kinds of double refraction poasesttdby these two crystals.If we combine two plates of negative crystals, sndi^s Iceland spar and beryl, the system of rings whichthey produce will be such as would be formed bytiPOplates of Iceland spar, one of which is the plate employed,and the other a plate which gives rings of' thesame size as the plate of beryl. But if we combine aplate of a negative crystal with a plate of a positive crystal,such as one of Iceland spar with one of zircon orice, the resulting system of rings, in place of arisingfrom the sum of their separate actions, will arise fromtheir difference ; that is, it will be equal to the systemproduced by a plate of Iceland spar whose thickness isequal to the difference of the thicknesses of the plate ofIceland spar employed, and another plate of Iceland spar(SAP. ZXU. RIKafl IN Crystals WITH ONE AXIS. 197Hit would give rings of the same size as those producedby the zircon or ice.These experiments of combining rings are not easilymade, unless we employ crystals which have externalSees perpendicular to the axis of double refraction suchai the variety of Icdand spar called path calcaire basSe,mine of the mica with one axis and well crystallised[ibtes of ice &c. When two such plates cannot beobtained, I have adjusted the axes of Uie two plates soit.to coincide by placing between them at their edgestwo or three small pieces of soft wax by pressing whichin different directions we may produce a sufficientlyaccurate coincidence of the systems of rings to establishthe preceding conclusions.If, when two systems of rings are thus combined eitherhofOi negative or both positive or the one negative andthe other positive we interpose between the plates whichproduce them crystallised films of sulphate of lime ormica, we shall produce the most beautiful changes in theiona and character of the rings. This experiment Ifound to be particularly splendid when the film wasplaced between two plates of the path calcaire haste ofthe same thickness and taken from the same crystal. Byfixing them permanently with their faces parallel andliving a sufficient interval between them for the introductionof films of crystals I had an apparatus by whichthe most splendid phenomena were produced. The ringswere no longer symmetrical round their axis but exhibitedthe post beautiful variety of forms during the rotationof the combined plates all of which are easily deduciblefrom the general laws of double refraction and polarisation.The table of crystals that have negative double refractionshows the bodies that have a negative system ofrings ; and the table of positive crystals indicates thosethat have a positive system of rings.(116.) The following is the method which I havensjed for. distinguishing whether any system of rings ispositive or negative. Take a film of sulphate of lime*.o 3198 A Breath OS QFTIOU BAST USuch as that shown at C £ D F^ fig, 97-> and mark uponits surface the lines or neutral axes C D^ £ F as newlyas may he. Fix this fin by a little wax on the lorfiue^L D or F G^ of the rhomb which produces the negativesystem of rings. If the film produces anne the led ofthe second order it will now when combined with dieihomb^ obliterate part of the red ring of the leeondorder either in the two quadrants A C^ B D^ or in theother two AD, C B. Let it obliterate the red in AC,B D ; then if the line C D of the film crows diMtwo quadrants at right angles to the rings, it will be d»principal axU of the sulphate of lime ; bat if itthe other two quadrants then the line £ F, whichthe quadrants AC^BD^ will be the principal axis ofsulphate of lime, and it should be marked as audi. Weshall suppose, however, that C D has been proved to betheprincipal axis. Then, if we wish to <»T«Tninft whetherany other system of rings is positive or negative, Hthave only to cross the rings with the axis C D, by interposingthe film : and if it obliterates the red ring of thesecond order in the quadrant which it crosses, the systemwill be negative ; but if it obliterates the same ring ittthe other two quadrants which it does not cross, dmthe system will be positive. It is of no consequencewhat colour the film polarises, as it will always obstantethe tint of the same nature in the system of rings underexamination.(117*) In order to explain the formation of the sittersof rings seen along the axis of crystals, we mustconsider the two causes on which they depend ; namelythe thickness of the crystal through which the polarisedlight passes, and the inclination of the polarised light tothe axis of double refraction or the axis of the rings. Wehave already shove how the tint or colour varies with thethickness of the crystallised body, and how when weknow the colour for one thickness, we may determine itfor all other thicknesses the inclination of the ray to theaxis remaining always the same. We have now, therefore,only to consider the effect of inclination to theDKUP. XaOI. BDTCMr IK Crystals WITH ONE AXIS. 199[t ia obvious that along the axis of the crystal where themo Lack lines A B^ C D^Jlg* 9^; cross each other thereM neither double refraction nor colour. When the partedxmy is alig^tlyinclined to the axis a faint tint appears,ike the blue in the first order of Newton's scale ; and ashs inclination gradually increases all the colours inNew-boo'a tale are produced in succession from the wry blacksf the first order up to the reddUh white of the seventhBider. Here then it appears that an increase in theinclination ois the polarised light to the axis correspondsto an increase of thickness ; so that if the light alwayspined through the same thickness of the mineral thefiflSsrent colours of the scale would be produced hy diffidenceof inclination alone. Now it is found by ex*detriment, that in the same thickness of the mineral, theMnnericdi-value of the tints, or the numbers oppositeto dietinta in the last column of Newton's table, vary as$» square of the sine of the inclination of the polarisedmy to the axis. Hence it follows, that at equal inclinatela the same tint will be produced ; and consequently,Ihe nmilsr tints will be at equal distances from the asiaof the rings, or the lines of equal tint or rings will bedrdet whose centre is in the axis. Let us suppose thattt an inclination of 30^ to the axis we observe the bitetf the second order, the numerical value of whose tintb 9 in Newton's table and that we wish to know thetint which would be produced at an inclination of 45^.TIk sine of 80^ is-500, and its square-2500. The sinetf 45? is '7071> and its square *5000. Then we say,IS •2500 is to 9, so is *500 to 18> which in the table isIhe numerical value of the reef of the third order. Ifesuppose the thickness of the mineral to be increasedUf the inclinations 30^ and 45°, then the numerical valueof the tint would increase in the same proportion.It is obvious from what has been said, that the polarisingforce, or that which produces the rings, vanishesifaen the double refraction vanishes, and increases andDiminishes with the double refraction, and according tohe same law. The polarising force, therefore, dependso 4200 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PART I). ;on the force of double refraction ; and we accordinglyfind that crystals with high double refraction have thepower of producing the same tint, either at much Im.thicknesses or at much less inclinations to the axis. In :order to compare the polarising intensities of diflfenat!crystals the best way is to compare the tints which .they 'produce at right angles to the axis where the force ois =double refraction and polarisation is a maximum, iitd 'with a given thickness of the mineral. Thus, in diecase given above we may find the tint at right andes tothe axis by taking the square of the sine of 90^, whichis 1 ; so that we have the following proportion : as *2500is to 9^ so is 1 to 36, the value of die maximum tint ofcalcareous spar at right angles to the axis, upon the sap-positionthat a tint of the value of 9 was produced at aninclination of 30°. If we have measured the thicknessof Iceland spar at which the tint 9 was produced, we aieprepared to compare the polarising intensity of Icdandspar with that of any other mineral. Thus, let us takea plate of quarto, and let us suppose that at an inclinationof 30^^ and with a thickness fifty-one times as greatas that of Uie plate of Iceland spar, it produces a ydkmof the first order, whose value is about 4. Then to findthe tint at 90°, or at right angles to the axis, we say, asthe square of the sine of 30°, or '2500, is to 4, so is thesquare of the sine of 90°, or 1, to l6, the tint at 90°, orthe green of the third order. Now the polarising poweror intensity of the Iceland spar would have been to thatof the quartz as 36 to 1 6, if the thickness of the twominerals had been the same, or 2^ times greater ; but aithe thickness of the quartz was 51 times greater thanthat of the Iceland spar, the polarising intensity of ^Iceland spar will be 51 multiplied by 2^ times, or 115times greater than that of quartz. The intensities £wvarious crystals have been determined by. several observers,but the following have been given by Mr.Herschel : —on. RmC» IN GBYgTALS WITH TWO AXES. 201iritis Intended of a few Crystals with One Axis*Value ofThlckncHM that producethe same That.MghtttTint.1 spar -0*000028te of strontia -0-000802latine•0-001175.sulphate of lime --0-002129K - - --0-003024lyllite, 1st variety-lor « --0-009856ian -0-024170yllite, 2d varietyS30-030374-0-366620above measures are suited to yellow lights andhers in the second column show the proportionssicknesses of the different substances that pro-sametint. The polarising force of Iceland sparodious at right angles to the axis that it isimpracticable to prepare a film of it sufficientlyexhibit the colours in Newton's table.CHAP. XXIII.[E SYSTEM OF COLOURED RINGS IN CRYSTALSWITH TWO AXES.It was long believed that all crystals had onlyB of double refraction; but after I discovered\Ae system of rings in topaz and other mineralsthat these minerals had two axes of double re-as well as of polarisation and that the possessionaxes characterised the great body of crystalsire either formed by art or which occur in thekingdom.double system of rings or rather one of the setsdouble system of rings in topaz first presented3 me when I was looking along the axis ofwhich reflected a part of the light of the sky thatSOS A TBEATOB OK omn.happened to be polarised, so that they wtn bthe ud either of a polarising or an anal;In this and sont other minerals, however,dolce refraction are to much inclined to oithat ire cannot see the two systema of ringsdull' therefore proceed to explain them as enitre, in which 1 abo discovered them antmany of their properties.Nitre, or saltpetre, is an ardfleial subaticrystallises in ux-sided prisms with angleIso. It belongs to the prismatic system ofhas therefore two axes of double refraction aft ray of light is not divided into two. Thteach inclined about SJ" to the axis of theabout S° to each other. If we therefore cutof a prism, of mtr« with a knife driven by afrom a hammer, and polish two flat anr&ceiFig. 100.euler to the axis of the prism, so as to leave ipf the Both or eighth of an inch, and then ttH TWO AXES. i03d lift r J, fig. 94., along the us of the print,JHHiiim the oyatal as near to the pUte B sa pDuible onlac aide, and ibe eye aa near it as pouifale on the other,«e dull aee the double austen of rings, A B, shownFig. 100., when the plane passing through the twosua of nitre is in die pine of primitive polarisation,i; in die [dane of reflexion r « £, fig. 94., and the(jrstem abown inj^. 101. when the same place is in-died 45° to either of these planes. In passing fromta state of ;^. 100. to that of J^. 101., die hack linesiaoiM the forms shown in fig lOS. and 103.Fig. los, Jig. 103,These systema of rings have, generally speaking, thene colonia aa those of thin plates, or as those of thesterns of lings round one axis. The orders of colourstanuBBBee at the centres A and B of each system ; butIt a certain distance, which in fig. 100. corresponds toibe dxih ring, the rings, in place of returning and(Dcirehng sadi pole A and B, entre the two poles asIQ ellipse does its two foci.When we rfiminiBh the thickness of the place of nitre,Ae rings enlarge ; the fifth ring will then surroundlodi pales. At a less thickness, the fourth ring will sur.KHUid them, till at last all the rings will surround bothMet A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PAST xipoles and the system will have a great resemblance 16the system surrounding one axis. The place of the pokeA, B never changes hut the black lines A B^ C D becomebroad and indefinite ; and the whole system is distinguishedfrom the single system principally by the ovalappearance of the rings.If we increase the thickness of the nitre the ringswill diminish in size; the colours will lose their resemblanceto those of Newton's scale ; and the tints do notcommence at the poles A^ B^ but at virtual poles in theirproximity. The colour of the rings within the two pokeare red, and without them bltie ; and the great body ofthe rings are pink and green.As the same colour exists in every part of the samecurve the curves have been called achromatic Ones, orlines of equal tint. The lines or axes along which thereis no double refraction or polarisation, and whose polesare A^ B^ fg. 100., have been called optical axes, oi OJVof no polarisation, or axes of compensation, or resuUaMaxes ; because they have been found not to be real kuA,but lines along which the opposite actions of other tupreal axes have been compensated, or destroy one another.(119.) In various crystallised bodies such as ntand arragonite, where the inclination of the resultantaxes A, B,fig. 100., is small, the two systems of rings maybeeasily seen at the same time ; but when the inclinationof the resultant axes is great, as in topass, sulphate qfiron, Sec, we can only see one of the systems of rings,which may be done most advantageously by grinding andpolishing two parallel faces perpendicular to the axis ofthe rings. In mica and topaz, and various other crystals,the plane of most eminent cleavage is equally inclinedto the two resultant axes ; so that in such bodiesthe systems of rings may be readily found and easilyexhibited.Let M N, for example, fig, 104., be a plate of toms,cut or split so as to have its face perpendicular to tfaieaxis of the prism in which this body crystallises. Ifwe place this plate, fig. 104., in the appar$tiu fig. 9^I D* 0RT8TAL8 WITH TWO t'■ 'm that tbe.poUmed ray rt, fig. 9^., passes along dieiteABeE, fig. IM., and if the eye receives this rayFig. 104.alien reflected from te analysing plate B, it will see indie direction of that ray a system of oral rings, like thatJ^. 105. in j^. 105. In like manner, if the-^- polarised light is transmitted alongthe line C B d D, the eye will seeanother system perfect BimiUrtother other. ThelinesABeBL and C B if D are, therefore, the1 resultant axes of topaz. TheI angle ABC will be found equalI to about 121° 16'; but if we1 compute the inclination of therefracted rays B d, B e, we shallit, or the angle dB e,U>beonly 65°; which is, therefore, theinclination of the optical or resultantaae» ot topaz.If we suppose the plate of nitre fixed in any of thepardons which give any of the rings shown in fig. 1 00,101, 102, or 103., then, if we turn round the plate B,ve ahab observe in the azimuths of 90° and 270^ asystem of rings complementary to each, in which theLack cross in fig. 100. and the black hyperbolic curves'fig. 101, 103. are white, all the other dark partslight, and the red green, the green red, &c. as in theangle system of rings with one axis. *In the preceding observations we have supposed thepolarisation of the incident light, and the analysis of die206 A Treatise ON Optics. TAMTtLtransmitted lights to be necessary to the producticmflfthe rings ; but in certain cases they may be sho^m liscommon light with the analysing plates, or by polarisedlight without the analysing plate B, and issome cases without either the light being polarised cranalysed. If in topaz for examples. 104<.^ we roscommonlight to fall in the direction A B, so as to berefracted along B e, one of the resultant axes and subsequentlyreflected at e from the second surface, andreaching the eye at c, we shall see, after reflection finnthe analysing plate, the system of rings in. 105.; crif A B is polarised light, the rings will be seen by tbeye at c without an analysing plate. There are sefeniother curious phenomena seen under these drcmD-stances, which I have described in the Phil. TVatuacHmfor 1814, p. 203. 211.I have found some crystals of nitre which exhibit.their rings without the use either of polarised list orananalysing plate; and Mr.Herschel has found the vmproperty in some crystals of carbonate of potash.(120.) When the preceding phenomena are seen bypolarised homogeneous light, in place of white light, therings are bright curves, separated by dark intervals; Aecurves having always the colour of the light employed.In many crystals the difference in the size of the ringsseen in different colours is not very great, and the potsA, B of the two systems do not greatly change theirplace ; but Mr. Herschel found that there were crystalsuch as tartrate of potash and soda, in which the variationin the size of the rings was enormous beinggreatest in red, and least in violet light, and in whitthe distance A B, fig, 100. 101., or the inclination of dieresultant axes varied from 56^ in violet light to 76^ inred, the inclination having intermediate values fbr intermediatecolours, and the centres of all the differentsystems lying in the line A B. When all these systemof "rings are combined, as they are in using white Uffst,the system of rings which they form is exceedinglyInsular, the two oval cents, ox this halve of the sintC|UP< ZZm. UNM IN CBT8TAUS WITH TWO AXES. 20?^jrdar of cologne being drawn out with long spectra orMi of led green and violet lights and the ends of all"ifi other rings being red without the resultant axes,ifd bine within../Ifr. Herschel found other crystals in which the rings^f^ imaBegt in red, and largest in blue lights and in^ ijfidx the incUnatimi of the axes or A B is least in red,fod greatest in fillet light.:. In an crystals of this kind, the deviation of the tints,■- tt Ae colours of the rings seen in white light, fromftwfam's Tables is very considerable, and may be calmedfrom the preceding principles. This deviationI find to be very great, even in crystals with one axis•f doable refraction and one system of rings, such aa^fOpkgliUe where the rings have scarcely any other tintsAui a succession of greenish fellow, and reddish purplecnOL By viewing these rings in homogeneous light,Mr. Herschel' has found that the system is a negativeone for the rays at the one end of the spectrum, aponte one for the rays at the other end of the spec-tangand that there are no rings at all in yellow light.A nmilar and equally curious anomaly I have foundia glauberite, which is a crystal which has two axes ofdoiUde refraction, or two systems of rings for red light,od one negative system for violet light.(121.) All the singularities of these phenomena dis.i|ipear, and may be rigorously calculated by supposingAt. resultant axesoi crystals where there are two, or theliable axis where there is one, with a system of ringsdedicating from Newton's scale as merely apparent axes,€r axes of compensation, produced by the opposite actionof two or more rectangular axes, the principal one ofi^ich is the line bisecting the angle formed by the tworesultant axes. Upon this principle, I have shown that•E the phenomena presented by such crystals may beeompiited with as much accuracy as we can compute themotions of the heavenly bodies.The method of doing this may be understood fromthe foDowuig observations. Let A C B D^ fig, 1 06., be aA TREATISE ON OPtlOB.crystal with two axes turned into a sphere. Let ]Fig, 106.the poles of axes Othe pointingthem and A B a linethrough O^ and perpendicC D^ a line passing throngLet us suppose an axis ithrough O^ perpendicularplane A C B D^ then we ncount for all the phenomenacrystals hy supposing theO to he the principal one iother axis to he along either of the diameters A BIf we take C D^ then the axis O and C D must hethe same names either both native or both negaliif we take A B^ the axes must he one positive and t]negative; or what is perhaps the simplest supposeillustration we shall suppose the two rectangle]which produce all the phenomena to he A B^ C Eboth positive or both negative leaving out the oiSupposing AOB, CPPDtohe projections of griefof the sphere, then P, P are the points where the idestroys the effect of the axis C D ; that is, where 1produced hy each axis must be equal and opposite,if we suppose the arch C P to be 60% then, sin90°, it follows that the axis C D produces at 60^ ttint that A B does at 90^, and consequently the pcintensity of C D will be to that of A B as the s<the sine of 90° is to the square of the sine of 6€1 to 0*75, or as 100 to 75. The polarising forceaxis being thus determined, it is easy to findwhich will be produced by each axis separatelygiven inclination to the axis, by the method fexplained. Let E be any point on the surfacesphere, and let the tints produced at that point 'the blue of the second order, by C D, and l6, or tla£ the third order, by A B. Let the inclinationplanes passing through A E, C E, or the spheresC £ A be determined, then the tint at the pointbe equal to the diagonal of a parallelogram wholHAr» zxm. Bmcn nr crystals with two axes. 209"Ve 9 ^^ l6> *>^ whose angle is double the angle€ £ A. , This law, which is general, and applies also toliable refraction, baa been confirmed by BiotandFresnd,'%B lut of whom has proved that it coincides rigorouslyiii the law deduced from the theory of waves.'- If the axes A B, C D are equal, it follows that theywill produce the same tint at equal inclinations ; that is,key will compensate sadi other only at one point, viz.-0> and will produce round O a system of coloured rings,die very same as if O were a single axis of double re-fiction of an opposite name to A B, C D. If the axisA B has exactly die same proportional action that C J)htm upon each of the differently coloured rays, a com-penaatton will take place for each colour exactly at O,Ae centre of the resultant systems of rings, and thecorners will be exactly those of Newton's scale. But if^etdi asia exercises a different proportional action uponthe coloured rays, a compensation will take place at Ofia some of the rays (for violet, for example), while thettnnpenaation for red will take place on each side of O;tanaeqaently, in such a case the crystal will have onenis for violet light and two axes for red light, like glau-levite.The phenomena of apophyUite may, in a similar manner,be explained by two equal negative axes, A B, C D,Mid a motive axis at O.According to tMs method of combining the action ofdifferent rectangular axes, it follows that three equal andrectangular axes, either all positive or all negative, will4eBtzoy one another at every point of the sphere, and thusfiodaoe the very same effect as if the crystal had nodoable refraction and polarisation at all. Upon this prin.file I have explained the absence of double refractionin all the crystals which form the tessular system ofMedia, each of the primitive forms of which has actuallythree similarly situated and rectangular axes. Ifone of these axes is not precisely equal to the other,ind the crystallisation not perfectly uniform, traces ofdoable refraction will appear, which is found to be theSionTREATISE OK OPTIOB.PABTILcase in muriate of soda, diamond and other bodies of teakclass.(122.) The following table contains the polarisiiigintensities of some crystals with two axes as given hjMr. Herschel : —Polarising Intensities of some Crystal with Two AxeValue ofMchMtTent.TbicknctM thatproduce tba MiMTint.NitreAnhydrite, inclination of axe esp 48'Mica, inclination of axes 45° . .Sulphate of barytesHeulandite (white), inclination of)axes 54017' 50-0001350-000f>96OD00765OtX)liU00O040S1CHAP. XXIV.INTERFERENCE OF POLARISED LIGHT. ON THE ClUliOF THE COLOURS OF CRYSTALLISED BODIES.(123.) Having thus described the principal phenomenaof the colours produced by regularly crystallised bodkinthat possess one or two axes of double reflections we shipproceed to explain the cause of these remarkable phenomenaDr. Young had the great merit of applying the doctrineof interference to explain the colours produced \t\double refraction. When a pencil of light falls upon ftthin plate of a doubly refracting crystal it is separatedinto two which move through the plate with di£feRitvelocities corresponding to the different indices of lefraction for the ordinary and extraordinary ray. Iicalcareous spar the ordinary ray moves with greatvelocity than the extraordinary one; and therefore tfaejought to interfere with one another and in homogeneouslight produce rings consisting of bright and dark backgroundthe axis of double refraction. According to thisdoctrine however the rings ought to be produced iscommon as well as in polarised light ; but as this viiOHAP. XZiy. INTERFERENCE OF POLARISED LIGHT. 2114>not the caae^ Dr. Young's ingenious hypothesis was longneglected. The subject was at last taken up hy Messrs.Fresnel and Aragon who displayed great address in theirinvestigation of the subjects and succeeded in showinghow the production of the rings depended on the polarisationof the incident pencil and its subsequent analysisby a reflecting plate or a doubly refracting prism.The following are the laws of the interference of polarisedlight as discovered by MM. Fresnel and Arago : —1. Wen tfJDO rays polarised in the same plane interfereforth each other, they will produce by their interferencefringes of the very same kind as if they were commonlight.This law may be proved by repeating the experimentson the reflexion of lights mentioned in Chap. X.^ inpolarised in place of common light; and it will be foundthat the very same fringes are produced in the one caseas in the other.2. When two rays of light are polarised at right anglesto each other, they produce no coloured fringes in thestone circumstances under which two rays of commonlight would produce them. When the rays are polarisedat angles intermediate between 0° and 90°, they producefringes of intermediate brightness, the fringes being totallyobliterated at 90°, and recovering their greatestbrightness at 0°, as in Law 1.In order to prove this law, MM. Fresnel and Aragoadopted several methods, the simplest of which is thefollowing, employed by the latter. Having made twofine slits in a thin plate of copper, he placed the copperbehind the focus F of a lens, as in fig, 56., and receivedthe shadow of the copper upon the screen C D, wherethe fringes produced by the interference of the rayspassing through the two slits were visible. In order,ho¥TOver, to observe the fringes more accurately, he viewedthem with an eye-glass, as formerly described. He nextprepared a bundle of transparent plates, like either ofthose shown at A and B, fig. Q3., made of fifteen thinAlms of mica or plane glass, and he divided this ^^MXvdXfcp 2Sid A TREATISE ON OPTIOS. part ninto two^by a sharp cutting instrument At the line ddivision these bundles had as nearly as possible the ssiaethickness and they were capable of polarising completelight incident upon them at an angle of 30^. Thesebundles were then placed before the slits so as to receiveand transmit the rays from the focus F at an intenseof 30^^ and through portions of the mica in each bundlethat were very near to each other previous to their separation.The bundles were also fixed to revolving framesso that by turning either bundle rounds their planes ofpolarisation could be made either parallel or at lifjbiangles to each other or could be inclined at any intermediateangle. When the bundles were placed so as topolarised the rays in parallel planes the fringes wereformed by the slits exactly as when the bundles wereremoved ; but when the rays were polarised at 90°, or atright angles to each other the fringes wholly disappeared.In all intermediate positions the fringes appeared withintermediate degrees of brightness.3. Two rays originally polarised at right angles to etnaother may be subsequently brought into the same pUm ofpolarisation, without acquiring the power of formifringes by their interference.li, in the preceding experiment a doubly refractivecrystal be placed between the eye and the copper slits,having its principal section inclined 45^ to either of dieplanes of polarisation of the interfering rays each pencilwill be separated into two equal ones polarised in tworectangular planes one of which planes is the principalsection itself. Two' systems of fringes ought therefore,to be produced ; one system from the interference of theordinary ray from the right hand slit with that of tbcordinary ray from the left hand slit, and another systemfrom the interference of the extraordinary ray from outrighthand slit with the extraordinary ray from ^left hand slit ; but no such fringes are produced.4. Two rays polarised at right angles to each other,and afterwards brought into similar planes of polarisation,produce fringes hy tlietr interference like Ta\js afcomnufnCBAF. Xiv . INTBBFEBENOE OF POLARISED LIGHT. 2 ISa^, provided they belong to a pencil, the whole of whichwoe originally polarised in the same plane,5. In the phenomena of interference produced by raysAi have suffered double refraction, a difference of halfam undulation must be allowed, as one of the pencils isretarded by that quantity from some unknown cause.The second of these laws affords a direct explanationof the fact which perplexed Dr. Youngss that no fringesare ohsenred when light is transmitted through a thinplate possessing double refraction. The two pencilsdies produced do not form fringes hy their interferencebecause they are polarised in opposite planes.The production of the fringes hy the action of doublyrefracting crystals on polarised light may he thus explained.Let M N^ fig, 107.^ he a section of the plateFig, 107. of sulphate of lime, C E D F,fi, 94*., an d B the analysing plate.Let R r he a polarised ray incidentupon the plate M N, and let Oand E he the ordinary and extraordinaryrays produced hy thedouble refraction of the plateM N. When the plate M N is in such a positiontibet either of its neutral axes C D, E F, fig, 94., areon the plane of primitive polarisation of the ray R r,fg. 107v then one of the pencils will not suffer reflexionby the plate B, and consequently only one of the rayswill he reflected. Hence it is obvious that no colourscan be produced by interference, because there is onlyone ray. But in every other position of the plate M N,the two rays, O s, E «, will be reflected by the plate B ;and being polarised by the plate in the same plane, theywill, by Law 1., interfere, and produce a colour or a fringecorresponding to the retardation of one of the rays withinIhe plate, arising from the difference of their velocities.If we call d the interval of retardation within the plateM N, we must add to it half an undulation to get thereal interval, as one of the rays passes from the ordinaryto the extraordinary state. If we now suppose tfauKp 3214 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. part ILplate B to make a revolution of 90''^ M N remainingfixed, then the ray E will be reduced to the ordinarystate; and consequently we must subtract half an undulationfrom d, the interval of retardation within theplate, to have the real difference of the intervals of retardation.Hence the two intervals of retardation windiffer by a whole undulation; and consequently thecolour produced when the plate B has been turned round90°, will be complementary to that which is producedwhen the plate B has the position shown in. 107*If we suppose the rays E and O to be received uponand analysed by a prism of Iceland spar we shall havetwo ordinary rays interfering to form the colours in oneimage, and two extraordinary rays interfering to producethe complementary colours in the other image.CHAP. XXV.ON THE POLARISING STRUCTURE OF ANALCIICE.(124.) In a preceding chapter I have mentioned the veryremarkable double refraction which is possessed by anal-time.This mineral, which is also called cubizite, hasbeen regarded by mineralogists as having the cube forits primitive form; but if this were correct, it shouldhave exhibited no double refraction. Analcime has certainlyno cleavage planes, and it must be regarded atpresent as forming in this respect as great an anomaly incrystallography as it does in optics by its extraordinaryoptical phenomena.The most common form of the analcime is the solidcalled the icoaitetrahedron, which is bounded by twenty-fourequal and similar trapezia ; and we may regard it asderived from the cube, by cutting off each of its anglesby three planes equally inclined to the three faces whichcontain the solid angle. If we now conceive the cureto be dissected by planes passing through all the twelve!. 215signals of its Bin faces, each of these penes nil! bemd to be a. plane of no double refraction, or polarisation;that ia, a ray, of polarised light tranBiiiitled inJ direction whatever, provided it is in one of theseidea, will exhibit none of the polarised tints when thefatal is placed in the apparatus, Jig. 94. Thesemea of no double retraction are shown by dark UnesFig. Lips.u)d 109. If thepolarised ray is incident inany other direction which isout of these planes, it will .be divided into two pencils,and exhibit the finest tints,all of which are related tothe planes of no double refraction.The double refrainis sufficiently great toadmit a distinct separationa of the images when the indethrough anypdr of the four planes whichare adjacent to the three seaof the aohd, or of the cubefrom which it is derived.The least refracted image ise extraordinary one ; and consequently the double re.action is negative in relation to the axes to which theably refracted ray is perpendicular.In all other doubly refracting crystals, each particleJ the same force of double refraction ; but in thealdme, die double refraction of each particle variesQt the square of its distance from the planes alreadyThe beauty distribution of the tints «how7i inr. 108. and Io. cannot, of course, be exhibited to theeat once, but are deduced by transmitting polarised^t in every direction through the mineral.In several of the crystals, the tints rise to the thirdfourth order; but when the crystals are very small, flw216* ▲ TBBATUn ON OPTIOB. Part B*tints do not exceed the white of the first order. Thetints are exactly those of Newton's scale which indicate!diat they are not the result of opposite and dissimilaractions. In fig. 108. and 109* the tints are representedby the faint shaded lines having their origin from teplanes where the double refraction disappears.The preceding property of analcime is a simple wAeasily applied mineralogical character which would identifythe most shapeless fragment of the mineraLThe abbe Hay first observed in this mineral itsproperty of yielding no electricity by friction and derivedthe name of analcime from its want of this property.When we consider that the crystal is intersectedby numerous planes in which the ether does not existat all or has its properties neutralised by opposite actionwe may ascribe to this cause the difficulty with whichfriction decomposes the natural quantity of electricityresiding in the mineral.ICHAP. XXVI.ON CIRCULAR POLARISATION.(125.) In all crystals with one axis there is ndthadouble refraction nor polarisation along the axis; andthis is indicated in the system of rings by the disappearanceof all light in the centre of the rings at theintersection of the black cross. When we examine however,the system of rings produced by a plate of rod:crystal whose faces are perpendicular to the axis, we findthat the black cross is obliterated within the inner ring,which is occupied with an uniform tint of red, green,or blue, according to the thickness of the plate. This«17et sill be seen in J^. 110. Mr. Arago first obaemdj!^, ijQ, these colonia in 18II. He ftrundthat when they were analysed withk prism of Iceland spar, the twoimages had complementary colon,I tmd that the colours changed, Newton's scale as iaprism revolved ; so that if the colourof the extraordinary imageI red, it became in successionn^, ydlom, green, and violet. From this result heeluded, that the differently coloured rays had beenuiaed in different planes, by passing along the axilhe rock crystal. In this state of the subject, it wainup by M. Biot, who investigated it with muchtdty and success.ijetC £ D P be the plate of quartz, fig. 94'., aloi^we asia a polarised ray, r«, is transmitted. Wheneye is plaid at E, above the analysing plate firedin die figure, it will see, for example, a circular redce in the centre of the rings. If we turn the quartsnd its asia, no change whatever takes place ; but ifturn the plate C from right to left, through an angle100° for example, ne shall observe the red chaistrange, geiha, green, and hotel, the latter having ak purple tinge. If we now cut from the samean of rock crystal another plate of twice the thickerand place it in die apparatus, the plate B rainingwhere it was left, we shall find that its tint isbrent from that of the former plate ; but by turningplate B 100° farther, we shall again bring the tintl8 least brightness, viz., a sombre violet. By a platece as thick, the least brightness will be obtained byling the plate B 100° farther, and so on, till, whenthickness is very great, the plate B may have madeal complete revolutions. Now, it might happenta thickness had been taken, bo that the rotation ofrtuch produced the sombre violet was 360", or termedin the point 0% from which it set out, whichA TREATISE ON 0PTI08.PABTn«would have perplexed the observer if he had not madethe succession of experiments which we have mentioned.This phenomenon will be better understood bysupposing that we take a plate of quarto-^V^ ^^ ^inch thick and use the different homogeneous rays of thespectrum in succession. Beginning with red, we shallfind that the red light in the centre of the rings haaitinuunmum brightness when the plate B is at 0^ of azimuthas in fig, 94}, If we turn B from right to left,the red tint fir gradually increase and after a rotationof 17tl^ the red tint will wholly vanish, having reachedits maximum. With a plate T>3ths thick the redwill vanish at S5°, every additional thickness of the25th of an inch requiring an additional rotation of 17^°*If the light is violet, the! same thickness viz.^-^^ih oian inch will require a rotation of 41^ to make it vanishevery additional 25th of thickness requiring a rotationof 41° more.(126.) The rotations for different colours correspondingto 1 millimetre or ^3th of an inch of quartzare as follows : —Arcs ofAnxofHomogeneous Raj.Rotation-homogeneousRay.Extreme red17° 5(/Limit of orange and yellow5^31'Mean red - .19 00Mean yellow - - -24 00Limit of red and orange -20 50Limit of yellow and green25 68Mean orange - .21 40Mean green . .27 86Limit of green and blue -30 05Limit of indigo and violet37 68Mean blue - . .32 31Mean violet . -40 88Limit of blue and indigo -34 57Extreme violet44 08Mean indigo - . .36 13Upon trying various specimens of quartz, M. Biotfound that there were several in which the verysame phenomena were produced by turning the plate Bfrom left to right. Hence, in reference to tjfiis property,quartz may be divided into right-handed and left-handedquartz.From these interesting facts it follows, that, in passingalong the axis of quartz, polarised light comports itself,at its egress from the crystal, as if its planes of polarisationrevolved in the direction of a spiral within thecrystals in some specimens from right to left, and inChap. ZZYI. ON OntCVLAB Polarisation. S19riders from Tuft to right, " To conceive this distinction"'mjB Mr. Herschel '' let the reader take a common corkscrewand holding it with the head towards him, let himturn it in the usual manner as if to penetrate a cork.The head will then turn the same way as the plane ofpolarisation of a ray in its progress from the spectatorthrough a right-handed crystal may he conceived to do.If the thread of the cork-screw were reversed, or werewhat is termed a left-handed thread, then the motion ofdie head as the instrument advances would representdiat of the plane of polarisation in a left-handed specimenof rock crystal.From the opposite character of these two varieties ofquartz, it follows, that if we combine a plate of right-handedwith a plate of left-handed quartz, the result of theCombination will be that of a plate of the thickest of thetwo, whose thickness is equal to the difference of the twothicknesses. Thus, if a plate-eth of an inch thick oftigktJianded quartz is combined with a plate ./^ ths thickof left-handed quartz, the same colours will be producedas if we used a plate-^^ths of an inch thick of left-handedquartz. When the thicknesses are equal, the plates ofcourse destroy each other's effects, and the system ofrings with the black cross will be distinctly seen.(127-) In examining the phenomena of circular polarisationin the amethyst, I found that it possessed theFig. HI. power in the same specimen ofturning the planes of polarisationboth from right to left and from leftto right, and that it actually consistedof alternate strata of rightand kftJianded quartz, whose planeswere parallel to the axis of the prismof double refraction. When we cuta plate perpendicular to the axis ofthe pyramid, we therefore cut acrossthese strata, as shown in^^f. 111., which exhibits sectionsif the strata which occur opposite the three alternateaces of the six-sided pyramid. The shaded lines are thoseS20 A TBBATI8K ON OPTIOS. PAST ILwhich turn the planes of polarisation from fight to left,while the intermediate unshaded ones and the three uiwshaded sectors turn them from left to right. These strathare not united together like the parts of certain cobpolite crystals whose dissimilar faces are brought intomechanical contact; for the right and left-handed stratadestroy each other at the middle line between eachstratum and each stratum has its maximin polarisingforce in its middle line the force diminishing graduallyto the lines of junction.In some specimens of amethyst the thickness of thesestrata is so minute that the action of the right-handedstratum extends nearly to the central line of the lefthandedstratum and vice verse, so as nearly to destroyeach other ; and hence in such specimens we see thesystem of coloured rings with the black cross almostentirely uninfluenced by the tints of circular polarisation.A vein of amethyst therefore eth of an inch thick inthe direction of the axis may be so thin in a directionperpendicular to the axis that the arc of rotation for diered ray may be 0° ; and we shall have the curious phenomenonof a plate which polarises circularly only itemost refrangible rays of the spectrum. By a greaterdegree of thinness m the strata the plate would be incapableof polarising circularly the yellow ray ; and bya greater thinness stilly there would be no action on iSbnviolet light. These feeble actions however, might tierendered visible at great thicknesses of the mineral.We may therefore conclude that the axes of rotationin amethyst vary from 0° to each of the numbers in thepreceding table, according to the thickness of the strataThe colouring matter of the amethyst I have foundto be curiously distributed in reference to these views jbut I must refer to the original memoir for farther information.*M. Biot maintained that this remarkable property ofquartz resided in its ultimate particles, and accompaniedthem in all their combinations. I have founds however« £dtn&(irghTramacHQfM,^o\.Vx. 1^.139.Chap. Lxvi. OV dBOULAB Polarisation.That it is not possessed by opal, tabasheery and other sili-oeoiu bodies and that it disappears in melted quartz,Mr. Herschel also found that it does not exist in a sole.lion of silex in potash.Hitherto no connection could be traced between theFig. 112. right and left-handed structure in quartz andthe crystalline form of the specimens whichpossessed these properties. Mr. Herschel!,however discovered that the plagiedral quartzwhich contains unsymmetricjEd faces x x a,fig. 112.^ turns the planes of polarisation inthe same direction in which these faces leanround the summits KxXy ax x.Circular Polarisation in Fluids.(128.) The remarkable property of polarising lightcircularly occurs in a feeble degree in certain fluids inwhich it was discovered by M. Biot and Dr. Seebeck. Mr.Herschel has found it in camphor in a solid state andI have discovered it in certain specimens of unanimatedglass. If we take a tube six or seven inches long andfin it with oil of turpentine and place it in the apparatusfig. 9^., so that polarised light transmitted throughthe oH may be reflected to the eye from the plate C^ weshall observe the complementary colours and a distinct rotationof the plane of polarisation from right to left. Otherfluids have ibe property of turning the planes of polarisationfrom left to right, as shown in the following tablewhich contains the results of M. Blot's experiments.Crystals which turn the Planes From Right to Left.Rock crystal - - -Oil of turpentine -Solution of 1753 parts of artificial cant.poor in 17.359 of alcoholEssential oil of laurelof turpentine.Arc of Rotationfor every 25thof an inch inThickness.Relate Thicknessesthat producethe sameEffect.222 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PAST D.Crystals which turn the Fianesfrom Jjeft to Bi^UArc of RoUtioofor every !»tbof an Inch inThickness.Dative TUek-lneMeadiat producethe wmRock crystal • -Essential oil of lemons . . - -Concentrated syrup180-4140-4S60-554In examining these phenomena M. Fresnel discoveredthat in quartz they were produced by the interference oftwo pencils formed by double refraction along the axis ofquartz. He succeeded in separating these two penallywhich differ both from common and polarised listThey differ from polarised light because when either ofthem is doubled by a doubly refracting crystal, the pencilor image never vanishes during the revolution of thecrystal. They differ from common light, because whenthey suffer two total reflexions from glass, at an angle ofabout 54°, the one vidll emerge polarised in a planeinclined 45° to the right, and the other in a plane 45^to the left, of the plane of total reflexion. M. Fresnelhas also discovered the following properties of a circularlypolarised ray : — When it is transmitted through a thindoubly refracting plate parallel to its axis, it is dividedinto two pencils with complementary colours; and thesecolours will be an exact quarter of a tint, or an order d[colours, either higher or lower in Newton's scale, thanthe colour which the same crystallised plate would havegiven by polarised light. M. Fresnel also proved that acircularly polarised ray, when transmitted along the axisof rock crystal, will not exhibit the complementary colourswhen analysed.(129.) In the prosecution of this curious subject, M.Fresnel discovered the following method of producing aray possessing all the above properties, and thereforeexactly similar to one of the pencils produced by circulardouble refraction. LetABCD,^^. 113., be a parallelsof crown glass, whose index of refraction is1*510, and whose angles ABC, ADC are each 54 J°.If a common polarised ray, Rr, is incident perpendicularlyupon A B, and emerges perpendicularly from C D,eSAP. ZZVI. ON OmOUXiAB POLARISATION. 229after haying sii£^red two total reflexions at E and Flie,113. *^ angles of 54}° ; and if these reflexionsare performed in a plane inclined 45®to the plane of polarisation of the raythe emergent ray F G will have all theproperties of a circularly polarised rayresembling in every respect one of thoseproduced by double refraction along theaxis of rock crystal. But as this circularlypolarised ray may be restored toa single plane of polarisation, inclined45° to the plane of reflexion, by twototal reflexions at 54}°, it follows, and I have verifieddie result by observation, that if the parallelopipedA. B C D is sufficiently long, the pencil will emergecircularly polarised, at 2, 6, 10, 14, 18, reflexions,ind polarised in a single plane after 4, 8, 12, l6, 20reflexions.M. Fresnel proved that the ray R r would emergeIt G, circularly polarised by three total reflexions at59° 12', and four total reflexions at 74^ 42'. Hence,according to the preceding reasoning, the ray will becircularly polarised by 9> 15, 21, 27, &c. reflexionsat 69° 12^^ and restored to common polarised light at6, 12, 18, and 24 reflexions at the same angle ; and itwill be circularly polarised by 12, 20, 28, 36, &c. re-flexions at 74° 42', or it will be restored to commonpolarised light.I have found that circular polarisation can be producedby 2}, 7hy 12}, &c. reflexions, or any other numberwhich is a multiple of 2}; for though we cannot seedie ray in the middle of a reflexion, yet we can showit when it is restored to a single plane of polarisation,at 5, 10, 15 reflexions. * When we use homogeneouslight, we find that the angle at which circular polarisationis produced is different for the differently colouredrays ; and hence these different rays cannot berestored to a single plane of polarisation at the same• See PhiL Transactions, 1830, p. SOLA TBBATIBB OV OFnOB. PISm^ of reflexion. Complementary odonrB wDl Aiofre be produced, such as I described long ago,which, I believe, have not been observed by any operson.* These colours are essentially different fthose of common polarised list, and will be mstood whcfh we come to explain those of dlpolarisation.CHAP. XXVII.OK ELLIPTICAL POLARISATION, AND ON THE ACTUirMETALS UPON LIGHT.On Elliptical Polarisation.(130.) The action of metals upon light has airpresented a troublesome anomaly to the ^likMflMalus at first announced that they produced no dwhatever ; but he afterwards found that the diftrtbetween transparent and metallic bodies consisteddiis,— that the former reflect all the light whidiilpolarised in one plane, and refract all the light iMthey polarised in an opposite plane : while metal Wrrflfrt that th polarised in both planes. Before 1 1acquainted with any of the experiments of Malin, Ikfound-*- that light was modified by the action [sofaulfic bodies; and that, in all the metals which I tod,polarised in the phoel1813. I diawT^mi tbef«i/fVT asd wit and lipArts how tbedr ^nii[ikji#su.eOAP* XXYn. Nuptial Polarisation. 225tints varied with the angle of incidence and rose tahigher orders hj increasing the number of reflexions.M* Biot, in repeating my experiments and in an elaborateinvestigation of the phenomena* was misled bjIfe same causes and has given a lengthened detail ofexperiments formulae and speculations in which allthe real phenomena are obscured and confounded.Although I had my full share in this rash generalisation,yet I never viewed it as a correct expression of thephenomena, and I have repeatedly returned to thesubject with the most anxious desire of surmounting itsdifficulties. In this attempt I have succeeded ; and Ihave been enabled to refer all the phenomena of theaction of metals to a new species of polarisation, whichI have called elliptical polarisation and which unitesthe two classes of phenomena which constitute circularand rectilineal polarisation.(131.) In the action of metals upon common light,it is easy to recognise the fact announced by Mains,diat the light which they reflect is polarised in differentplanes. I have found that the pencil polarised in theplane of reflexion is always more intense than thatpolarised in the perpendicular plane. The differencebetween these pencils is least in silver, and greatest inp1r"*> and consequently the latter polarises more lighti(K the plane of reflexion than silver. The followingtable shows the effect which takes place with otheruietals:*—Order in which the Metals polarised most Light in the Pure ofM^enofu0sI«iM. Steel Copper. Fine gold.l4Hid. Zinc. Til) plate. Common silver. ''Ar cobalt Speculum metaL Brass. Pure silver.AnmieiA goImIL Platinum. Grain tin. Total reflexionIipnpyritef. Bismuth. Jewellers' gold. Aromglaai.JiBtiinony. Mercury.By increasing the number of reflexions, the wholeof the incident light may be polarised in the plane ofTrain de Physique, torn. iv. p. 579. 6C0.226 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PAST ILreflexions. Eight reflexions from plates of steely between60^ and 80'', polarised the whole light of a wncandle ten feet distant. An increased number of re-flexions Qahove 36] is necessary to do this with puesilver ; and in total reflexions from glass, where Ikcircular polarisation begins, and where the two pendare equal, the effect cannot be produced by any numberof reflexions.In order to examine the action of metals upon polarisedlight, we must provide a pair of plates of sadimetal, flatly ground and highly polished, and each itleast 1^ inches long and half an inch broad. These paralUplates should be fixed upon a goniometer, or other dividedinstrument, so that one of the plates can be madeto approach to or recede from the other, and so tinttheir surfaces can receive the polarised ray at dialectangles of incidence. In place of giving the plates tmotion of rotation round the polarised ray, I hxn Lfound it better to give the plane of polarisation of the |ray a motion round the plates, so that the planes of reflexionand of polarisation may be set at any requiredangle. The ray reflected from the plates one or moretimes is then analysed, either by a plate of glass or srhomb of Iceland spar.When the plane of reflexion from the plates is siteparallel or perpendicular to the plane of primitive polarisation,the reflected light will receive no peculiarmodification, excepting what arises from its property ofpolarising a portion of light in the plane of reflexion*But in every other position of the plane of reflexion,and at every angle of incidence, and after any numberof reflexions, the pencil will have received particularmodifications, which we shall proceed to explain. Oseof these, however, is so beautiful and striking, stoarrest our immediate attention. When the plates aiesilver or gold, the most brilliant complementary colorisare seen in the ordinary and extraordinary imageschanging with the aivg^le of incidence and the numberfonAv. xzvn. scepticalof reflexions. Then colony me most brilliant whenibe plane of reflexion ia inclined 45° to the plane ofindigence, and they vanish when they inclination is 0"or go". All the other metals in the table, p. 220, give■nah^ons coUrarB ; but they are most brilliant in silver,end diminish in brilliancy from silver to galena.In order to Investigate the cause of these phenomena,let us suppose iteei plates to be used, and the plane ofAb polarised ray to be inclined W to the plane of reflexion.At an incidence of 7^° the light has sugaredsome physical change, which ia a maximum at thatmile. It is not polarised light, because it does notTUiish during the revolution of the analysing plate. Itli neither partially polarised light nor common light;beomse, when we reflect it a second time at 75°, it is■BBtared to light polarised in one plane. If we transmitAe light reflected from steel at 75° along the axis of'Xocl&nd spar, the system of rings shown in ^g, 97. is': Fie 1I4> changed into the system shown infig. 114., as if a, thin flhn of acrystallised body which polarisesthe blue of the first order had\ crossed the system. If we substitutefor the calcareous spar flhnsI of sulphate of lime which givedifferent tints, we shall find thatthese tints are increased in valueby a quantity nearly equal to atint, according as die metallic action coinopposes that of the crystal. It was onle authority of this experiment that I was led to .i!licve that melts acted like crystallised plates. AndiFlen I found that the colours were better developedpure after successive reflexions, I rashlydeluded, as M. Biot also did after me, that each suc-movereflexion corresponded to an additional hicksp '^ of the film. In order to prove the error of this.^Naion, let us transmit the list reflected S, 4>, 6, &Q 2A TREATISE ON OPTICS.PABTILtimes from steel at 75^ along the axis of Iceland spar,and we shall find that the system of rings is perfect andthat the whole of the light is polarised in one plane ; •result absolutely incompatible with the supposition «fthe tints rising with the number of reflexions. At1^ 3^ 5^ 7^ 9^ 11 reflexion the light when transmittedalong the axis of Iceland spar will produce an effetequal to nearly a quarter of a tint, beyond which itnever rises.I now conceived that light reflected 1, 3, 5, f,9times from steel at 75^ resembled circularly polarisedlight. In circularly polarised light produced by dmtotal reflexions from glass, the ray originally polarised4- 45^ to the plane of reflexion is, by the two i^exiomat the same angle, restored to light polarised — 45'' tothe plane of reflexion ; whereas in steel, a ray polarised+ 45°, and reflected once from steel at 75 ^, is restedbj another reflexion at 75^ to light polarised — 17^«With different metals the same effect is produced, bitthe inclination of the plane of polarisation of the restoredray is different, as the following table shows : —IIiiilhrtiTotal Reflexion.offMWdRv-bismuth- . . .210 (TSpeculum metalZinc - - . . .asteel • • M •Iron pyrites . . .Antimony . . .Canonical cobalt . .16 15Cobalt13 30LeadGalenaaSecular iron . . .Total Reactions.From glassPure silverCommon silverFine gold .Jewellers' goldGrain tin .BrassTin plate .CopperMercuryPlatina .Inclinationof StoredRay.45° (y39 48rIn total reflexions, or in circular polarisation the d^clearly polarised ray is restored to a single plane by diesame number of reflexions and at the same angle at whichit received circular polarisation, whatever be the inclinationof the plane of the second pair of reflexions tothe plane of the first pair ; but in metallic polarisationthe angle at which the secoiiA x^^^^di^v features the n)\CHAP. zxvn.Elliptical POLARISATION.to a single plane of polarisation varies with the inclinationof the plane of the second reflexion to the plane ofthe first reflexion. In the case of total reflexion thisangle varies as the radii of a circle; that is it is alwaysthe same. In the case of metallic polarisation it variesas the radii of an ellipse. Thus when the plane of thepolarised ray is inclined 45° to the plane of primitivepolarisation, the ray reflected once at 75° will he restoredto polarised light at an incidence of 75° ; hut when thetwo planes are parallel to one another the restoration takesplace at 80°; and when they are perpendicular, at 70°;and at intermediate angles, at intermediate inclinations.For these reasons, I have called this kind of polarisationoptic polarisation.We have already seen that light polarised -f 45° iscritically polarised hy 1, 3, 5, 7 reflexions from steelat 7^°, and restored to a single plane of polarisation hy2, 4, 6, 8 reflexions at the same angle ; and we havefloated that the ray restored hy two reflexions has itsplane of polarisation brought into the state of — 1 7°. Thefollowing are the inclinations of this plane to the planeof reflexion, by different numbers of reflexion from steeland silver : —No. ofReflexion.Inclination of the Planeof the polarised Ray.No. ofReflexion.Inclination of the Planeof the polarised Ray.Steel.silver.Sted.Silver.l/OO+ 5 22I 38+ »):58'J 1.-)+ 31 5226 6+ 21 7+ 03+ 0016 56+ 1? 306 42+ 47These results explain in the clearest manner why commonlight is polarised by steel after eight reflexions, andin silver not till after thirty-six reflexions. Common^^t consists of two pencils, one polarised + 45^, and thetMiier — 45°; and steel brings these planes of polarisationtnfo the plane of reflexions after eight reflexions, whilesilver requires more than thirty .six reflexions to do this.(132.) The angles at which elliptical polarisation isproduced by one reflexion may be considered as tkeQ5A TREATISE ON OPTICS.Parts.maximum polarising angles of the metal and their tangentsmay be considered as the indices of refraction fromthe different metals as shown in the following table—*Name cf Metal.Angles of MaximumPolarisation.Index ofRefractionGrain tin .Mercury - - - -Galena . . . -Iron pyrites - - -Grey cobalt . - -Speculum metal . . .Antimony melted -SteelBismuth - • -Pure silver - - - -Zinc - - . -Tin plate hammered - -Jewellers' fold7>»o.S078 2778 1077 SO76 5675 2574 5072 3070 5070 454-9154«934-5114-3094-0113-84437S23-6893-2713-1722-8792-864Elliptical polarisation may be produced by a sufficientnumber of reflexions at any given angle eider above orbelow the maximum polarising angle as shown in thefollowing table for Steel: —Number of Re-flexions at whichElliptical Polarisationis produces.Number of Regionsat which the PenciliH restored to a singlePlane.Observed Anodeof Incidence.3 9 15 &c.2i 7i I2J &c.2 6 10 &c.1| 4i 7i &C.1 3 5 fee.4 44 74 &c.2 6 10 &c.2| 7^ 12| &c3 9 15 &c.6 12 18 \c.5 10 15 &C.4 8 12 &c.3 6 9 &c.2 4 6 *c.3 6 9 &c.4 8 12 &a5 10 15 &c.6 12 18 &c.860 (y82 207o67 4060 2056 2552 20lien the number of reflexions is an integer, it iteasily understood how an elliptically polarised ray beginsto retrace its course, and recover its state of polarisationin a single plane, by the same number of reflexions bywhich it lost it ; but it is interesting to observe, when thenumber of reflexions is 1^, 2^, or any other mixed number,that the ray must have acquired its elliptical polarisationin the middle of the second and third reflexion ; thatis, when it had reached its greatest depth within themetallic surface it then begins to resume its state <^polarisation in a single plane, and recovers it at the end ofCHIT. ZXm. BIiLIPTlOAL PDIiABIBATION. Si3, 5, and ?> refleicioiu. A very remarkable efFect takes[dace when one reflexion is made on one aide of the.maximum polarising angle, and one on the other aide.A raja that has received partial elliptical polanaaticv. byone reflexion at 85° does not acquire more ellipticpolarisation bj a reflexion at 54°, but it retraces milacourse and recover ite state of single polarisation.By a method which it would be out of place to explainhere, I have determined the number of points ofrestoration which can occur sC different angles of in-thence from 0° to 90°i for any number of reflexions;and I have represented them in ^. Is., where thearches 1,1. II; II., &c., represent the quadrant of ind-hence,for one, two, &c. ; reflexions C being the pointof 0-', and B that of 90° of incidence. In the quadrantI, I. there is no point of restoration. In II,II. there is only one point or node of restoration, viz.It 73° in filter. In 111, III. there are two points ofrestoration, because a ray elliptically polarised by one and• half reflexions will be restored by three reflexions at 63°43 beneath the maximum polarising angle, and at 79° ^O"above that angle. It may also be shown that for IV.reflexion there are 3 points of restoration, for V. re-flexions 4 points ; and for VI. reflexions 5 points, asitatm in die figures The loops or double curves aredrown to represent the intensity of the elliptic libationwbieb baa its minimum at 1, 2, 3, &C., vd^- v^&4 4^58 A TREATISE ON Optics. FABT ILmaximum in the middle of the unshaded parts. If wenow use homogeneous lights we shall find that the loopshave different sizes in the different coloured rays and thattheir minima and maxima are different. Hence in tiVI th quadrant C B for examples there will he 6 loops ofall the different colours, viz. CI; 1,2 ; 2,3 ; 3,4, &&;overlapping one another, and producing hy their roixtmethose beautiful complementary colours which have alreadybeen mentioned. For a more full account of this curiousbranch of the subject of polarisation, I must refer thereader to the Philosophical Transactions, 1830; or tothe Edinburgh Journal of Science, Nos, VII. and VIII.new series, April, 1831.CHAP. XXVIII.ON THE POLARISING STRUCTURE PRODUCED BY HEAT,COLD, COMPRESSION, DILATATION, AND INDURATION.The various phenomena of double refraction, and thesystem of polarised rings with one and two axes ofdouble refraction, and with planes of no double refraction,may be produced either transiently or permanently,in glass and other substances, by heat and cold, rajcooling, compression and dilatation, and induration.1. Transient Influence of Heat and Cold,(1.) Cylinders of glass vrith one positive axis of doublerefraction.1 33.) If we take a cylinder of glass, from half an iiidito an inch in diameter, or upwards, and about half sbinch or more in thickness, and transmit heat from itscircumference to its centre, it will exhibit when exposedto polarised light, in the apparatus, flg, 9^ & systemof Tides with a back cross, «&iic5^ «sb^Lu to those flidiAy.xsNrni. polarisation by hat. 2S8J^.98.; and the complementary system shown in/^.99«i'll appear hy turning round the plate C 90°. In thiscue we must hold the cylinder at the distance of 8 orID inches from the eye when the rings will appear as itwere in the inside of the glass. If we cover up anyportion of the surface of the glass cylinder we shallhide a corresponding portion of the rings so that thecylinder has its single axis of double refraction fijced inlee axis of its figure and not in every possible directionparallel to that axis as in crystals.By crossing the rings with a plate of sulphate of limenformerly explained we shall find that it depresses thetints in the two quadrants which the axis of the platecrosses; and consequently that the system of rings isnegative, like that of calcareous spar.As soon as the heat reaches the axis of the cylinderthe rings begin to lose their brightness and when the heatis uniformly diffused through the glass they disappearentirely.(2.) Cylinders of glass with a negative axis of doublerefraction,(134.) If a similar cylinder of glass is heated uniformlyin boiling oil, or otherwise brought to a considerablyhigh temperature, and is made to cool rapidlyby surrounding its circumference with a good conductor,it will exhibit a similar system of rings, whichwill all vanish when the glass is uniformly cold. Bycrossing these rings with sulphate of lime, they will befound to be positive, like those of ice and zircon ; or thesame thing may be proved by combining this system ofrings with the preceding system, when they will be foundto destroy one another.In both these systems of rings, the numerical value ofthe tint or colour at any one point varies as the squareof the distance of that point from the axis. By placingthin films of sulphate of lime between two of thesesystems of rings, very beautiful systems may bft ^^^duce.234 A TREATISE ON OPTIOS. part II*(3.) Oval plates of glass with two axes of double refraction.(135.) If we take an oval plate A B D C, fig. 11 6.,and perfoixi with :t the two precedingexperiments we shall find that it has inboth cases two axes of double refractionthe principal axis passing throughO; being negative when it is heated at itscircumference and positive when coldenters its circumference. The curvesA B^ C D^ correspond to the black ones in. 101. and thedistance mn to the inclination of the resultant axes. Theeffect shown mfigAlQ. is that which is produced by incliningmn 45° to the plane of primitive polarisation ; hotwhen mn is in the plane of primitive polarisation, orperpendicular to it the curves A B^ CD, will form tblack cross, as in^^. 100.In all the preceding experiments, the heat and coldmight have been introduced and conveyed through dieglass from each extremity of the axis of the cylinder orplate. In this case the phenomena would have beesexactly the same, but the axes that were formerly negativewill now be positive, and vice versa,(4.) Cubes of glass with double refraction.(136.) When the shape of the glass is that of a cube,the rings have the form shown in fig. 117. and whenit is a paralelopiped with its length about three times itsbreadth, the rings have the form shown in fig. 118. theFin. 117.curves of equal tint near the angles being ct>c/6«, as shownin both the figures.• ZXyni. Polarisation BY HEAT. 235Rectangular plates of glass with planes ofn>o doublerefraction,37.) If a well annealed rectangular plate of glassD C, is place with its lower edge C D on a pieceon Ab Jig. Ii., nearly red hot, and the two to-fig.119.A Bir are placed in the apparatus, fg, 9^,, so thatmay he inclined 45° to the plane of primitivenation, and that polarised light may reach the eyefrom every part of the glass, we shall observe thesing phenomena. The instant that the heat enterssurface C D, fringes of brilliant colours will be seenlei to C D, and almost at the same time before thehas reached the upper surface E F, or even theal line a b, similar fringes will appear at £ F. Coaterst faint blue, and then white, yellow, orange,all spring up at a &; and these central colours will beled from those at the edges by two dark lines, M N,in which there is neither double refraction nor portion.These lines correspond with the black curvesf. 101. and fig, Ii,, and the structure between M N,P is negative, like that of calcareous spar; whilestructures without M N and O P are positive, like5 of zircon. The tints thus developed are those ofton's scale, and are compounded of the different setsIts that would be given in each of the homogeneousof the spectrum.1 these plates there is obviously an infinite numberces in the planes passing through M N, O P, andle tints, as well as the double refraction, can be caledby the very same laws as in regular ci^^Uia>tis mutandis.A TREATISE OK 0PTIG8.PABTObIf the plate E F D C is heated equally all rounds thefringes are produced with more regularity and quickness;and if the plate first heated in oil or otherwise is cooledequally all rounds it will developed the same fringes, butthe central ones at a & will in this last case be positive,and the outer ones at E F and C D negative.Similar effects to those above described may be producedin similar plates of rock salt, obsidian, fluor spar,copal and other solids that have not the doubly refractingstructure.A series of splendid phenomena are produced bycrossing similar or dissimilar plates of glass when theirfringes are developed. When similar plates of glass,or those produced by heat, as in. 1 19., are crossed, thecurves or lines of equal tint at the square of intersection,A B C D, Jig. 120., will be hyperbolas. The tint itthe centre will be the difference Fig. 120.of the central tints of each of thetwo plates, and the tints of thesucceeding hyperbolas will risegradually in the scale above thatcentral tint. If the tints producedby each plate are preciselythe same, and the plates of thesame shape, the central tints willdestroy each other, the hyperbolaswill be equilateral ones, and the tints will graduallyrise from the zero of Newton's scale.When dissimilar plates are crossed, as in Jig, 121., viz.one produced by heat with one produced by cold, the linesof equal tint in the square of intersection A B C P(Jig. 121.), will be ellipses. The tints in the centre willbe equal to the sum of the separate tints, and the lintsformed by the combination of the external fringes will beequal to their difference. If the plates and their tateare perfectly equal, the lines of equal tint will be circlet*The beauty of these combinations can be understoodonly from coloured . drawings. When the plates arecombined lengthwise they add to or subtract from eachwasJoamATtim bt hat.soldier'sefibct^ according as similar or dissimilar fringestie opposed to one another.Fig. 121.(6.) Sphere ofj^ass, Sc. with an infinite number ofaxeeof double refraction,(138.) If we place a sphere of glass in a glass troughof hot oil and observe the system of rings while theheat is passing to the centre of the sphere we shall findit to be a regular system exactly like that in fi, 97*;and it will sufibr no change by turning the sphere in anydirection. Hence the sphere has an infinite number ofpositive axes of double refraction or one along each ofits diameters.If a very hot sphere of glass is placed in a glass troughof cold oil a similar system will be produced but thewin all be negative.(7*) Spheroids of glass tooth oneaais ofdatible refractionalong the axis i^ revolution and two axes along theequatorial diameters.(139*) I^ ^^ place an oblate spheroid in a glass troughof hot oaf we shall find that it has one axis of positivedoodle refraction along its shorter axis or that of revocation;but if we transmit the polarised light along anyof its equatorial diameters we shall find that it has twoaxes of double refraction, the black curves appearing asbkfig. 1 16. when the axis of revolution is inclined 45^ to238 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. part ILthe plane of primitive polarisation and changing into across when the axis is parallel or perpendicular to dieplane of primitive polarisation.The very same phenomena will he exhibited with Rprolate spheroid only the hack cross opens in a differentplane when the two axes are developed.Opposite systems of rings will he developed in boththese cases if hot spheroids are plunged in cold oil.The reason of using oil is to enable the polarised lightto pass through the spheres or spheroids without refraction.The oil should have a refractive power as near upossible to that of the glass.A number of. very curious phenomena arise from heatingand cooling glass tubes or cylinders along their axes;the most singular variations taking place according as theheat and cold are applied to the circumference or to dieaxis or to both.(8.) Influence of heat on regular crystals.(140.) The influence of uniform heat and cold on regularcrystals is very remarkable. M. Fresnel found thatheat dilates sulphate of lime less in the direction of itaprincipal axis than in a direction perpendicular to it;and professor Mitscherlich has found that Iceland spar isdilated by heat in the direction of its axis of double refractionwhile in all directions at right angles to this axis;80 that there must be some intermediate direction in whichthere is neither contraction nor dilatation. Heat bringsthe rhomb of Iceland spar nearer to the cube and diminishesits double refraction.In applying heat to sulphate of lime, professor found that the two resultant axes (P,P.^. 106.)gradually approach as the heat increases till they uniteat O^ and form a single axis. By a still farther increaseof heat they opened out on each side towards A and B.A very curious fact of an analogous kind I have foundin glauherite, which has one axis of double refraction forviolet, and two axes for red light. With a heat blowthat of boiling waUx^ \k^ Vnq x«i6K!^\»a& «x£8 (P^ P>CHAP. XXym. POLARISATION BY SUDDEN COOLING. 239fig. 106.) unite at O^ and by a slight increase of heatthe resultant axes again opened out one in the directionOA, and the other in the direction OB. By applyingcold the single axis for violet light at O opened out intotwo at P and P. At a certain temperature the violet axisalso opened out into two, in the plane A B.2. On the permanent Influence of sudden Cooling,(141.) In March, 1814, I found that glass meltedand suddenly cooled, such as prince Rupert's drops, possesseda permanent doubly refracting structure* ; and inDecember, 1814, Dr. Seebeck published an account ofanalogous experiments with cubes of glass. Cylinders,l^tes^ cubes, spheres, and spheroids of glass, with a permanentdoubly refracting structure, may be formed bybringing the glass to a red heat, and cooling it rapidly atits circumference, or at its edges. As these solid bodiesoften lose their shape in the process, the symmetry oftheir structure is affected, and the system of rings orfringes injured; so that the phenomena are not produced80 perfectly as during the transient influence of heat andcold. It is often necessary, too, to grind and polish thesurfaces afresh: an operation during which the solidsare often broken, in consequence of the state of constraintin which the particles are held.An endless variety of the most beautiful optical figuresmay be produced by cooling the glass upon metallicpatterns (metals being the best conductors) applied symmetricallyto each surface of the glass, or symmetricallygrand its circumference. The heat may be thus drawnoff from the glass in lines of any form or direction, so asto give any variety whatever to its structure, and, consequently,to the optical figure which it produces whenexposed to polarised light.(142.) In all doubly refracting crystals the form ofthe rings is independent of the external shape of thecrystal ; but in glass solids that have received the doubly• Letter to Sir Joseph Baal, AprU& 1814. l^ML Traiw.\«V%.S40 A TREATISE ON Optics Patty;refracting structure either transiently or permaaeii^from heat, the rings depend entirely on the external ditof the solid. If, in fig, 119v we divide the rectangleplate £ F D C into two equal parts through the line •each half of the plate will have the same structure atwhole, viz. a negative and two positive structures animatedby two dark neutral lines. In like manner if we ea piece of a tube of glass, by a notch, through its drewterence to its centre or if we alter the shape of cylindricplates and spheres, &c., by grinding them into difeeexternal figures, we produce a complete change upon ioptical figures which they had previously exhibited.3. On the Influence of Compression and DilataHmk(143.) If we could compress and dilate the yarioisolids above mentioned with the same uniformity wlwhich we can heat and cool them we should propthe same doubly refracting structures which have beidescribed compression and dilatation always produfibopposite structures.The influence of compression and dilatation may 1well exhibited by taking a strip of glass ABD(fig. 122., and bending it by the force of the handWhen it is held in the apparatus, fig, 94t., with i1^.122.edge A B inclined 45^ to the plane of primitive polarnations the whole thickness of the glass will be covered wit!coloured fringes consisting of a negative set separatefrom a positive set by the dark neutral line M N. Thfringes on the convene side A B are negative, and those blitheconcave side positive. As the bending force increasesthe tints increase in Ti\xm\^t*> ^xid as it diminishes, the](BAP. ZXVm. Polarisation B7 Room PBEgSlON. 241»Biirffii«li in number disappearing entirely when thepate of f^tuB recovers its diane. The tints which aretiioae of Newton's scale, vary with their distances fromMN; and when two such plates as that shown in fig.1S2. cross each other they produce in the square of in-teneetion rectilinear fringes parallel to the diagonal ofAe square which joins the angles where the two concaveend the two convex sides of the plates meet.When a plate of bent glass is made to cross a platecrystallised by heat and suddenly cooled, the fringes inAe square of intersection are parabolas, whose vertexwin be towards the convex side of the bent plate, if theprincipal axis of the other plate is positive, but towardsdie concave side, if that axis is negative.The effects of compression and dilatation may bemost distinctly seen by pressing or dilating squares orcylinders of calves' feet jelly or soft isinglass.By the application of compressing and dilatingfnToes^ I have been able to alter the doubly refractingstructure of regularly crystallised bodies in every directionsincreasing or diminishing their tints accordingto the direction in which the forces were applied.*The most remarkable influence of pressure, howeveris that which it produces on a mixture of resin andiHdte wax. In all the cases hitherto mentioned of theartificial production of double refraction, the phenomenaare related to the shape of the mass in which the changeis induced : but I have been able to communicate to thecompound above mentioned a double refraction, similarto that which exists in the particles of crystals. Thecompressed mass has a single axis of double refractionin every parallel direction, and the coloured rings areproduced by the inclination of the refracted ray to theaxis according to the same law as in regular crystals.If we remove the compressed film, any portion of it willbe found to have one axis of double refraction like portionsof a film of any crystal with one axis. The imeSee Edinburgh Tiamactkmt, toL vii p. 281.B243 ▲ TREATISE ON Optics. part Aiportant deductions which this experiment authorises irisbe noticed at the conclusion of this part of the word4. On the Influence of Induration.(144.) In 1814 I had occasion to make some experimentson the influence of induration in communicatingdouble refraction to soft solids. When isinglass is driedin a glass trough of a circular form it exhibits a systemof tints with the black cross exactly like negative crystalswith one axis. When a thin cylindrical plate of isinglassis indurated at its circumference it produces asystem of rings with one positive axis. If the troughin the first of these experiments and the plate in diesecond are oval two axes of double refraction will beexhibited.When jelly placed in rectangular troughs of glass isgradually indurated we have a positive and a n^;atiTestructure developed and these are separated by a Ladneutral line. If the bottom of the trough is taken oot^so as to allow the induration to go on at two parallelsurfaces the same fringes are produced as in a rectangularplate of glass heated in oil and subsequentlycooled.Spheres and spheroids of jelly may be made by properinduration to produce the same effects as spheres andspheroids of glass when heated or cooled. The lensesof almost all animals possess the doubly refracting structure.In some there is only one structure which isgenerally positive. In others there are two structures,a positive and a negative one ; and in many there arethree structures a negative between two positive and spositive between two negative structures. In some instanceswe have two structures of the same name together.By the process of induration we may remoteentirely the natural structure of the lens espedaDjwhen it is spherical or spheroidal and superind^flethe structure arising from induration. I have now .OOMFOBITB OB TB88BI4ATSD 0BY8TAU. 245fire me a spheroidal lens of the boneto fish, with onebetntifiil system of rings along the axis of the spheroid,and two systems along the equatorial diameters.I have also several indurated lenses of the cod, thatdisplay in the finest manner their doubly refractingtfrnctnre*CHAP. XXIX.PHENOMENA OF COMPOSITE OB Tesselated CRYSTALS.(145.) In all regularly formed doubly refracting crystalsdie separation of the two images, the size of the rings,and the value of the tints, are exactly the same in all paralleldirections. If two crystals, however, have growntogether with their axes inclined to one another, and ifwe cut a plate out of these united crystals so that theeye cannot distinguish it from a plate cut out of a singlecrystal, the exposure of such a crystal to polarised lightwill instantly detect its composite nature, and will exhibitto the eye the very line of junction. This will beobvious upon considering that the polarised ray has differentindications to the axis of each crystal, and willtherefore produce different tints at these different inclinations.Hence the examination of a body in polarisedlight furnishes us with a new method of discoveringstructures which cannot be detected hy the micro9Qope, or any other method of observation.A very fine example of this is exhibited in the bipy^radical sulphate of potash, which Count Boumon andother crystallographers regarded as one simple crystal,whose primitive form was the pyramidal dodecahedron,like the crystal shown in fig, 112. But by cutting aB 2A Treatise ON" OPTICS.PART litplate perpendicular to the axis of the pyramid and exposingit to polarised lights I found it to be oompowdof several crystals all united so as to form the legalfigure above represented. The crystal has two ftxei ofdouble refraction and the plane passing through Aetwo axes of one is inclined 60^ to the plane ptaisgthrough the two axes of each of the' other two. So Altwhen we incline the plate each of the three combedcrystals displays different colours. I have found nunsremarkable structures of this kind in the mineral kingdomsand among artificial salts ; but two of these an lointeresting as to merit particular notice.(146.) The apophyllite from Faroe generally CPftrtallies in right-angled square prisms and splits iridigreat facility into plates by planes perpendicular to Aeaxis of the prism. If we remove with a sharp knife Aeuppermost dice or the undermost, it will be found tohave one axis of double refraction and to give thesingle system of rings shown in Jtg, 98. K we removeother slices in the same manner, we shall findthat when exposed to polarised light they exhibit thcurious tesselated structure shown in fig, 1^3, Theouter case M O N P^ consists ofo a number of parallel veins orplates. In the centre is a smalllozenge, abed, with one axis ofdouble refraction and round itare four crystals. A, B, C, D, withtwo axes of double refraction,the plane passing through the^ axes of A and D being perpendicularto the plane passing through the axes of B andC; and the former plane being in the direction MN,and the latter in the direction O P.When the polarised light is transmitted through thefaces of certain prisms, the beautiful tesselated figureshown 'mfigA24f, is exhibited, all the differently shadedparts shining with the most splendid colours. AsFig.123.BB /J} \^^p. TTTT. OOXPOUT^ OB TBEBEUkTEDswdw prune hu every inhere the af^. Is. obvious that the doubly refracting' forcef ladies in different parts of the erjattl; butm this Tuition takes place in nich a aym-m metrical manner Id relation to the ideaI and ends of the prism, as to set at deI fiance all the rea^nieed laws of crystalsIt^aph;.With the view of observing the formIfflof the lines of equal colour, I immersedcrystal in oil, and transmitted theI polarised light in a direction parallel toa diagonal of the prism ; the effect ntjwHexhitnled is shown in fig. 125., whereI ABC D is the crystal VC and BD, itsliet^ea, where the thickness is nothing, andHaft the edge through which the diagonalII of the i^Um passes. Fig I S3|INow, it is obvious A ~ "I slut if this had beenregular crystal, the.'iiKi of equal tinto of equal doublefraction would have been illstraight Una parallel to A C or BD; but in the apophyllite they pre^■it the moat singular irregularities,•U of which ate, however, symme-ideally related |0 certain fi X ed pointswithin the crystal. In the middle«f the crystal, half way between mand n, there are onlyjfue fringes orondera of colours ; at points equidistantfrom this there are tucAges, the sixth returning intoilaelf in the form of an oval. Atf thar two equidistant points near mand n, the Sd, 4th, and 5th fringesare singularly serrated, and the 6th cend 7tli fringe return into themselves in the £bona of aB 3246 A TBUTint OK Optic Pasttguare; beyond thU, near m and », fliere ere only finfringes, in consequence of the fifth retaining into iudt(147). A complete structure of ■ Tery dififewrt Ind,but extremely interesting from the eSecti which it seduces,iB exhibited in many cretan of Idiot ^a,which are intersected by parallel Ans or Veins of thicknesses, as shown in fig. 186. These IiiTdoa or atraHL are perpeitdiculu taFig. 186. (lie sort diagonal E F, G H of ^faces of the rhomb, and panlld to ttr edges E G, F H. When we hwk perpendicularlythrough the faces AEBF,DGC H, the light will not pass throngany of ihepUneaeftcj, ABCD,a/hd,and consequently we shall only see twoimages of any olgect just as if theplanes were not dire. But if we look through anyof the other two pair of spirally faces, we shall observethe two common images at their usual distance;and at a much greater distance, two secondary imago,one on each aide of the common images. In somecases there are sour, and in other cases tix, w-contrary images, arranged in two line* ; one line beingon each side of the common image, and perpendicularto the line joining their centres. When the inter 'rusting pines are numerous, and especially iriien theyare also found perpendicular to the short diaguiala «fthe other two fiices of the rhomb that meet at B, theobmse Summit, the secondary images are extremely numerous,and sometimes arranged in pyramidal heaps ofsingular beauty, Vanishing, and reappearing, and chaostheir colour and the intensity of their light, by disinclinationof the plate. If the light of the luminousobject is polarised, the phenomena admit of still greatsvariations. When the strata or veins are thick, theimages are not coloured, bat have merely at their edgethe-colour of refracted light.Malus considered these phenomena as produced byfissure <a cracks within the crystal, and he regarded tbt^EAKZSOZ. OOMPOim Oft TJnSELATBD 0BT8TAL6. 247colours as those of thin plates of air or space ; but Ihave found diat they are produced by veins or twin crys-tabfirmly united together so as to resist separationmore powerfully than the natural cleavage planes and Ihave found this both crystallc^aphically^ by measuringthe andes of the vdns^ and optically by observing thesystem of rings seen through die veins alone.This composite structure will be understood fromJi§. 19,1. y where A B D C is the principal section ofA rhomb of Iceland spar whose axis is A D. Theibrm and portion of one of the intersecting veins orrhomboidal plates shown at Mm Nne but greatlyflicker than it actually is ; the angles A m M, and D n N^being 141^ 44^ A ray of common light R h, incidenton the face A C at 6^ will be refracted in the lines h v,% d. These rays entering the vein M m N n^ at e anddj will be again refracted doubly ; but as the vein is sothin as to produce the complementary colours of polarisedlight by the interference of the two pencils whichcompose each of the pencils c e, df, these colours willdepend on the thickness of the vein M N^ and onthe inclination of the ray to the axis of the plate M N.These double pencils will emerge from the vein ate,f, and will be refracted again as in the figure intothe pendls cm, e n, fo, fp; the colours of e n,fo,being complementary to those of e m, fp. That themultiplication and colour of the images is owing to thecauses now explained may be proved ocularly, as I havedone it, by dividing rhombs of calcareous spar, and in-B 4248 A TBKATin iOI 9PTICB. ? Abs O*setting between them or in grooves cut in a dn^ plateof calcareous spar a thin film of sulphate of lime ormica. In this way all the phenomena of the naturalcompound crystal may be reproduced in the artificialone and we may give great variety to the phenomenaby inserting thin films in different azimuths round thepolarised pencils bc,bd, and at different indications tothe axis of double refraction.The compound crystal showii in fig. 127- is in realitya natural polarising apparatus. The part of therhomb A m N C^ polarises the incident light R b. Thevein M N is the thin crystallised vein whose colours areto be examined ; and the part B M n D^ is the analysingrhomb.Various other minerals and artificial crystals are intersectedwith analogous veins and produce analogousphenomena. There are several composite crystal whichexhibit remarkable peculiarities of structure and dlsjdaycurious optical phenomena by polarised light. The Braziliantopaz is one of those which is worthy of noticeand whose properties I have explained by-coloured draW'*ings^ in the second volume of the Cambridge TVeuw-actions.For a full account of the properties of compositecrystals and of the multiplication of images by the crystalsof calcareous spar that are intersected by veins, wprefer the reader to the Edinburgh Transactions vol iip. 317.^ and the Phil. Trans., 1815, p. 270. ; or to thEdinburgh Encyclopedia art. Optics.L4F. ZXX. Absorption OF POLARISED LIGHT. 249CHAP. XXX.r THE DICHROISM^ OR DOUBLE Colour OF BODIES;AND THE ABSORPTION OF POLARISED LIGHT.48.) If a crystallised body has a different colour infervent directions when common light is transmittedrough its substance it is said to possess dichroism,iiich signifies two colours. Dr. Wollaston observed18 property long ago in the potash muriate of paUa^wm, which appeared of a deep red colour along the1b^ and of a vivid green in a transverse direction; andCordier observed the same change of colour in a mindcalled polite, to which Hairy gave the name ofiiroite. Mr. Herschel has observed a similar fact in apiety of suh^aaysulphate of iron, which is of a deep)od red colour along the axis and of a light greenUmr perpendicular to the axis. In examining this classphenomena I have found that they depend on theportion of lights being regulated by the inclination ofe incident ray to the axis of double refraction and ondifference of colour in the two pencils formed byable refraction.In a rhomb of yellow Iceland spar the extraordinarylage was of an orange yellow colour while the ordi-ry image was yellowish white along the axis. Thelour and intensity of the two pencils was the barnesid die difference of colour and intensity increased witheinclination to the axis. When the two images over-spedeach other their combined colour was the sameall angler with the axis and this colour was that ofe funeral. If we expose the rhomb to polarised«50A TREATISE ON Option.PABTn.light, its colour will be orange fellow in the positionwhere the ordinary image vanishes, and yellowish whitein the position where the extraordinary image vanisfaei.The crystals in the following Table possess the sameproperties, the ordinary and extraordinary images havingthe colours opposite to their names : —Colours cf ike tmo Image in Crpdals w&k omi AxelNamMorCiyitals.Zircon.Sapphire.Ruby.Emerald.Emerald.Beryl, blue.Beryl, green.Beryl, yellowish green.Rock crystal, nearly )transparent 3Rock crystal, yellow.AmethystAmethyst.AmethystTourmaline.Rubellite.Idocrase.Nellie.Apatite lilacApatite olive.Phosphate of lead.Iceland spar.OctohedritaPrincipia Section In Planeof Formation.Brownish white.Yellowish green.Pale yellow.Yellowish green.Bluish green.Bluish white.Whitish.Pale yellow.Whilst.Yellowish white:BlueGreyish white.Reddish yellow.Greenish white.Reddish white.Yellow.Yellow.Bluish.Bluish green.Bright green.Oran yellow.Whitish brown.Fkliiclpal idknlartoFlaaavfPahr-Deeper brown.BlueBright pink.Bluish green.Yellowish green.Blue.Bluish green.Pale green.Faint brown.Yellow.Pink.Ruby red.Bluish greenBluish green.Faint red.Green.Bluish white;Reddish.Yellowish Teen.Orange yellow.YeUowish whiteYellowish thrown.(149.) When the crystals have two axes of double refraction,the absorption of the incident rays produces tvariety of phenomena, at and near the two resultant axe.These phenomena are finely displayed in polite. Thismineral, which crystallises in six and twelve-sided prismsis of a sleep blue colour when Seen along the axis, and ofa brownish yellow when seen in a direction perpendicularto the axis of the prism. When we look along tbsresultant axes which are inclined 62^ 5(/ to one anotherwe see a system of rings which are pretty distinct 'beathe plate is thin ; but when it is thick, and when di^MiB sang through the axes u in the plane of primitivepoUriiatJon, riches of blue and nice light areKen to divers in the form of a cross from the centre ofthe Bfitem of rii^a. This curious efi^ is shownJig, 138. in fy. 128., where P P are d«contra of the two systema ofrings, O the principal n^alJTe axisof the crystal, and C D the planej pasung through the axes. The/ Une branches, which are shaded inthe figure, are tipped with purple attheir summits P P', and are separated■> hy whitish light in some specimens,and by hinjsb %ht in others. From P and F' to O,Ae white or yellowish light becomes more and more blue,end at O it is quite blue ; while from P and P' to Cand D it becomes more and more yellow, and at C andD it is quite yellow, the yellow being almost equallybright in the plane A C B D, perpendicular to the principalaxis O. When the plane C D is perpendicular todie plane of primitive polarisation, the poles P, P' arefilled with patches of white or yellowish light, butenvoy where else the light is a deep Ue.When examined hy common light, we find that theqntitxirjp image is hrownUh yellow at C and D, and thesUnwrdinary onefainC bine; the former acquiring someUne raps, and the latter same yellow ones from C to D,end from A to B Where there is still a great differencein the colour of the images. The yellow image becomewinter from A to P and P', and from B to P and P',vbete it changes into Hue, the feeble blue image beingpa^uUy reinforced by other blue rays till the intensity ofthe two blue images is nearly equal. The faint blue imageiuoeaiea in intensity from C to P, and from D to P',nd the yellow one acquires an accession of blue light,and becomes blui^ white from P and P' to O ; the ordi-0117 image is whitish, and the other a deep blfle; butdw whiteness gradually diminishes towards O, wheredie two image are almost equally Uue. The following25£A TREATISE ON OPTICS.PABffnitable will show that this property exists in many othttcrystals: —(k)lour» ttf tke two Images in Crystals wUk two Axes,Name of CtTitala.Plane of Alto In Plane ofPolirtwirifln.Topaz-blue,green.greenish blue.pink.■ pink yellow.■ yellow.Sulphate of barytes.yellowish purple.■■ yellow.— orange yellow.Cyanite.Dichroite.Cymophane.Epidote olive green.whitish greenMica.White.White.Reddish grey.Pink.Pink.Yellowish white.Lemon yellow.Lemon yellow. •Gamboge yellow.White.Blue.Yellowish white.Brown.Pink white.Reddish browfl.Plane of Ashlarto Plane ofBlue.Green.Blue.White.Yellow.Orange.Purple.Yellowish wtiitaYellowish white.BlueYeUowish whiteYeUowish.Sap green.Yellowish wbitaReddish white.The following table shows the colour of the images incrystals with two axes which have not been examined.Nama of Crystal.Axis of Prism in Plane ofPolarisation.Axisof Pxtam PcraaiAai-lar to Plane of PotariMtlM.Mica.Acetate of copper.Muriate of copper.*Olivine.Sphere.Nitrate of copper.Chromate of lead.Staurotide.Augite.Anhydrite.Finite.Diallage.Sulphur.Sulphate of strontites.cobalt.OlivineBlood red.Blue.Greenish white.Bluish green.Yellow.Bluish white.OrangeBrownish red.Blood red.Bright pink.Reddish whiteBrownish white.Yellow.BluePink.Brown.Pale greenish yellow.Greenish yellow.BlueGreenish yellow.Blu'wb.BlueBlood red.YeUowish white.Bright green.Pale yellow.Yellowish white.White.Deeper yellow.Bluish wite.Brick red.Brownish whiteIn the last nine crystals in the preceding table thetints are not given in relation to any fixed line.The following list contains the colours of the twopencils in crystals whose number of axes is not yetknown.The colours are given in relation to the short diagonal of its room.boidalbaseOlaf. XXX. ABSOBPnON OF Polarised LIOHT.Amiiiiate of iron.Aetynolite.ftcdont opalSerpentine.Ancestors.Roe carbonate of copper.Oetohcdrite (one axis).Chloride of gtdd andmedium.■ ■ ' andamnumium.potassium.andnneUue.*Green.Yellow.Dark green.Greenish,Violet blue.Whitish brown.Lemon vellow.l S|k|Lemon yellow, ^j-gLemon ydlow.J ^^Bluish white.Greenish white.Lighter yellow.Lighter green.Yellowish. •Greenish blue.Yellowish brown.Deep orange. "| gal .Deep orange. V§/|'8|De orange, j^^Si(150.) By the application of heat to certain crystals Ihave been able to produce a permanent difference in ^eoobur of the two pencils formed by double refraction.This experiment may be made most easily on Braziliantopaz. In one of these topazes in which one of the pencilswas yelkno and the other pink, I found that a red heatacted more powerfully upon the extraordinary than upondie ordinary pencil discharging the yellow colour entirelyfrom the one and producing only a slight change uponIhe pink tint of the other. When the topaz was hotit was perfectly colourless and during the process ofcooling, it gradually acquired a pink tint which couldnot be modified or renewed by the most intense heat.In various topazes the colour of whose two pencils wasexactly the same heat discharges more of the colourfrom one pencil than the other;, and thus gives them thepower of absorbing light in reference to the axes ofdouble refraction.General Observations on Double Refraction,1 51 .) The various facts which have been explained inthe preceding chapters enable us to form very plausibleopinions respecting the origin and nature of the doubly refractingstructure. The particles of bodies reduced to astate of fluidity by heat, and prevented by the same causefrom combining into a solidity, exhibit no double refraction;and,inlikemanner,theparticlesof crystallised bodies,including metals when existing in a state of solution, exhibitno double refraction. As soon, however, as coolingt When the axis of the prism is in the plane of polarisation.254 A TBBATIBB OK OPTIOB. part tt.in the one case and evaporation in the other pennies theparticles to combine in virtue of their mutual affinitiesthese particles have subsequent to the action of theforces by which they combine acquired the doubly refractingstructure. This effect may be accounted for intwo ways ; either by supposing that the particles Iutcoriginally a douay refracting structure, or that theyhave no trace of such* a structure. On the first of thesesuppositions we must ascribe the disappearance of thedouble refraction in the fluid mass and in the solutionto the opposite action of the particles which must layehad an axis in every possible direction; but as no doublerefraction is visible it is more philosophical to supposethat none exists in the particles. On the second suppositionsthen that the particles have no doubly n*acting structure it is early understood how it may beproduced by the compression of any two particles broughttogether by attraction; for each particle will have ibaxis of double refraction in the direction of the finejoining their centres as if they had been compressed byan external force. By following out this idea which Ihave done elsewhere* I have shown how the variousphenomena may be explained by the different attractiveforces of three rectangular axes which may produce tsingle negative axis a single positive axis or two azei^either both positive or both negative or the one positionand the other negative. The influence of heat inchanging the intensity of the two axes of sulphate oflime and in removing one of the axes or in creating tnew one admits of an easy explanation on these prindoles.• Phil Transactions, 18£9. yoL vi. p. S28-^S7., or EdtHburgk Jomml^/Science, new series.cppigp* aaE3[i. vmisfJAiM refraction. . 255PART III.ON THE APPLICATION OF OPTICAL Principles TO THEEXPLANATION OF NATURAL PHENOMENA.CHAP. XXXI.ON UNUSUAL REFRACTION.(152.) The atmosphere in which we live is a transparentmass of air possessing the property of refracting light.We learn from the barometer that its density gradually diminishesas we rise in the atmosphere and as we knowhorn direct experiment that the refractive power of airincreases with its density it follows that die refractivepower of the atmosphere is greatest at the earth's sur-ice,and gradually diminishes till the air becomes sorare as almost scarcely to be able to produce any effectupon light When a ray of light falls obliquely upon amedium thus varying in density in place of being bentat once out of its direction it will be gradually moreand more bent during its passage through it so as tomove in a curve line in the same manner as if themedium had consisted of an infinite number of strataof different refractive powers. In order to explainthis, let E, fig, 129; he the earthy surrounded withan atmosphere A B C D^ consisting of four concentricstrata of different density and different refractivepower. The index of reaction for air at the earth'ssurface being 1*000^294^ let us suppose that the indexof the other three strata is 1-000,200, 1-000,120,1-000,050. Let B E D be the horizon, and let a rayS n, proceeding from the sun under the horizon, fall onthe outer stratum at n, whose index of refraction is1-000,050. Drawing the perpendicular E n tn, findby the rule formerly given the angle of lefraedoHjlSt u o.^256 A Theatre ON OPQOB. Partial.corresponding to the angle of incidence S n m. Whenthe ray n a falls on the second stratum at a, whose in-Fig. 129.Atex of refraction is 1*000^120^ we may in like mamittby drawing a perpendicular "Heap, find the refracted nja 6. In the same way the refracted rays h e and e <may be found. The same ray S n will therefore have bedrefracted in a polygonal line n a b c d, and as it reathe eye in the direction c d, the sun will be seen in tbdirection d c S'^ elevated above the horizon by the lefraction of the atmosphere when it is still below it. hlike manner it might be shown that the sun is k^above the horizon by refraction, when he is actaaD]below it at sunset.Although the rays of light move in straight Him dvacuo and in all media of uniform density yet, on tinsurface of the globe, the rays proceeding from a diiMliobject, must necessarily move in a curve line, bCMpthey must pass through portions of air of different dmcity and rd&active power. Hence it follows that, ei*meeting in a vertical line, no object, whether it is a staror planet beyond our atmosphere, or actually with it.is seen in its real place.Excepting in astronomical and trigonometrical observations,where the greatest accuracy is necessary, tfaiirefraction of the atmosphere does not occasion any tn-convenience.Bui «sice ^<& ^€qs^V| ^1 nSca sir and iHRefractive power vary ready when heated or cooled,great local heats or local colds will produce great changesof refractive power, and give rise to optical phenomena ofa very interesting kind. Such phenomena have receivedthe name of unusual reaction, and they are sometimesof such an extraordinary nature as to resemble more theeffects of magic than the results of natural causes.(153.) The elevation of coast, mountains, and ships,when seen over the surface of the sea, has long been observedand known by the name of looming. Mr. Huddartdescribed several cases of this kind, but particularly thevery interesting one of an inverted image of a ship seenbeneath the real ship. Dr. Vince observed at Ramsgatea ship, whose topmasts only were seen above the horizon ;bvt he at the same time observed, in the field of thetelescope through which he was looking, two images ofthe complete ship in the air, both directly above theship, the uppermost of ^e two being erect, and theodin inverted. He then directed his telescope to anothership whose hull was just in the horizon, and he observeda complete inverted image of it ; the mainmast of whichjmt touched the mainmast of the ship itself. Theseare shovra in fig. 130. and 131., inwhich (j^. 130.) A is the real sip,and B, C the images seen by unusualrefraction. Upon looking at anothership. Dr. Vince saw inverted images9 parts which suddenlyappeared and vanished, " first appearing,"says he, " below, and running*■ up very rapidly, showing more or lessof the masts at different limes as theybroke out, resembling in the swiftnessof their breaking out the shooting ofa beam of the aurora borealis." AsW— ■ the ship continued to descend, more1^^^ of the image gradually appeared, oil^^^^^^^^^ the image of the whole ship was at^^^BS^^S last completed, with the muomwite \&iSScontact When the dip descended still lower, the iougrreceded from the ship, but no second image wu noireVince observed another c>k like that in Jig. 131.,Fig. 131- but in which the (ea waa diniacllfI between the ihipa B, C Aithe ship A came aboTc the horizon,the image C gradually; disappeared,and during this time the image Bdescended, but the ^p did not mo near the horizon aa to bring themainniaBla together. ThetwoimagMwere visible when the whole iliipvas beneath the horizon.Captain Scoresbyby, when ning the Greenland lead, observed w-veal very in teresdng case of udumuIrefraction. On the Seth of Junli ] 820. he saw from the maat-hnd"^ ^ , eighteensailof shipaatthediatancerf^^^^^S*»Ji» about twelve miles. Oneofthemwdrawn out, or lengthened, in a vertical direction; anotherwas contracted in the same direction ; one laidversed image immediately above it ; and other t\two distinct inverted images above them, aeconiwith two images of the strata of ice. In 1 823, CaptainScoreeby recognised his father's ship, the Fame, by tiinverted image in the air, although tht this ittdf nwhelm the koran. He afterwards foimd that the ship wmseventeen miles beyond the horizon, and its distance thirtymiles. In all th cases, the image was directly abovethe object ; but on the 17th of September, 1818, MM.Urine and Sort observed a case of unusual refiw:ti(»,where the image was on one ude of the object. A barkabout 4000 toises distant wa seen approaching Genevaby the left Inn of the lake, and at the same montthere was seen above the water an image of the simili,which, in place of following the direction of the precededfrom it, and seemed to approach Geneva by theright bank of the lake ; the image sailing from etttCoat. ZZXI. imVSUAL REPBAOTTON. S59to west while the hark was sailing from north tosmith. The image was of the same size as the objectwhen it first receded from the hark hut it grew lessand less as it receded and was only one half that of thebark when the phenomenon ceased.While the French army was marching through theundy deserts of Lower £gypt^ they saw various phenomenaof unusual refraction to which they gave the nameof mirage. When the surface of the sand was heated hythe sun the land seemed to he terminated at a certaindistance hy a general inundation. The villages situatedupon eminences appeared to he so many islands in themiddle of a great lake and under each village there wasan inverted image of it. As the army approached theboundary of the apparent inundation the imaginary lakewithdrew and the same illusion appeared round the nextvillage. M. Songes who has described these appearancesin the Memoires sur Egypt, ascribes them to re-flexion from a reflecting surface which he supposes totake place between two strata of air of different density.One of the most remarkable cases of mirage was observedby Dr. Vince. A spectator at Ramsgate sees thetops of the four turrets of Dover Castle over a hi betweenRamsgate and Dover; Dr. Vince however on the 6thof August, 1806^ at seven p. m., saw the whole of DoverCastle, as if it had been brought over and placed on theRamsgate side of the hilL The image of it was so strongthat die hill itself was not seen through the image.The celebrated fata morgana, which is seen in thestraits of Messina and which for many centuries astonishedthe vulgar and perplexed philosophers, is obviouslya phenomenon of this kind. A spectator on an eminencein the city of Reggio, with his back to the sun and hisace to the sea, and when the rising sun shines from thatpoint whence its incident ray forms an angle of about45° on the sea of Reggio, sees upon the water numberlessseries of pilasters, arches, castles well delineated, regularcolumns, lofty towers, superb palaces with balconies8 2and windows, village quid trees, pliiiu with heidi uiflocks, armies of men on foot and on honebtck, alpining rapidly in succession on the aurfue of the sea. Thatsame olgecta are, in particular states of the atmbspbotiseen in the air, though less vivid; ; and when the uiis hazy and dewy they are seen on the surface of diesea, vividly coloured, or fringed with all the prixiulitcolours.(154.) That the phenomena above described are generallyproduced by refraction through strata of air of differentdensities may be proved by various experiments. Inorder to illustrate this. Dr. Wollaston poured into ■m. iqo square phial {fy. 132.) a small quantityof dear syrup, and above this itpoured an equal quantity of water,which gradually combined with ditsyrup, as seen at A. The word 5jrnfupon a card held behind the bottle appearederect when seen through the pm■ynip, but inverted, as represent inthe figure, when seen through the mitreof water and syrup. Dr.WoUasMthen put nearly the same quantity edrectified spirit of wine above the voler,sin the same figure atB, and he saw the appearance thenrepresented, the true place of the word Spirit, and the invertedand erect images below.Analogous phenomena may be seen by looking at objectsover the surface of a hot poker, or along thesurface of a wall or painted board heated by the sun.The late Mr. H. Blackwater has described some phenomenaboth of vertical and lateral mirage aa seen alKing Geoi^'s Bastion, Leith, which are very entitiesThe extensive bulwark, of which thu bastionibis the central part, is formed of his Locks of cutsandstone, and from this to the eastern end the phenomenaare best seen. To the east of the tower 4*bulwark is extended in a straight line to the distance di<KAKZZXI. VTOJSUAL Refraction. 26lW feet It is eight feet high towards the land with• footway about two feet broad and three feet from thegnmnd. The parapet is three feet wide at top andn iligfady inclined towards the sea.When the weather is favourable the top of the parapetResembles a mirror or rather a sheet of ice ; and if in diisstate another person stands or walks upon it an observerat a little distance will see an inverted image of the personunder him. If, while standing on the footwayanother person stands on it also but at some distancewith his face turned towards the sea his image willappear opposite to him giving the appearance of twopensons talking or saluting each other. If again whenstanding on the footway and looking in a directionfrom the tower another persons crosses the easternextremity of the bulwark passing through the watergate,either to or from the sea, there is produced theappearance of two persons moving in opposite directions,constituting what has been termed a lateral mirage : firstone is seen moving past, and then the other in an oppositedirection, with some interval between them. Inlooking over the parapet, distant objects are seen variouslymodified; the mountains (in Fife) being converted intoimmense bridges ; and on going to the eastward extremityof the bulwark, and directing the eye towards thetower Ae latter appears curiously modified, part of itbeing as it were cut ofi* and brought down, so as to formanother small and elegant tower in the form of certainsepulchral monuments. At other times it bears anexact resemblance to an ancient altar, the fire of whichseems to bum with great intensity.*(155.) In order to explain as clearly as possible how theerect and inverted image of a ship is produced as injS^r. 131., let S P(^.133.) be a ship in the horizon, seenat £ by means of rays S£, PE passing in straightlines through a track of air of uniform density lying betweenthe ship and the eye. If the air is more rare at ethan at a, which it may be from the coldness of the seaEdinburgh Journal qf Science, No. V. p. las3A TRKATUB ON OPTIGBbpabthl dbelow a, its refractive power will be less at e thin at •*In this case rays S d, F c, whidi^ under ordinary eii«Fig. 133.substances, never could have reached the eye at £y winbe bent into curve lines P c^ S d; and if the variation ofdensity is such that the uppermost of these rays 8 dcrosses the other at any point a, then S d will be undermostand will enter the eye £ as if it came from thelower end of the object. If E p^ £ », are tangents tothese curves or rays, at the point where they enter theeye, the part S of the ship will be seen in the direction8, and the part P in the direction E p; that it, theimage S p will be inverted. In like manner, other rays,S n, P m, may be bent into curves S n E, P m £, whichdo not cross one another, so that the tangent £ # to thecurve or ray S n will still be uppermost, and the tangentp^ undermost. Hence the observer at £ will see anerect image of ibe ship at s' p' above the invertedimage « p, as in Jig. 131. It is quite clear that thestate of the air may be such as to exhibit only one ofthese images, and thus these appearances may be allseen when the real ship is beneath the horizon.In one of captain Scoresbyby's observations we haveseen that the ship was drawn out, or magnified, in a verticaldirection, while another ship was contracted ordiminished in the same direction. If a cause shouldexist, which is quite possible, which elongated the shiphorizontally at the same time that it elongated it verticallythe effect would be similar to that of a convex lenii^and the ship would appear magnified, and might berecognised at a distance far beyond the limits of unassistedvision. This very case seems to have occurredOn the 26th July, 179S, at Hastings, at Ave p. mlMr. Latham saw the French coast, which is about 40 or50 miles distant, as distinctly as through the best glasses*The sailors and fishermen could not at first be per-loaded of the reality of the appearance; but as thediis gradually appeared more elevated, they were soconvinced that they pointed out and nam to Mr.Latham the different places they had been accustomed tovisit : audi as the bay, the windmill at Bologna, 8tValley, and other places .on the coast of Picardy. AUdieee places appeared to them as if they were sailing att small distance into the harbour. From the easterndiff or hill, Mr. Latham saw at once Dungeness, Doverelifb, and the French coast, all the way from CalaisBologna, on to St. Valley, and, as some of the fishermenaffirmed, as far as Dieppe. The day was extremelyhot, without' a breath of wind, and objects at some distanceappeared greatly magnified.This class of phenomena may be well illustrated, as Ihave elsewhere* suggested, by holding a mass of heatediron above a considerable thickness of water, placed in aglass trough, with plates of parallel glass. By withdrawingthe heated iron, the gradation of density increasingdownwards, will be accompanied by a decrease9f density from the surface, and through such, a mediumthe phenomena of the mirage may be seen.(156.) That some of the phenomena ascribed to unusualrefraction are owing to unusual reflexion arising fh>mdifference of density, cannot, we think, admit of a doubt[f an observer beyond the earth's atmosphere at S, Jig,I29.» were to look at one composed of strata of differentrefractive powers as shown in the figure, it is obviousthat the light of the sun would be reflected at its passagethrough the boundary of each stratum, and the same• Mdmburgk EmcydoprnMOt art Heat8 4264 A TRBATI8B ON OPTICS. PART libwould happen if the variation of refractive power wereperfectly gradual. Well described cases of this kindare wanting to enable us to state the laws of the phenomena;but the following fact as described by Dr. Buchan,is so distinct as to leave no doubt respecting its origin.Walking on the cliff' says he, " about a mile to theeast of Brighton, on the morning of the 18th of November,1804, while watching the rising of the sun, Iturned my eyes directly towards the sea just as the solardisc emerged from the surface of the water, and saw theface of the cliff on which I was standing representedprecisely opposite to me at some distance on the ocean.Calling the attention of my companion to this appearance,we soon also discovered our own figures standing on thesummit of the opposite apparent cliff, as well as the representationof a windmill near at hand. The reflectedimages were most distinct precisely opposite to where westood, and the false cliff seemed to fade away, and todraw near to the real one, in proportion as it receded towardsthe west. This phenomenon lasted about ten minutes,till the sun had risen nearly his own diameter above thesea. The whole then seemed to be elevated into theair, and successively disappeared, like the drawing up ofa drop scene in a theatre. The surface of the sea wascovered with a dense fog of many yards in height, andwhich gradually receded before the rays of the sun. Thesun's light fell upon the cliff at an incidence of about73° from the perpendicular.CHAP. XXXII.ON TH£ RAINBOW.(157') The rainbow is, as every person knows, aluminousarch extending across the region of the sky opposite to thesun. Under very favourable circumstances, two bowsseen, the inner and like o\l\£i, qt \k\& smart( andChap. ZZXn. OK THE RAINBOW. ' 265tee secondary, and within the primary rainbows and incontact with it and without the secondary one there havebeen seen supernumerary hows.The primary or inner rainbow, which is commonly%oei\ alone is part of a circle whose radius is 41°. Itconsists of seven differently coloured hows viz. violetwhich is the innermost indigo, blue, green, yellow,orange, and red, which is the outermost. These colourshave the same proportional breadth as the spaces in theprismatic spectrum. This how is therefore only an infinitenumh^ of prismatic spectra arranged in the circumferenceof a circle ; and it would he easy, hy a circulararrangement of prisms or hy covering up all the centralpart of a large lens to produce a small arch of exactlythe same colours. All that we require therefore to formarainbow is a great number of transparent bodies capableof forming a great number of prismatic spectra fromthe light of the sun.As the rainbow is never seen unless when rain isactually falling between the spectator and the sky oppositeto the snn^ we are led to believe that the transparentbodies required are drops of rain which we know to besmall spheres. If we look into a globe of glass orwater held above the head and opposite to the sun weshall actually see a prismatic spectrum reflected fromdie farther side of the globe. In this spectrum thexMet rays moll be innermost and the spectrum verticaLIf we hold the globe horizontal on a level with the eyeso as to see the sun's light reflected in a horizontalplane we shall see a horizontal spectrum with the violetlays innermost. In like manner if we hold a globe inaposition intermediate between these two so as to seethesun's light reflected in a plane inclined 45° to thehorizon, we shall perceive a spectrum inclined 45° tothe horizon with the mole innermost. Now, since in ashower of rain there are drops in all positions relativeto the eye, the eye will receive spectra inclined at allangles to the horizon, so that when combined they will£arm the large circular spectrum which constitute therainhn'or.To «tpUn this more clearly, IM E, F, J^ Ifdrop* of radii exposed to the nm'a nyt, iiupon Item in the direction R E, R F. ost1 of light which fall* upon the dropnjw which pus through or near die axis of thwil be refracted to a focus behind it, but tboaefall on the upper side of the drop will be refthe red reft least, and the viokt most, and wupon the back of the drop with sufficient obliqoitmany of them will be reflected is shown in theThe rays will be again refracted, and will mteye at O, which will perceive a spectrum or primateof the maun, with the red space uppermost, avielel undermost. If the sun, the eye, and theE, F, are all in the same vertical plane, the spiproduced by £, F will form the colours at the virimit of [he bow as in the figure. Let ub now snowdropto be near the horizon, bo that the eye, thuand the sun are id a plane inclined to the horizon«f the sun's light will be reflected in the same nas at E, F, with this difference only, that the pireflexion irfll be inclined to the horizon, and wilpart of the bow distant from the summit. Henmanifest, that the drops of rain above the line jthe eye and the upper part of the rainbow, andplane paidng through the eye and the sun, will finupper part of the bow ; and the drops to the liauKzsacn. oir tbm lEtAumows 96Tlift hand of the observer and without the line joiningAe eye and the lowest part of the bow' will form theWest part of the bow on each hand. Not a singledrop therefore between the eye and the space withinthe bow is concerned in its production : so that if aSlower were to fall regularly from a doud^ the rainbowwould appear before a since drop of ndn had readiedthe ground.If we compute the inclination of the red ray and thefeet ray to the indent rays R £^ R F^ we shall findit to be 42'' 2' for the red, and 40^ 17' for the violet,80 that the breadth of the rainbow will be the differenceof those numbers or 1° 45^^ or nearly three times and ahalf the sun s diameter. These results coincide so ao*curate with observation as to leave no doubt that theprimary rainbow is produced by two refractions and oneintermediate reflexion of the rays that fall on the upperaden of the drops of ndn.It is obvious that the red and violet rays will suffert second reflexion at the points where they are repeatedas quitting the drop but these reflected rayswill go up into the sky and cannot possibly reach theeye at O. Bat though this is the case with rays thatenter the upper side of the drop as at E F^ or the sidedirtiest from the eye, yet those which enter it on theunder dde^ or the side nearest the eye, may after tworeflexions reach the eye, as shown in the drops H, G,where the rays R, R enter the drops blow. The redand violet rays will be refracted in different directions,and after bang twice reflected will be finally refractedto the eye at O ; the violet forming the upper part, thered the under part of the spectrum. If we now computethe inclination of these rays to the incident raysR> R, we shall find them to be 50° 58' for the red ray,and 54^ ICV for the violet ray ; the difference of whichor S° 10" will be the breadth of the bow, and the distancebetween the bows will be 8° 15'. Hence it isdear that a secondary bow will be formed without theprimary bow, and with its colours reversed, in cone*268 A TREATISE ON 0PTI06. PABTOLquench of their being produced by two reflexions andtwo refractions. The breadth of the secondary bowis nearly twice as great as that of the primary one,and its colours must be much fainter, because it consistsof light that has suffered two reflexions in placeof one.(158.) Sir Isaac Newton found the semi-diameter ofthe interior bow to be 42°, its breadth 2° 10% and itsdistance from the outer bow 8° 30' ; numbers whichagree so well with the calculated results as to leave nodoubt of the truth of the explanation which has beengiven. But if any farther evidence were wanted, it maybefound in the fact, which I observed in 1812, thatlight of both the rainbows is wholly polarised in planespassing through the eye and the radii of the arch. Thisresult demonstrates that the bows are formed by reflexionat or near the polarising angle, from the surface ofa transparent body. The production of artificial rainbowsby the spray of a waterfall, or by a shower of dropsscattered by a mop, or. forced out of a syringe, is anotherproof of the preceding explanation. Lunar rainbows aresometimes seen, but the colours are faint, and scarcelyperceptible. In 1814, 1 saw, at Berne, & fog-bow, idiidiresembled a nebulous arch, in which the colours wereinvisible.(159.) On the 5th July, 1828, I observed threesupernumerary bows within the primary bow, each consistingof green and red arches, and in contact with theviolet arch of the primary bow. On the outside of theouter or secondary bow I saw distinctly a red arch, andbeyond it a very faint green one, constituting a supernumerarybow, analogous to those within the primaryrainbow.Dr. Halley has shown that the rainbow formed bythree reflexions within the drops will encircle the sunitself, at the distance of 40° 20% and that the rainbowformed by four reflexions will likewise encircle him atthe distance of 45° 33'. The rainbows formed byreflexions will be partly covered by the secondary bow.(mA9,XXXSL, ON THE RAINBOW. 269fbe het which forms these three hows is obviously toofidnt to make any impression on our organs and diesnohow have therefore never been observed.Many peculiar rainbows have been seen and described.On the 10th August l665, a faint rainbow was seen atChartres crossing the primary rainbow at its vertex.It was formed by reflexion from the river.On the 6th August 1698^ Dr. Halley when walkingon the walls of Chester, observed a remarkableninbow^ shown in fig. 135., where A B C is theprimary bow D H £ the secondary one, and A FFig. Is.HDA C EH G C the new bow intersecting the secondary bowD H £, and dividing it nearly into three parts. Dr.Halley observed the points F, G to rise, and the archF G gradually to contract, till at length the two archesF H G and F G coincided, so that the secondary iris foragreat space lost its colours, and appeared like a whitearch at the top. The new bow, A H C, had its coloursin the same order as the primary one ABC, and consequentlythe reverse of the secondary bow ; and on thisaccount the two opposite spectra at G and F counteractedeach other, and produced whiteness. The sun at thistime shone on the river Dee, which was unruffled, andDr. Halley found that the bow A H C was only thatpert of the circle of the primary bow that would havebeen under the castle bent upwards by reflexion from theriver. A third rainbow seen between the two commononef^ and not concentric with them, is described in^0 A nUBATUB OW OTTIOB. TAKttXUCrozier's Jouiual^ and is doubtleflstbesamephenomeiMib«8 that observed by Dr. Halley, Red rainbows distortedrainbows and inverted rainbows on the grassy hare beenbeen. The latter are formed by die drops of rain suspendedon the spiders' webs in the finds.CHAP. XXXIII.ON Halos GORONiE^ PARHELTA^ Ain Paracelsus(160.) When the sun and moon are seen in a clear sky,sey exhibit their luminous discs without any change ofcolour, and without any attendant phenomena. In otherconditions of the atmosphere the two luminaries not onlyexperience a change of colour, but are surrounded witha variety of luminous circles of various sizes and forms.When the air is charged with dry exhalations the sonis sometimes as red as blood. When seen throughwatery vapours, he is shorn of his beams, but preserveshis disc white and colourless; while, in another state ofthe sky I have seen the sun of the most brilliant salmoncolour. When light fleecy clouds pass over the sun andmoon, they are often encircled with one, two, three, oreven more, coloured rings, like those of thin plates ; andin cold weather when particles of ice are floating in thehigher regions, the two luminaries are frequently surroundedwith the most complicated phenomena consistingof concentric circles, circles passing through theirdiscs, segments of circles, and mock suns, formed at thepoints where these circles intersect each other.The name halo is given indiscriminately to thesephenomena, whether they are seen round the sun or themoon. They are called parhelia when seen round thesun and para^eleruB when seen round the moon.The small halos seen round the sun and moon in fineweather, when they are partially covered with light fleecyclouds have been also called corpore. They are veryCBAF.zxxin. oat hales and parhelia. 271common round the mm, though, from the overpoweringbrightness of his rays they are best seen when he is observedby reflexion from the surface of still water.In June 169^^ sir Isaac Newton observed by reflexionin a vessel of standing water, three rings of colour roundthe sun, like three little rainbows. The colours of thefirst or innermost were blue next the sun, red without,and white in the middle between the blue and red. The.colours of the second ring were purple and blue within,and pale red without, and green in the middle. Thecolours of the third ring were pale blue within and palered without. The colours and diameters of the ringsare more particularly given as follows : —1st Ring - Blue, white, red - Diameter, 5^ &*Sd King - Pale blue, pale red Diameter, 1 2°.On the i9th February, l664, sir Isaac Newton sawa Jude round the moon, of two rings, as follows : —1st Ring - White, bluish, green, yellow, red - Diameter, 3**.Sod Ring - Blue, green, red - Diameter, 65.Sir Isaac considers these rings as formed by thelist passing through very small drops of water, inthe same manner as the colours of thick plates. On theapposition that the globules of water are the 500th ofan inch in diameter, he finds that the diameters of therings should be as follows : —1st Red ring - - Diameter, 7J°.2d Red ring - - Diameter, 10^°.8d Red ring - - Diameter, 12° 33'.The rings will increase in size as the globules becomeless, and diminish if the globules become larger.The halos round the sun and moon, which have existedmost notice, are those which are about 47° and94° in diameter. In order to form a correct idea ofthem, we shall give accurate descriptions of two ; onea parhelion, and the other a paraclete.The following is the original account of a parhelion,seen by Schemer in l630 : —272 A Treated ON 0PTI08. VlBflBi(161.) '' The diameter of the circe M Q N not Hthe sun, was about 45°^ and that of the drde ORFwas about 95° 20' ; they were coloured like the piniivyrainbow ; but the red was next the sun, and the othercolours in the usual order. . The breadths of all bircheswere equal to one another, and about a tinripart less than die diameter of the sun as represented iftfig, 136.; though I cannot say but the whitish drdeFig. 136.O G P^ parallel to the horizon, was rather broaderthan the rest. The two parhelia M , N were livyenough, but the other two at O and P were not so brisk.M and N had. a purple redness next the sun, and werewhite in the opposite parts. O and P were all offswhite. They all differed in their durations ; for P,which shone but seldom and but faintly, vanished first ofall, being covered by a collection of pretty thick clouds.The parhelion O continued constant for a great while,though it was but faint. The two lateral parhelitM, N were seen constantly for three hours together.M was in a languishing state, an died first, after severalstruggles, but N continued an hour after it tHleast. Though I did not see the last end of it yet Iwas sure it was the only one that accompanied the theiKAv; )aaan» tnr calm astd PARfiSLiA. S73ui fair. a long time having escaped those doiids andiqwcn which extinguished the rest. However itloaded at last upon the fall of some small showers*rfaii phenomenon was observed to last 4^ hours at leastnd since it appeared in perfection when I first saw itam persuaded its whole duration might he above fivelOurs.** The parhelia Q, R were situated in a vertical planepassing through the eye at F^ and the sun at G^ inwhich vertical the arches H R C^ O R P either crossedr touched one another. These parheHa were sometimesbrighter sometimes fainter than the rest, hutwere not so perfect in their shape and whitish colour.lie varied their magnitude and colour according toledifferent temperature of the sun's light at G, andie matter that received it at Q and R ; and therexre ittdx light and colour were almost always. -fiuctu-king and continued, as it were, in a perpetual conflict.took particular notice that they appeared almost thejust and last of the parhelia excepting that of N.*' The arches which composed the small halo M Next to the sun, seemed to the eye to compose a single[circumference, but it was confined, and had unequalbreadths ; nor did it constantly continue like itself, butV perpetually fluctuating. But in reality it consistedf the arches expressed in the figure, as I accuratelyserved for this very purpose.* These arches cut eachther in a point at Q, and there they formed a pardon; the parhelia. M,>N shining fi*om the commonintentions of the inner halo, and the whitish circle> N M P."(16^) Medius observed at Antic, on the 30th oftf urghj 1660, at one A. M., the paraclete shown inf. 1S7» The moon A was seen surrounded by an entirerhidah circle B C D £, in which there were two mockleona at B and D ; one at each side of the moon, of various colours, and shooting out very longThe four Intersecting circles which form this inner halo are describedmm fiMir-flbotret, one at each angle of a small square.T274 A Treatise ON Optics. KASIID.and whitish heads by-fits. At aloft two o'dodc tlarger aide surrounded the lesser and reached to dieJ%. 137.horizon. The tops of both these dries were touchedby coloured arches like inverted rainbows. The Ssf^prior arch at C was a portion of a large drde, and Aesuperior at F a portion of a lesser. This phenomenonlasted nearly three hours. The outward great circevanished first. Then the larger inverted arch at C, andthen the lesser ; and last of all the inner circle B C D£disappeared. The diameter of this inner circle andalso of the superior arch was 45^^ and that of the exteriorcircle and inferior arch was 90°.On another occasion Hevelius observed a large whiterectangular cross passing through the disc of the moon,the moon bslDg in the intersection of the cross and encircledwith a halo exactly like the inner one in thepreceding figure.(l6\S.) The frequent occurrence of the halos of 47°and 94° in cold weather and especially in the northernregions of the globe led to the belief that they must beformed by crystals of ice and snow floating in the air.Descartes supposed that they were produced by refraction,through flat stars of pellucid ice ; and Huygens who investigatedthe subject, both experimentally and theoretically,has published an e\aLboTa.tA theory of halos,OBLAP. XXXXn. ON HAIiOS AND PARHELIA. 275in ivfaidi he assumes the existence of particles of hailsome of which are globular and others cylindrical withan opaque nucleus or kernel having a certain proportionto the whole. He supposes these cylinders to be keptin a vertical position, by ascending currents of air orvapour and to have their axes at all possible inclinationsto the horizon when they are dispersed by the wind orany other causes. He considers these cylinders to havebeen at first a globular collection of the softest andpurest particles of snow to the bottom of which otherparticles adhere the ascending currents preventingthem from adhering to the sides ; they will, therefore,assume a cylindrical shape. Huygens then supposesthat^the outer part of the cylinders may be melted bythe heat of the sun, a small cylinder remaining unmeltedin the centre, and that if the melted part isagain frozen, it may have sufficient transparency to re-ftBCt and reflect the rays of the sun in a regular mannor.By means of this apparatus, the existence ofwhich is not impossible, Huygens has given a beautifulsolution of almost all the difficulties which have beenencountered in explaining the origin of halos.Sir Isaac Newton regarded the halo of 45°, as producedby a different cause from the small prismaticooronfle ; and he was of opinion that it arose from refraction" from some sort of hail or snow floating in theair in 8 horizontal posture, the refracting angle beingabout 58° or 60^"When we consider, however, the gfl|it variety ofcrystalline forms which water assumes in freezing; thatthese crystals really exist in a transparent state in theatmosphere, in the form of crystals of ice, which actuallyprick the sldn like needles; and that simple andcompound crystals of snow, of every conceivable varietyof i^pe, are often falling through the atmosphere, andsometimes melting in passing through its lower andwarmer strata, we do hot require any hypotheticalcylinders to account for the principal phenomena ofhalos*T 2276 ▲ TREATISE ON OPTICS. PartialMariotte^ Youngss Cavendish and others have agreedin ascribing the halo of 45° or 46° in diameter to le-fractionthrough prisms of ice with refracting angles of60° floating in the air and haying their refractingangles in all directions. The crystals of hoar-frost hateactually such angles and if we compute the deviation ofthe refracted rays of the sun or moon incident uponsuch a prism with the index of refraction for hoe,taken at 1*31, we shall find it to be 21° 50'^ the doableof which is-43° 40^ In order to explain the larger halo,Dr. Young supposes that the rays which have been oncerefracted by the prism may fall on other prisms and theeffect then be doubled by a second refraction so as toproduce a deviation of 90°. This however is by nomeans probable and Dr. Young has candidly acknowledgedthe " great apparent probability" of Mr. Cavendish'ssuggestion that the external halo may be producedby the refraction of the rectangular terminations of diecrystals. With an index of refraction of 1*31^ thiswould give a deviation of 45° 44', or a diameter of91° 28', and the mean of several accurate measures is91° 40', a very remarkable coincidence.The existence of prisms with such rectangular terminationsis still hypothetical ; but I have removed thedifficulty on this point, by observing in the hoar-frostupon stones, leaves, and wood, regular quadrangularcrystals of ice, both simple and compound.Although halos are generally represented as dries,with the sun or moon in their centres, yet their apparentform is commonly an irregular oval, udder below thanabove, the sun being nearer their upper than theirlower extremity. Dr. Smith has shown that this is anoptical deception, arising from the apparent figure of thesky, and he estimates that when the circle touches thehorizon, its apparent vertical diameter is divided by themoon, in the proportion of about 2 to 3 or 4 ; and is tothe horizontal diameter drawn through the moon as 4 to3, nearly.With the view of ascertaining if any of the halosCHIP. zzxm. . cnr halo and parhelia. 277are formed by reflexion I have examined them withdoubly refracting prisms and have found that the lightwhich forms them has not suited reflexion.The production of halos may be illustrated experimentallyby crystallising various salts upon plates ofgrasse and looking through the plates at the sun or acandle. When the crystal are granular and properlyformed they will produce the finest effects. A fewdrops CKf a saturated location of alum for examples spread0¥ep a plate of glass so as to crystallise quickly, willcover it with an imperfect crusty consisting of flat cathedralcrystals scarcely visible to the eye. When theobserver with his eye placed close behind the smoothBide of the glass plate looks through it at a luminousbody, he will perceive three fine halos at different distances,encircling the source of light. The interior halo,which is the whitest of the three is formed by the refractionof the rays through a pair of faces in thecrystals that are least inclined to each other. The secondhide, which is blue without and red within, with all theprismatic colours, is formed by a pair of more inclinedfaces ; and the third halo, which is large and brilliantlycoloured, from the increased refraction and dispersion, isformed by the most inclined faces. As each crystal ofhim has three pair of each of these included prisms,and as these refracting faces will have every possibledirection to the horizon, it is easy to understand howthe halos are completed and equally luminous throughout.When the crystals have the property of doublerefraction, and when their axis is perpendicular to theplates, more beautified combinations will be produced.(16*4.) Among the Impious phenomena of the atmosphere,we may here notice that of converging andverging solar beams. The phenomenon of divergingbeams, represented in. 138., is of frequent occurrencein summer, and when the sun is near the horizon; andarises from a portion of the sun's rays passing throughopenings in the clouds, while die adjacent portions areT 3378 * TBMAttiB oir .omcs. part tobstructed by die dondB. The phenomena offavayittg bent, wtdcb is of much rtshown in 1S9, where the rays converge to a paula,u far below the horizon M N as the aim is above it.This phenomenon ie always seen opposite to the sun, andFSg. 139.AH///'/generally at the same time with the phenomenon rfdiverging beams, as if another sun diametrically oppositeto the aral one, were below the benson at A, and throe'Gap. Xxxi. OQNYEBOINa BEAMS. ^79lag out his divergent beams. In a phenomenon of thiskind which I saw in 1824^ the eastern portion of thehorizon where it appeared was occupied with a blackdoud^ which seems to be necessary as a ground forrendering visibly such feeble radiations. A few minutesafter the phenomenon was first seen the converginglines were black or very dark; an effect which seems tohave aiiseii from the luminous beams having becomefaroad and of imeqiial intensity so that the eye took upasit were, the dark spaces between the beams morereadily than &e Impious beams themselves.This phenomenon is entirely one of perspective. Letus suppose beams inclined to one another like the meridiansof a globe to diverge from the sun as thesemeridians diverge from the north pole of the globe, andlet us suppose that planes pass through all these meridiansand through the line joining the observer and the sun, ortheir common intersection. An eye, therefore placedin that line or in , the common intersection of all thefifteen planes will see the fifteen beams convergingtb a point opposite the sun just as an eye in theaxis of a globe would see all the fifteen meridiansof the globe converge to its south pole. If we supposethe axis of a globe or of an armillary sphereto be directed to the centres of the diverging andconverging beams, and a plane to pass through the globeparallel to the horizon, it would cut off the meridians80 as to exhibit the precise appearances in fig, 138. andiig.lSQ'', with this difference only, that there would befifteen beams in the diverging system in the place of theDumber shown fig. 139*T 4280 A TREATISE ON OPTIOB. PABTDI*CHAP. XXXIV.ON THE OOLOUBS OF NATURAL BODIES.(165.) There is no branch of the aj^catiMi of (^tical science which possesses a greater interest than ^which proposes to determine the cause of the oolom ofnatural bodies. Sir Isaac Newton was the first who enteredinto an elaborate investigation of this difficultsubject; but though his speculations pre marked with diepeculiar genius of their author yet they will not standa rigorous examination under the lights of modemscience.That the colours of material nature are not the issnltof any quality inherent in the coloured body has beenincontrovertibly proved by Sir Isaac. He found that illbodies of whatever colour, exhibit that colour only whenthey are placed in white light. In homogeneous reilight they appeared red, in violet light vtoht, and so on ;their colours being always best displayed when placed intheir own daylight colours. A re wafer, for examenappears red in the white li^ht^of day, because it reflectsred light more copiously than any of the other colours.If we place a red wafer in yellow light, it can no longerappear red, because there is not a particle of red light inthe yellow light which it could reflect It reflects, however,a portion of yellow light, because there is someyellow in the red which it does reflect. If the red waferhad reflected nothing but pure homogeneous red lightand not reflected white light from its outer surface, whichall coloured bodies do, it would in that case have appearedabsolutely black when placed in yellow light.The colours, therefore, Oi bodies arise from their propertyof reflecting or transmitting to the eye certain rays ofwhite light, while they stifle or stop the remaining rays.eHAP. XZXiy. OOLOUBS OF Natural BODIES. 281To this point the Newtonian theory is supported by infallibleexperiments; but the principal part of the theorywhich has for its object to determine the manner inwhich particular rays are stopped while others are reflectedor transmitted is not so well founded.As Sir Isaac has stated the principles of his theorywith the greatest deamess^ we shall give them in hisown words.*^ IfiXy Those superficies of transparent bodies reflectthe greatest quantity of light which have the greatestrefracting power; that is which separate media thatdiffer most in their refracting power. And in the confinesof equally refracting media there is no reflexion.'' 2d^ The least parts of almost all natural bodies arein Bone measure transparent ; and the opacity of thesebodies arises from the multitude of reflexions caused intheir internal parts.** 3d, Between the parts of opaque and coloured bodiesare many spaces either empty, or replenished with of other densities ; as water between the tingingcorpuscles wherewith any liquor is impregnated ; air betweenthe aqueous globules that constitute clouds ormists ; and for the most part spaces , void of both airand water, but yet perhaps not wholly void of all substance,between the parts of all bodies.'' 4th, The parts of bodies ,and their interstices mustnot be less than of some definite bigness, to render themopaque and cured.'^ 5tfa, The transparent parts of bodies, according totheir several sizes, reflect rays of one colour, and transmitthose of another, on the same grounds that thin plates orbubbles do' reflect or transmit these rays; and this I taketo be the ground of all their colours."*' 6th, The parts of bodies on which their coloursdqiend are denser than the medium which pervadestheir interstices.7th, The bigness of the component parts of naturalbodies may be conjectured by their colours."Upon these principles Sir Isaac has exidevvoxn^ \a282 A TREATISE OK OPTICS. Partialexplain the phenomena of trarupareneyy blade andopacity, and colour. He regards the transparency dwater, . salt, glass, stones, and such like substances asarising from the smallness of their particles and the intervalsbetween them ; for though he considers them tobe as full of pores or intervals between the particles asother bodies are yet he reckons the particles and their 'intervals to be too small to cause reflexion at their commonsurfaces. Hence it follows from the table in ps^^103 and 104, that the particles of air and their intervalcannot exceed the half of a millionth part of an inch ; thisparticles of water the ^fh of a millionth and those idglass the ^ of a millionth; because at these thicknessesthe light reflected is nothing, or the very Idack of thefirst order. The opacity of bodies, such as that of whitepaper, linen, &c., is ascribed by Newton to a greatersize of the particles and their intervals, viz. such a sideas to reflect the white, which is a mixture of the ooioaxsof the different orders. Hence in air they must exceed77 millionths of an inch, in water 57 miUionths, and inglass 50 millionths.In like manner all the different colours in Newton'stable are supposed to be produced when the particles andtheir intervals have an intermediate size between thatwhich produces transparency and that which produceswhite opacity. If a film of mica, for example, of anuniform blue colour, is cut into the smallest pieces ofthe same thickness, every piece will keep its colour, anda heap of such pieces will constitute a mass of the samecolour.So far the Newtonian theory is plausible ; but in attemptingto explain black opacity, such as that of coaland other bodies absolutely impervious to lights it seemsto fail entirely. To produce blackness, '^ the partiesmust be less than any of those which exhibit colour.For at all greater sizes there is too much light reflectedto constitute this colour; but if they be supposed alittle less than is requisite to reflect the white and very£Bent blue of the fa%\, oidet> $be ^^n^ ^e^^qX «& TeryCHAP. ZZXIV. Colours OF NATUIL4L Bodies. 283lite lof^MM touppeKT intensely black." That such bodiesiron be black when seen by reflexion is evident ; butidiot becomes of all the transmitted light ? This questionseems to have perplexed Sir Isaac. The answer toiii, " it may perhaps be variously refracted to and frowithin the body, until it happens to be stifled and lost ;by which means it will appear intensely black."In this theory, therefore, transparency and blacknessaxe supposed to be produced by the very same constipationof the body ; and a refraction to and fro is assumedto extinguish the transmitted light in the oneease, while in the other such a refraction is entiretyexcluded.In the production of colours of every kind, it is assumedthat the complementary colour, or generally onehalf of the light, is lost by repeated reflexions. Now,af reflexion only changes the direction of light, weshould expect that the light thus scattered would showittdtf in some form or other; but though many accurateexperiments have been made to discover it, it has neveryet been seen.For these and other reasons*, which it would be outof place here to enumerate, I consider the Newtoniantheory of colours as applicable only to a small class of{dbienomena, while it leaves unexplained the colours offluids and transparent solids, and all the beautiful huesof the vegetable kingdom. In numerous experiments onthe colours of leaves, and on the juices expressed fromthem, I have never been able to see the complementarycolour which disappears, and I have almost invariablyfound that the transmitted and the reflected tint is thesame. Whenever there was an appearance of two tints,I have found it to arise from there being two differentcoloured juices existing in different sides of the leaf.The Newtonian theory is, we doubt not, applicable tothe colours of the wings of insects, the feathers of birds,the scales of fishes, the oxidated films on metal andglass, and certain opalescences.• See more detailed exAmJnadon of the theory thtny la£« ot %\x\«NiftKewUm.284 A TREATISE ON OPTIOS. part m.The colours of vegetable life and those of Tarioiukinds of solids arise we are persuaded from a specieattraction which the particles of these bodies exerciseover the differently coloured rays of light. It is by thelight of the sun that the coloured juices of plants ueelaborated that the colours of bodies are changed, sodthat many chemical combinations and decompositionsare effected. It is not easy to allow that sudi effectscan be produced by the mere vibration of an etherealmedium ; and we are forced by this class of facts, toreason as if light was material. When a portion of lightenters a body and is never again seen we are entitledto say that it is detained by some power exerted overthe light by the particles of the body. That it is attractedby the particles seems extremely probable, andthat it enters into combination with them and prodoeeivarious chemical and physical effects, cannot well bedoubted; and without knowing the manner in whichthis combination takes place, we may say that the lig^is absorbed, which is an accurate expression of the factNow, in the case of water, glass, and other transparentbodies, the light which enters their substance has acertain small portion of its particles absorbed, and thegreater part of it which escapes from absorption, and istransmitted, comes out colourless, because the particleshave absorbed a proportional quantity of all the differentrays which compose white light, or, what is the samething, the body has absorbed white light.In all coloured solids and fluids in which the transmittedlight has a specific colour, the particles of thebody have absorbed all the rays which constitute thecomplementary colour, detaining sometimes all the raysof a certain definite refrangibility, a portion of the raysof other refrangibilities, and allowing other rays to escapeentirely from absorption ; all the rays thus stopped informby their union a particular compound colour, whichwill be exactly complementary to the colour of the transmittedrays.In black bodies svxs^ sd cQaX> %(a.) ^"^^ Tv^^^UchtCHAP. ZXZIV. COLOURS OF NATURAL BOIOES. 285enter their substance are absorbed ; and hence we see thereason why such bodies are more easily heated and inflamedby the action of the luminous rays. The influenceexercised by heat and cooling upon the absorptivepower of bodies furnishes an additional support to thepreceding views.(1 66.) Before concluding this chapter we may mentiona few curious facts relative to white opacity, blackopacity, and colour, as exhibited by some peculiar substances.1st, Tabasheer, whose refractive power is 1-111, betweenair and water, is a silicious concretion found inthe joints of the bamboo. The finest varieties reflect adedicate azure colour, and transmit a straw-yellow tintwhich is complementary to the azure. When it is slightlywetted with a wet needle or pin, the wet spot instantlybecomes milk white and opaque. The application of agreater quantity of water restores its transparency.Sadly, The cameleon mineral is a solid substance madeby heating the pure oxide of manganese with potash.When it is dissolved in a little warm water, the solutionchanges its colour from green to blue and purple, the lastdescending in the order of the rings, as if the particlesbecame smaller.idly, A mixture of oil of sweet almonds with soap andsulphuric acid is, according to M. Clary, first yelhwthen orange, red, and violet. In passing from the orangeto the red, the mixture appears almost black,4thly, If, in place of oil of almonds, in the precedingexperiment, we employ oil obtained from alcohol heatedwith chlorine, the colours of the mixture vdll be pakyellow, orange, black, red, violet, and beautiful bltie,5thly, Tincture of turnsole, after having been a considerabletime shut up in a bottle, has an orange colour ;but when the bottle is opened and the fluid shaken, itbecomes in a few minutes red, and then violet-blue,6thly, A solution of hcematine in water containing somedrops of acetic acid is a greenish yellow. When introducedinto a tube containing mercury, and heated by spv-286 A TREATISE ON OPTIOB. Partisrounding it with a hot iron, it assumes the various cakmrtof yellow, orange, red, and purple, and returns graduallyto its primitive tint.7tMy, Several of the metallic oxides exhibit a temporarychange of colour by heat, and resume their originalcolour by cooling. M. Cheerful observed, that when indigo,spread upmi paper, is volatility, its colour pagesinto a very brilliant poppy-red. The yellow phosphateof lead grows green who hot.8fhly, One of the most remarkable facts, however, isthat discovered by M. Thenard. He found that phosphorus,purified by repeated distillations, though naturallyof a whitish yellow colour when allowed to coolslowly, becomes absolutely black when thrown melted intocold water. Upon touching some little globules that stillremained yellow and liquid when he was repeating thisexperiment, M. Biot found that they instantly becamesolid and black.CHAP. XXXV.ON THE EYE AND VISION.An account of the structure and functions of the humaneye, that masterpiece of divine mechanism, forms an interestingbranch of applied optics. This noble organ,by means of which we acquire so large a portion of ourknowledge of the material universe, is represented in fy.140. and 141., the former being a front and external viewof it, and the latter a section of it through all its humours.The human eye is of a spherical form, with aslight projection in front. The eyeball or globe of the^e consists of four coats or membranes, which havereceived the names of the sclerotic coat, the choroid coat,the cornea, and'the retina ; and these coats enclose threehumours, — the aqueous humour, the vitreous humour,and the crystalline humour the last of which has the1 law. The idenitlc coat, aaaa, or the ud tough membrane, to which are studiedall the miles wbidi give motion to the eyeball,Hthewhiie of the ere,aa,j^.l39. TheWfTMa, hb, is the dear and transparent coat which formsthe front of the eyeball, and is the first optical surface«t which the rays of l^ht are refracted. It is firmlyunited W the »derotie coat, filling up, as it were, a circuit«pertiire in its front. The cornea is an exceedinglytough membrane, of equal thickness throughout,and composed of several firmly adhering layers, capableof opposing great resistance to external injury. Thechoroid coat ia a delicate membrane lining the innersurface of the eeleroHc, and covered on its inner surfacewith a black pigment. Inunedialely within this pigment,and close to it, lies the retina, rrr, which is theinnermost coat of all. It is a delicate reticulated membrane,formed by the expansion of the optic nerve, oo.288 A Treatise ON OPTICS. PABTIIbwhich enters the eye at a point about-j^ of an indiafrom the axis on the side next the nose. At the extrascity of the axis of the. eye in a line passing throughthe centre of the cornea, and perpendicular to its surfacesthere is a small hole with a yellow margin calkdthe foramen centrale, which notwithstanding its name,is not a real openings hut only a transparent spot heeof the soft pulpy matter of which the retina is composed.In looking through the cornea from without we perceivea flat circular membrane, c/yfisf- 140.^ or within,hby fig, 139*> which is grey, blue, or hacks and dividesthe anterior of the eye into two very unequal parts. Inthe centre of it there is a circular opening, d, called liepupil, which widens or expands when a small portion oflight enters the eye, and closes or contracts when a greatquantity of light enters. The two parts into which theiris divides the eye are called the anterior and the interiorchambers. The anterior chamber, which is anteriorto the iris, ef, contains the aqueous humour ; andthe posterior chamber, which is posterior to the iris,contains the crystalline and vitreous humours, the lastof which fills a great portion of the eyeball.The crystalline lens, cc,fig. 140., is a more solid substancethan either the aqueous or the vitreous humour.It is suspended in a transparent bag or capsule by thediary processes gg, which are attached to every part ofthe margin or circumference of the capsule. This lenais more convex behind than before ; the radius of its anteriorsurface being 0'30 of an inch, and that of itsposterior surface 0*22 of an inch. The lens increasesin density from its circumference to its' centre, and possessesthe doubly refracting structure. It consiatft ofconcentric coats, and these are again composed of fibres*The vitreous humour, VV, is contained in a capsulewhich is supposed to be divided into several compartments.The total length of the eye from O to 6 is about 0*91of an inch ; the principal focal distance of the lens, ee.(MAP. JKZY. DSMSSmON OP THD BTB. 289b' 1*73 ; and the range of the moving eyeball or thediameter of the field of distinct vision is 110^. TheBdd of vision is 50^ above a horizontal line and 70^9bIow it, or altogether Iso in a vertical plane. It is90^ inwards and 90^ outwards or altogether in a horselogical plane 150^I have found the following to be the refractive powersif iste diSlBreat humours of the eye ; the ray of lightbeing incident upon them from air : ^Aqueous Crystalline Lens. VitreousHumour. Soxftoe. Cantle. Mean. HumOUT.1-3S6. 1«3767. l*399a 1*3839. 1-3394.But as the rays refracted by the aqueous humour passinto the crystalline, and those from the crystalline intohie vitreous humour, the indices of refraction of theinsulating surface of these humours will be : —Prom aqueous humour to outer coat of the crystalline 1 0466Phi do. to crystalline, using the mean index - 1 •0353Phi vitreous to crystalline outer coat - - - 1 •0445Pam do. to do. using the mean index - 1-0332As the cornea and crystalline lens must act upon thesays of light which fall upon the eye exactly like aaavex lens, inverted images of external objects will bedonned upon the retina r r r in precisely the same manoras if the retina were a piece of white paper in theeos of a single lens placed at d. There is this differed,however, between the two cases, that in the eye thespherical aberration is corrected by means of the variationin the density of the crystalline lens, which, havinggreater refractive power near the centre of its mass,extracts the central rays to the same point as the raysHbidi pass through it near its circumference c c. Noprovision, however, is made in the human eye for theDirection of colour, because the deviation of the differentlycoloured rays is too small to produce indistinctnessof vision. If we shut up all the pupil excepting aportion of its edge, or look past the finger held near theje, till the finger almost hides a narrow line of whiteu290 A Treatise ON OPTIOS. PABTHLlights we shall see a distinct prismatic spectre of thisline containing all the different colours; an eSket whichcould not take place if the eye were achromatic.That an inverted image of external objects is formedon the retina has been often proved and may be oca-earlydemonstrated by taking the eye of an o'sl, and paringaway with a sharp instrument the sclerotic coat till itbecomes thin enough to see the image through it. Beyondthis point optical science cannot carry us. In whatmanner the retina conveys to the brain the impressionswhich it receives from the rays of light we Imo nol,and perhaps never shall know.On the Phenomena and Laws of Vision,(167.) 1< On the seat of vision, — The retina, fromits delicate structure and its proximity to the vitreoushumour had always been regarded as the seat of visionsor the surface on which the refracted rays were convergedto their foci for the purpose of conveying theimpression to the brain till M. Marriott made the canonsdiscovery that the base of the optic nerve or thecircular section of it at O^ Jig. 141.^ was incapable ofconveying to the brain the impression of distinct vision.He found that when the image of any external olyectfell upon the base of the optic nerve, it instantly disappeared.In order to prove this, we have only to placeupon the wall, at the height of the eye, three wafers, twofeet distant from each other. Shutting one eye, standopposite to the middle wafer, and while looking at theoutside wafer on the same hand as the shut eye, retiitfgradually from the wall till the middle wafer disappears.This will happen at about five times the distance of thewafers, or ten feet from the wall ; and when the middlewafer vanishes the two outer ones will be distinctly seen.If candles are substituted for wafers, the middle candlewill not disappear, but it will become a cloudy mass oflight. If the wafers are placed upon a coloured wall, thespot occupied by the wafer will be covered by the colourof the wall as if thew^fet Itself had be removed.■KJff. XXrr. ON THE seat OF VISION. 991Looordiii^ to Daniel Bernoulli the part of the opticore insensible to distinct impressions occupies aboutle seventh part of the diameter of the eye, or about thei^tfa of an inch.This unfitness of the base of the optic nerve for givingdistinct vision induced Marriott to believe that theharold coat, which lies immediately below the retinaperforms the functions ascribed to the retina ; for wherebere was no choroid coat there was no distinct vision.rhe patty of the choroid coat and the transparency ofbe retina yrbieh rendered it an unfit ground for theelection of images were arguments in favour of thisfdnion. Comparative anatomy furnishes us with an-tierargument perhaps even more conclusive than anyif those urged by Marriott. In the eye of the sepia sligo,T cattle-fish an opaque membranous pigment is interslOsed-Mfoeen the retina and the vitreous humour*; sohetty if the retina is essential to vision the impressionsf ' die image on this black membrane must be conveyed9 the retina by the vibrations of the membrane in frontf it. Now since the human retina is transparent itrin not prevent the images of objects from being formedn the choroid coat; and the vibrations which they exciteII-diis membrane, being communicated to the retinaiffl be conveyed sto the brain. These views are strengthenedby another fact of some interest. I have observedat young persons that the choroid coat (which is supposed to be black, and to grow fainter by age,)elects a brilliant crimson colour, like that of dogs anddick animals. Hence, if the retina is affected bylys which pass through it, this crimson light whichoust necessarily be transmitted by it ought to excitehe sensation of crimson, which I find not to be theA French writer, M. Lehot, has recently written annk, endeavouring to prove that the seat of vision is inbe vitreous humour ; and that, in place of seeing a fiatietore of the object, we actually see an image oi \!Ik£««•Dr. Knox, EdiHb. Journal of Science No. \l. passa.u 2292 A Treatise ON Option FABTttdimensions viz. with lengthy breadth and Ai ctaM iTo produce this effect, he supposes that the lemmaout a number of small nervous filaments whichinto the vitreous humour, and convey to the hraiii thiimpressions of all parts of the image. If this demywere true, the eye would not require to adjust itMlf lidifferent distances ; and we besides know for certain, dMtthe eye cannot see with equal distinctness two poorof an object at different distances, when it sees one 4them perfectly. M. Lehot might indeed ready to diefirst of these objections, that the nervous filaments mfnot extend far enough into the vitreous humour to !«•der adjustment unnecessary ; but if we admit this ntwould be admitting an imperfection of workmanship, ftiso far as the Creator would thai be enjoying two kMof mechanism to produce an effect which ooold hawbeen easily produced by either of them separate.As difficulties still attach to every opinion respeedilthe seat of vision, we shall still adhere to the niual ef* jipression used by all optical writers, viz. that the imageof objects are painted on the retina.1 68 .) 2. On the law ofmnibie directed. — when a nfof light falls upon the retina, and gives us vision of dvpoint of an object from which it proceeds, it becomes ainteresting question to determine in what direction dvobject will be seen, reckoning from the point where ilfalls upon the retina. In fig, 142., let F be a point ofthe retina on which the image of a point of a dicitobject is formed by means of the crystalline lens, wsf" \kposed to be at L L. Now, the rays which form theFig. 148.I«BA». 3CKZV. LAW OV YUDBLB DIBBOTION. 293ioMge of the point at F fall upon the retina in all possibledirections from L F to L F, and we know that thefont F is seen in the direction F C R. In the saepePlumer, the points //' are seen somewhere in the 8,/T. These lines F R,/' 8,/T, which maybecalled the lines qf visible direction, may either he thoseirhidi pass through the centre C of the lens L h, or, inthe case of the eye, through the centre of a lens equi-debtto all the refractions employed in producing theimage ; or it may he the resultant of all the directionsvillain the angles L F L, L / L ; or it may he a line perpendicularto the retina at F,/^f. In order to determinethis point, let us look over the top of a card at thepoint of the object whose image is at F till the edge ofIbe card is just about to hide it, or, what is the sameihiBg, let us obstruct all the rays that pass through thepiqiil excepting the uppermost, R L ; we shall then finddiat'tlie point whose image is at F, is seen in the samedirection as when it was seen by all the rays L F, C F,L F. If we look beneath the card in a similar manner,10 as to see the object by the lowermost ray, R L F, weAsk aee it in the same direction. Hence it is manifestduty the line of visible direction does not depend on thedevotion of the ray, but is always perpendicular to theRtfauL This important truth in the physiology of visionWtJ be proved in another way. If we look at the sun•?er the top of a card, as before, so as to impress theeye with a permanent spectrum by means of rays L Fflung obliquely on the retina, this spectrum will be seenalong die axis of vision F C. In like manner, if wepress the eyeballs at any part where the retina is, weshall see the luminous impression which is produced inadirection perpendicular to the point of pressure ; andif we make the pressure with the head of a pin, so as topress either obliquely or perpendicularly, we shall findthat the luminous spot has the same direction.Now, as the interior eyeball is as nearly as possible aperfect sphere, lines perpendicular to the surface of theretina must all pass through one single point, namely,u 3294 A Breathe ON 0PTI08. PART ID.the centre of its spherical surface. This one point mayhe called the centre of fjUibk direction, because evcrjpoint of a visible object will he seen in the direction tifa line drawn from this centre to the visible point.When we move the eydudl by means of its own musterthrough its whole range of 110°^ every point of toobject within the area of the visible field either of distinctor indistinct vision remains absolute fized^ andthis arises from the immobility of the centre of visibledirection and, consequently, of the lines of visible directionjoining that centre and every pont in the visiblefind. Had the centre of visible direction been out ofthe centre of the eyeball, this perfect stability of visioncould not have existed. If we ^pf&» the eye with thefinger, we alter the spherical form o^ th surface of theretina, we consequently alter the direction of lines perpendicularto it, and also the centre where these linemeet; so that the directions of visible objects should bechanged by pressure, as we find them to be.(169*) S. On the cause 0/ erect viMon/rmH an invertedimage, — As the refractions which take place at the surfaceof the cornea, and at the surfaces the crystallinekniyact exactly like those in a convex lens in forming behind itan inverted image of an erect object ; and as we knowfrom direct experiment that an inverted image is formedon the retina, it has beni long a problem among theleamedyto determine how an inverted image produces an erectobject. It would be a waste of time to give even an (faUline of the different opinions which have been entertainedon this subject ; but there is one so extraordinary as tomerit notice. According to this opinion, all infants seeobjects upside down, and it is only by comparing the erroneousinformation acquired by vision with the accurateinformation acquired by touch, that the young learn to seeobjects in an erect position ! To refute such an opinionwould be an insult to the intelligent reader. The establishmentof the true cause of erect vision necessarilyoverturns all erroneous hypotheses.The law of visible direction above explained and dt*Coat. Z33T. 0AU8B OF EBEOT Vision. 295daeod from direct experiment removes at once everydifficulty that besets the subject The lines of visible directionnecessarily cross each other at the centre of visibledirection so that those from the lower part of the imagego to the upper part of the object and those from theupper part of the image to the lower part of the olijecUHeroes inly. 142. the visible direction of the point /',finned by rays coming from the upper end S of the objectwill bec S^ and the visible direction of the pointf, formed by rays coming from the lower end T of theinject, win be / C T; so that an inverted image necessarilyproduces an erect object.This conclusion may be illustrated in another way.If we hold up against the sun the erect figure of a maneat out of a piece of black paper, and look at it steadilyfor a little while ; if we then shut both eyes, we shall seema erect spectrum of the man when the figure of the papiserect, and an inverted spectrum of him when the figureis held in an inverted position. In this case, there areno rays proceeding from the object to the retina after theeye is shut, and therefore the object is seen in the positionsabove mentioned, in virtue of the lines of visibledirection being in aU cases perpendicular to the impressedpart of the retina.(170.) 4. On the law of distinct vision. — Whentiieeye is directed to any point of a landscape; it sees with perfectdistinctness only that point of it which is directly in theadds of the eye, or the image of which falls upon the centralbi of the retina. But, though we do not see any otherpoint but one with that distinctness which is necessary toexamine it, we still see the other parts of the landscape withsufficient distinctness to enable us to enjoy its general effect.The extreme mobility of the eye, however, and the durationof the impressions made upon the retina, make upfor this apparent defect, and enable us to see the landscapeas perfectly as if every part of it were seen with equaldistinctness.The indistinctness of vision for all objects situated outof the axis of the eye increases with their di&taxiQe&trai&Lu 4296 A TBSATI8B ON OPTIOB. PlBTin.that axis; so that we are not entitled to ascribe the distinctnessof vision in die axis to the circumstance of the imigBbeing formed on the central hole of the retina when thereis no nervous matter; for if this were the case, thenwould be a precise boundary between distinct and indiestinct vision, or the retina would be found to grow thicteand thicker as it receded from the central hole, wbidi itnot the case.In making some experiments on the indistinctness ofvision at a distance from die axis of the eye, I was kdto observe a very remarkable peculiarity of oblique visionIf we shut one eye, and direct the other to any fixedpoint, such as the head of a pin, we shall see indistinctlyall oder objects within die sphere of vision. Let one ofthese objects dies seen indistinct be a strip of whitepaper, or a pen lying upon a green cloth. Then, aftaia short time, the strip of paper, or the pen, will dist^ypevaltogether, as if it were entirely removed, die impreMMDof the green doth upon the surrounding parts of die eyeextending itself over the part of the retina which theimage of die pen occupied. In a short time the vanishedimage will re-appear, and again vanish. When body eyaare open, the very same effect takes place, but not so readilyas with one eye. If the object seen indistinct is iblack stripe on a white ground, it will vanish in a similarmanner. When die object seen obliquely is luminoussuch as a candle, it will never vanish entirely, unless itslight is much weakened by being placed at a great distance,but it swells and contracts, and is encircled with inebulous halo; so that the luminous impressions must extendthemselves to adjacent parts of the retina which aicnot influenced by the light itself.If, when two candles are placed at the distance of abouteight or ten feet from the eye, and about a foot from sadiother, we view the one direct and the other indireedy^the indirect image will swell, as we have already mentioned,and will be surrounded with a bright ring of ffelhmlight, while the bright light within the ring will have tpale blue colour, li vUcke caxv^^i^ %xa ^^nr^ >2Dann^ aJAzv. ULW ov DnmfCT rmoir. S97primi, ibe fed and gi'een light of the indirect image willI, and there will he left only a large mass of yellowwith a portion of hone light. In making thisacpttimenty and looking steadily and directly at one ofthe prismatic images of the candles I was surprised toind that the red and green rays began to disappear leavingonly ydlow and a small portion of hone ; and whendie eye was kept immovably fixed on the same point ofAe image the ffeUaw Hght became almost pure white sodttt the prismatic image was converted into an elongatedimage of white Hght.If the strip of white paper which is seen indirectlywith both eyes is placed so near the eye as to be seendouble the rays which proceed from it no longer fallupon corresponding pcnnts of the retina and ^e twoimages do not vanish instantaneously. But when theone begins, to disappear the other begins soon after itfo Ifaat they sometimes appear to be extinguished at theMUBie time.From these results it appears that oblique or indirectman is inferior to direct vision, not only in distinctnesshot from its inability to preserve a sustained vision of€kjectB ; but though thus defective, it possesses a superiorityover direct vision in giving us more perfect visionof mmnta objects, such as small stairs, which cannot be seenby direct vision. This curious fact has been noticed1^ Mr. Herschel and Sir James South, and some of the¥ntkct astronomers. '^ A rather singular method," sayMet. Herschel and South, '^ of obtaining a viewand even a rough measure, of the aides of stars of thelast degree of faintness, has often been resorted to, viz.to direct the eye to another part of the field. In thisw«y, a faint star, in the neighbourhood of a lai onewin often become very conspicuous; so as to bear acertain illumination, which will yet totally disappear, asif suddenly blotted out, when the eye is turned fulliron it, and so on, appearing and disappearing alternateas often as you please. The lateral '^tViow^ oildie retina, hew iat^fued by strong ligbta^ audi \<e»a cx^-298 A TRBATI8B ON OPTIOS. Fatalhaunted-by perpetual attention are probably more caen*able to faint impressions than the central ones ; wludimay serve to account for this phenomenon."The following explanation of this curious phenomenalseems to me more satisfactory : — A luminous point seenby direct vision, or a sharp line of light viewed steadilyfor a considerable time throws the retina into a statesagitation highly unfavourable to distinct vision. If mlook through the teeth of a fine comb held close to theeye or even through a single aperture of the same narrownessat a sheet of illuminated white paper or evenat the sky the paper or the sky will appear to be coveredwith an infinite number of broken serpentine lines,parallel to the aperture and in constant motion ; and mdie aperture is turned rounds these parallel undulationswill also turn round. These black and white lines anobviously undulations on the retina which is sensible todie impressions of light in one phase of the induction,and insensible to it in another phase. An analogouseffect is produced by looking stedfastly and for a considerabletime on the parallel lines wluch represent thesea in certain maps. These lines will break into portionsof serpentine lines and all the prismatic tints wistbe seen included between the broken curvilinear portions.A sharp point or line of light is therefore unableto keep up a continued vision of itself upon theretina when seen directly.Now in the case of indirect vision we have alieaiiyseen that a luminous object does not vanish but is seenindistinctly and produces an enlarged image on the retinabeside that which is produced by the defect of convergencein the pencils, Hence a star seen indirectly,will affect a larger portion of the retina from these Pmcauses and losing its sharpness will be more distinctIt is a curious circumstance too, that in the experimentwith the two candles mentioned above, the candles seenindirectly frequently appear more intensely bright diasdie candle seen directly.(171.) 5. On the inrnxMH^ cf the ejfe f tirolBAP. Lxxv. EFFECT OF WEAK UOHT ON THE EYE. S99kiipresHons of faint light, — The insensibility of thnBtma to indirect impressions of objects ordinarily illusninated^ has a singular counterpart in its intensity toHie direct impression of very faint light. If we fix the!je steadily on objects in a dark, room that are illuminatedwith the faintest seam of lights it will be soonthrown into a state of painful agitation ; the objects willappear and disappear according as the retina has re-Veered or lost its sensibility.These affections are no doubt the source of manyoptical deceptions which have been ascribed to a supernaturalorigin. In a dark nighty when objects are feeblyilluminated their disappearance and reappearance mustMem very extraordinary to a person whose fear or curiositycalls forth all his powers of observation. Thisfeet of the eye must have been often noticed by thesportsman in attempting to mark upon the monotonousliMths^ tibe particular spots where moor-game hadifig^ted. Availing himself of the slightest difference oitint in the adjacent heaths he endeavours to keep hisBye steadily upon it as he advances; but whenever theContrast of illumination is feeble he almost always loses■g^t of his mark or if the retina does take it up aleeond time, it is only to lose it again.*(Ito 6. On the duration of impressions of light enthe retina, — Every person must have observed that theeffect of light upon the eye continues for some time.Dnring,the twinkling of the eye, or the rapid closing ofthe eyelids for the purpose of diffusing the lubricatinghad over the cornea, we never lose sight of the objectswe are viewing. In like manner, when we whirl abinding stick with a rapid motion, its burning extremityiris produce a complete circle of light, although thatExtremity can only be in one part of the circle at thene instantThe most instructive experiment, however, on thisabject, and me which it requires a good deal of practiceto make well, is to look for a short time at the• Beetle Edbiburgk Journal (/ Scene, Na VL p. £88.300 A Treatise ON OmOk Want IBiwindow at the end of a long apartment and theMquickly direct the eye to the dark walL In general dieordinary observer will see a picture of the window inwhich the dark has are white and the white panes daric ;hut the practised ohsenrer, who makes the observationwith great promptness will see an accurate representationof the window with dark has and bright panes ; but diisrepresentation is instantly succeeded by the complementarypicture in which the bars are bright and ^panes dark. M. Darcy found that the light of a litecoal, moving at the distance of l65 feet, maintained itsimpression on the retina during the seventh part of asecond.(173.) 7* On the cause of single vision with two egm.although an image of every visible object is fbimfldon the retina of each eye, yet when the two eyes ancapable of directing their axes to any given olgect^ italways appears single. There is no doubt that, in outsense, we really see two objects, but these objects appearas one, in consequence of the one occupying exactly lobesame place as the other. Single vision with two eyes, orwith any number of eyes, if we had them, is the necessaryconsequence of the law of visible direction. By theaction of the external muscles of the eyeballs, the axeof each eye can be directed to any point of space at tgreater distance than 4 or 6 inches. If we look, fatexample, at an aperture in a window shutter, we knowthat an image of it is formed in each eye ; but, as theline of visible direction from any point in the one imagemeets the line of visible direction from the same point inthe other image, each point will be seen as one point,and, consequently, the whole aperture seen by one eyewill coincide with or cover the whole aperture seen bfthe other. If the axes of both eyes are directed to apoint beyond the window, or to a point within the roooirthe aperture will then appear double, because the line ofvisible direction from the same points in each image donot meet at the aperture. If the muscles of either o£the eyes ia unable to direct the two axes of the eyes toOval. Xxv. AOOOIOIODATION OF THE EYE. SOIthe Mine point, the object will in that case also appearddmUe. This inability of one eye to follow the motionsof the other is frequently the cause of squinting as theeye which is, as it were, left behind necessarily looks inadifferent direction from the other. The same effect isoften produced by the imperfect Vision of one eye, inconsequence of which the good eye only is used. Hencethe imperfect eye will gradually lose the power of fol*liming the motions of the other, and will therefore lookina different direction. The disease of squinting maybeoften easily cured.(174.) S. On the accommodation of the eye to differentditiancet, — When the eye sees objects distinctly at agreat distance, it is unable, without some change, to seeobjects distinctly at any less distance. This will bereadily seen by looking between the fingers at a distantetgect. When the distant object is seen distinctly, theii^gen will be seen indistinctly ; and, if we look at thefingers so tus to see them distinctly, the distant object willbe quite indistinct. The most distinguished philosophershave maintained different opinions respecting the methodby which the eye adjusts itself to different distances.Some have ascribed it to the mere enlargement and diminutionof the pupil; some to the elongation of the eye, bywhich the retina is removed from the crystalline lens;some to the motion of the crystalline lens ; and othersto a chai in the convexity of the lens, on the suppositionthat it consists of muscular fibres. I have ascertained,by direct experiment, that a variation in theiqierture of the pupil, produced artificially, is incapableof producing adjustment, and as an, elongation of the eyewould alter the curvature of the retina, and consequentlyAe centre of visible direction, and produce a change oiplace in the image, we consider this hypothesis as quiteuntenable.In order to discover die cause of the adjustment, Imade a series of experiments, from which the followinginferences may be drawn : —Iste The contraction of the pupil, which necessarilySOS A TBBATUB OK Option. Pasted.takes place when the eye is adjusted to near otjeelilydoes not produce distinct vision hy the diminution of dieaperture hut hy some other action which necessarilyaccompanies it.2dly That the eye adjusts itsdf to near objects by twoactions; one of which is voluntary, depending whoQy onthe will and the other involuntary, depending on diestimulus of light falling on the retina.duly. That when the voluntary power of adjustmentfails the adjustment may still be effected by die involuntarystimulus of light.Reasoning from these inferences and other remits ofexperiment it seems difficult to avoid the contusionthat the power of adjustment depends on the meehaoiniwhich contracts and dilates the pupil ; and as this adjustmentis independent of the variation of its apertoi^it must be effected by the parts in immediate contactwith the base of the iris. By considering the variousways in which the mechanism at the base of the iris mayproduce the adjustments it appears to be almost certainthat the lens is removed from the retina by the contractionof the pupil.*(175.) 9* On the cause of longsightedness and uni'sightedness. — Between the age of 30 and 50^ the eyes ofmost persons bain to experience a remarkable change,which generally shows itself in a difficulty of reading smalltype or ill-printed books particularly with candlelightThis defect of sights which is called longsightedness, becauseobjects are seen best at a distance arises from achange in the state of the crystalline lens by whichits density and refractive power as well as its fbnn^ aiealtered. It frequently b^ins at the margin of the lens,and takes several months to go round it and it is oftenaccompanied with a partial separation of the laminaand even of the fibres of the lens. " If the human eye*as I have elsewhere remarked " is not managed withpeculiar care at this period the change in the conditionFor a fuller account of \hete ex^tlmeoti^ see FtHm^gik Joimul ^Science Nap 77.cnm zzzv« long and gHOBT-wg MT Ei m Mas. 303of the knB often runs into cataract or terminates in aderangement of fibres which though not indicated byidiite opacity occasions imperfections of vision that areoften mistaken for amaurosis and other diseases. Askilful oculist who thoroughly understands the stmc-tore of the eye and all its optical functions would haveno difficulty by means of nice experiments in detectingthe very portion of the lens where this change has takenj^ace ; in determining the nature and magnitude of thediange which is going on; in applying the proper remediesfor stopping its progress; and in ascertaining whetherit has advanced to such a state that aid can be obtainedfrom convex or concave lenses. In such cases lensesare often resorted to before the crystalline lens has sufferedan uniform change of figure or of density and theuse of them cannot fail to aggravate the very evils whichtfaey are intended to remedy. In diseases of die lenswhere the separation of fibres is confined to small spotsand ia yet of such magnitude as to give separate colouredimages of a luminous object or irregular halos of light,it is often necessary to limit the aperture of the spectacles,so as to allow the vision to be performed by thegood part of the crystalline lens."This defect of the eye, when it is not accompaniedwith disease, may be completely remedied by a convexlens, which makes up for the flatness of the crystalline,and enables the eye to converge the pencils flowing fromnear objects to distinct foci on the retina.Shortsightedness shows itself in an inability to seeat a distance; and those who experience this defectbring minute objects very near the eye in order to seethem distinctly. The rays from remote objects are inthis case conveyed to foci before they reach the retina,and therefore the picture on the retina is indistinct.This imperfection often appears in early life, and arisesfrom an increase of density in the central parts of thecrystalline lens. By using a suitable concave lens theconvergence of die rays is delayed, so that a distinctimage can be formed on the retina.304 A tjubatub qm oftiob, Piu»m*CHAP. XXXVI.ON AOOIDENTAXi OOLOUBS AND COLOURED gHADOWB.(176.) When the eye has been strongly impreflBodwith any particular species of coloured light, and chainthis state it looks at a sheet of white paper, ^paper does not appear to it white, or of the colour withwhich the eye was impressed, hut of a different colour,which is said to he the accidental colour of the colourwith which the eye was impressed. If we place, tatexample, a right red wafer upon a sheet of whilepaper, and fix the eye steadily upon a mark in thecentre of it, then if we turn the eye upon the whitepaper we shall see a circular spot of bluish green list,of the same size as the wafer. This colour, which iacalled the accidental colour of red, will gradually fadeaway. The bluish green image of the wafer is calledan ocular spectrum, because it is impressed on the eye,and may he carried about with it for a short time.If we make the preceding experiment with diSSer&s£t^coloured wafers, we shall obtain ocular spectra whosecolours vary with the colour of the wafer employed, aiin the following table.Aoddaatal Colour, or Clair of tiColour of the W«ftr.OcularRed.Orange.Yellow.Green.Bluish green.Blue.Indigo.Violet reddish.Blue.Indigo.Violet.Black. .Orange red.Orange yellow.Yellow green.White.White.Back.In order to find the accidental colour of any colourin the spectrum, takeVko^ i2Ky&\«Ck!^ ^i ^hA s^ectnimOHAP. ZZXVI. ON Accidental COLOURS. 505in a pair of compasses and setting one foot in thecolour whose accidental colour is required the othertrill fall upon the accidental colour. Hence the law ofaccidental colours derived from observation may bethus stated: — The accidental colour of any colour in aprismatic spectrum is that colour which in the samespectrum is distant from the first colour half the lengthi the spectrum ; or if we arrange all the colours of anyprismatic spectrum in a circle in their due proportionsthe accidental colour of any particular colour will be theooloor exactly opposite that particular colour. Hencethe two colours have been called opposite colours.If the primitive colour or that which impresses theeye, is reduced to the same degree of intensity as thelod dental colour we shall find that the one is the componentof the other or what the other wants to makeit white light ; that is the primitive and the accidentalsdkmrs will when reduced to the same degree of intensitywhich they have in the spectrum and whenmixed together make white light. On this account accidentalcolours have been called complementary colours,r With the aid of these facts the theory of accidentalcolours will be readily understood. When the eye hasbeen for some time fixed on the red wafer the partof the retina occupied by the red image is stronglyekdted^ or as it were deadened by its continued action.The sensibility to red light will therefore be diminished ;and consequently when the eye is turned from the redwafer to the white paper the deadened portion of theretina will be insensible to the red rays which formpart of the white light from the paper and consequentlywill see the paper of that colour which arises from allthe rays in the white light of the paper but the red ;that is of a bluish green colour which is therefore thetrue complementary colour of the red wafer. When ahlaek wafer is placed on a white ground the circularportion of the retina on which the black image falls inplace of being deadened is protected as it 'wete,>a^ ^<&sibsaice of light, while alltiie surroundings 'i^ax\A oi ^^306 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PART UI.Iretina being excited by the white light of the paper, |will be deadened by its continued action. Hence, whenthe eye is directed to the white paper it will see awhite circle corresponding to the black image on theretina ; so that the accidental colour of black is white.For the same reason, if a white wafer is placed on ahlnck ground, and viewed stedfastly for some time, theeye will afterwards see a black circular space ; so thatthe accidental colour of white is black.Such are the phenomena of accidental colours whenweak light is employed ; but when the eye is impressedpowerfully with a bright white light, the phenomenahave quite a different character. The first person whomade this experiment with any care was sir Isaac 'Newton, who sent an account of the results to Mr.Locke, but they were not published til 1829>* Manyyears before I69I, sir Isaac, having shut his left eye,directed the right one to the image of the sun reflectedfrom a looking-glass. In order to see the impressionwhich was made, he turned his eye to. a dark comer ofhis room, when he observed a bright spot made by thesun, encircled by rings of colours. This '^ phantomof light and colours," as he calls it, gradually vanished;but whenever he thought of it it returned and becameas lively and vivid as at first. He rashly repeated theexperiment three times, and his eye was impressedto such a degree, ^^ that whenever I looked upon theclouds, or a book, or a bright object I saw upon it around bright spot of light like the sun ; and which is stillstranger, though I looked upon the sun with my righteye only, and not with my left, yet my fancy b^^an to ,make an impression on my left eye as well as upon myright ; for if I shut my right eye, or looked upon a bookor the clouds with my left eye I could see the spectrum <of the sun almost as plain as with my right eye'' The ,effect of this experiment was such, that sir Isaac duntneither write nor read but was obliged to shut himsdfcompletely up in a dark chamber for three days together,^ • Ib Lord Kiof*s lifeof Locke.Chap. XZXYI. IMPRESSIONS ON THE RETINA. 307and by keeping in the dark, and employing his mindabout other things he began in about three or four daysto recover the use of his eyes. In these experiments,sir Isaac's attention was more taken up with the metaphysicalthan with the optical results of them, so thathe has not described either the colours which he saw, orthe changes which they underwent.£experiments of a similar kind were made by M.pinus. When the sun was near the horizon, he fixedhis eye steadily on the solar disc for 1 5 seconds. Uponshutting his eye he saw an irregular pale sulphur yellowimage of the sun, encircled with a faint red border. Assoon as he opened his eye upon a white ground, theimage of the sun was a brownish red, and its surroundingborder sky blue. With his eye again shut, the imageof the sun became green with a red border, differentfrom the last. Turning his eye again upon a whiteground, the sun's image was more red, and its border abrighter sky blue. When the eye was shut, the greenspectrum became a greenish sky blue, and then a finesky blue, with the border growing a finer red ; and whenthe eye was open, the spectrum became a finer red, andits border a finer blue. M. pinus noticed, that whenhis eye was fixed upon the white ground, the image ofthe sun frequently disappeared, returned, and disappearedagain.About the year 1808, I was led to repeat the precedingexperiments of iEpiniis ; but, instead of looking atthe gun when of a dingy colour, I took advantage of afine summer's day, when the sun was near the meridian,.and I formed upon a white ground a brilliant image of his.disc by the concave speculum of a reflecting telescope.Tying up my right eye, I viewed this luminous discwith my left eye through a tube, and when the retinamm highly excited, I turned my left eye to a whitegnmnd^ and observed the following spectra by alternatelyopening and shutting it : —X 2308 A Treatise ON OPTICS. PART in.8peetn«idilflftc7«open. SpedimvldilifteisdiBt.1. Pink surrounded with green. Green.2. Orange mixed with pii. Blue.S. Yellowish brown. Bluish pink.4. Yellow.5. Pure red. Sky blue.6. Orange. Indigo.Upon uncovering my right eye and turning it to awhite ground I was surprised to observe that it. alsogave a coloured spectrum exactly the reverse of the firstspectrum which was pink with a gre^i border. Thereverse spectrum was a green with a pinkish border.This experiment was repeated three times and alwayswith the same result ; so that it would appear that theimpression of the solar image was conveyed by the opticnerve from the left to the right eye. Sir Isaac Newlysupposed that it was his fancy that transferred the image -from his left to his right eye ; but we are disposed tothink that in his experiment no transference took placebecause the spectrum which he saw with both eyes wasthe same, whereas in my experiment it was the revenueone. We cannot however speak decidedly on this pointyas sir Isaac did not observe that the spectra with the eyeshut were the reverse of those seen with the eye open.If a spectrum is strongly formed on one eye, it is a verydifficult matter to determine on which eye it is formed,and it would be impossible to do this if the spectrumwas the same when the eye was open and shut.The phenomena of accidental colours are often finelyseen when the eye has not been strongly impressed ^tfaany particular coloured object. It was long ago observedby M. Meusnier, that when the sun shone througha hole a quarter of an inch in diameter in a red curtain,the image of the luminous spot was green. In like manner,every person must have observed in a brightly paintedroom, illuminated by the sun that the parts of anywhite object on which the coloured light does not fall,exhibit the complementary colours. In order to seethis class of phenomcMi, 1 \!«^^ found the flowingmethod the simple axi^i)tkfc>Dft«X. ^vfai%\^\K^N;:«<&CHAP. XZXn. Impressions ON THE Retina. 309candles hold before one of them a piece of colouredglass, suppose bright red and remove the other candleto such a distance that the two shadows of any bodyformed upon a piece of white paper may be equallydark. In this case one of the shadows will be red, andthe other green. With blue glass one of them will beUue, and the other orange yellow; the one being invariablythe accidental colour of the other. The very same effectmay be produced in daylight by two holes in a window-shutter; the one being covered with a coloured glassand the other transmitting the white light of the sky.Accidental colours may also be seen by looking at theimage of a candle or any white object seen by reflectionfrom a plate or surface of coloured glass sufficientlythin to throw back its colour from the second surface.In this case the reflected image will always have thecomplementary colour of the glass. The same effectmay be seen in looking at the image of a candle reflectedfrom the water in a blue finger glass ; the image of thecandle is yellowish : but the effect is not so decided inthis case as the retina is not sufficiently impressedwith the blue light of the glass.These phenomena are obviously different from thosewhich are produced by coloured wafers ; because in thepresent case the accidental colour is seen by a portion ofthe retina which is not affected or deadened as it wereby the primitive colour. A new theory of accidentalcolours is therefore requisite to embrace this class ofacts.As in acoustics where every fundamental sound isactually accompanied with its harmonic souiid^ so in theimpressions of lights the sensation of one colour is accompaniedby a weaker sensation of its accidental orharmonic colour.* When we look at the red wafer weareat the same time with the same portion of the re-tina seeing green; but being much fainter it seemsonly to dilute the red, and make it as it were whiterThe term harmonic has been applied to accidental co\civa%\\Nfi»aAfe^%primitive Mud its accidental colour oannonite with each c^«c V&\aiai9ficoLVX 3310 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PART m.by .the combination of the two sensations. When theeye looks from the wafer to the white paper, the permanentsensation of the accidental colour remains, andwe see a green image. The duration of the primitiveimpression is only a fraction of a second, as we havealready shown ; but the duration of the harmonic impressioncontinues for a time proportional to the strengthof the impression. In order to apply these views to thasecond class of facts, we must have recourse to anotherprinciple ; namely, that when the whole or a great partof the retina has the sensation of any primitive colour,a portion of the retina protected from the impression ofthe colour is actually thrown into that state which givesthe accidental or harmonic colour. By the vibrationsprobably communicated from the surrounding portions,the influence of the direct or primitive colour is not propagatedto parts free from its action, excepting in theparticular case of oblique vision formerly mentioned.When the eye, therefore, looks at the white spot ofsolar light seen in the middle of the red light of thecurtain, the whole of the retina, except the portion occupiedby the image of the white spot, is in the stateof seeing every thing green ; and as the vibrations whichconstitute this state spread over the portions of the retinaupon which no red light falls, it will, of course, seethewhite circular spot green.(177-) A very remarkable phenomenon of accidentalcolours, in which the eye is not excited by any primitivecolour, was observed by Mr. Smith, surgeon inFochabers. If we hold a narrow strip of white papervertically, about a foot from the eye, and fix both eyesupon an object at some distance beyond it, then if weallow the light of the sun, or the light of a candle, to actstrongly upon the right eye, without affecting the left,which may be easily protected from its influence, the offhandstrip of paper will be seen of a bright green colour,and the right hand strip of a red colour. If the strip ofpaper is sufficiently broad to make the two images overlapeach other the ovet\app\iv% i^«i\&Nq\ML\ift^rfectlY white.OBAY.ZZXVI. INSENglBIUTY TO COLOURS. 311and free from cour ; which proves that the red and greenare complementary. When equally luminous candlesare held near each eye the two strips of paper will bewhite. If when the candle is held near the right eyeand the strips of paper are seen red and green, then onbringing the candle suddenly to the left eye the lefthand image of the paper will gradually change to green,and the right hand image to red,(178.) A singular affection of the retina in referenceto colours is shown in the inability of someeyes to distinguish certain colours of the spectrum. Thepersons who experience this defect have their eyes geniallyin a sound state and are capable of performingall the most delicate functions of vision. Mr. Harrisa shoemaker at Allonby^ was unable from his infancyto distinguish the cherries of a cherry tree from itsleaves, in so far as colour was concerned. Two of hisbrothers were equally defective in this respect, and alwaysmistook orange for grass green, and light green foryeUaw. Harris himself could only distinguish blackand white. Mr. Scott, who describes his own case inthe Philosophical Transactions, mistook pirik for a paleblue, and a fill red for a full green.All kinds of yellows and blues, except sky blue, hecould discern with great nicety. His father, his maternaluncle, one of his sisters, and her two sons, hadall the same defect.A tailor at Plymouth, whose case is described byMr. Harvey, regarded the solar spectrum as consistingonly of gellou) and light blue ; and he could distinguishwith certainty only yellow, white, and green. He regardedindigo and Prussian blue as black.Mr. R. Tucker describes the colours of the spectrumas follows : —Blue sometimes Pink.Indigo - Purple.Violet - Purple.Red mistaken for Brown.Orange - Green.Yellow sometimes Orange.Green - Orange.A gentleman in the prime of life, NuVkoafc caafc Wa.^312 - A Treatise ON OPTICS. part UI.joccsLBion to examine saw only two colours in the spectrumviz. yellow and blue. When the middle of thered space was absorbed by a blue glass he saw theblack space with what he called the yellow on eachside of it. This defect in the perception of colour wasexperienced by the late Mr. Di^ald Stewart who couldnot perceive any difference in the c(^ur of the scarletfruit of the Siberian crab and that of its leaves. Mr.Dalton is unable to distinguish blue from pink by daylightand in the solar spectrum the red is scarcely visiblethe rest of it appearing to const of two coloun.Mr. Houghton has the same defect and is capable offully appreciating only blue and yelhw colours; andwhen he names colours the names of blue and yellowcorrespond to the more and less refrangible rays allthose which belong to the former exciting the sensationof blueness and those which belong to the latter thesensation of yellowness.In almost all these cases, the different prismaticcolours have the power of exciting the sensation oflights and giving a distinct vision of objects exceptingin the case of Mr. Dalton who is said to be scaredable to see the red extremity of the spectrum.Mr. Dalton has endeavoured to explain this peculiarityof vision by supposing that in his ovm case thevitreous humour is blue, and, therefore absorbs a greatportion of the red rays and other least refrangible rays;but this opinion is we think not well founded. Mr.Herschel attributes this state of vision to a defect in 'the sensorium by which it is rendered incapable ofappreciating exactly those differences between rays oiwhich their colour, depends.capt zzzvn. plane and ovrted jobbers. 313PART IV.ON OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS.All the optical instruments now in use have withthe exception of the humming mirrors of Archimedesbeen invented by modem philosophers and opticians.The principles upon which most of them have beenconstricted have already been explained in the precedingchapters and we shall therefore confine ourselvesas much as possible to a, general account of their constructionand properties. ^CHAP. XXXVII.ON PLANE AND Curved Ribbons.(179*) One of the simplest optical instruments is the9inj^ plane mirror or looking-glass which consists of aplate of glass with parallel surfaces one of which iscovered with tinfoil and quicksilver. The glass per-forms no other part in this kind of plane mirror than' that'of holding and giving a polished surface to the thin brightfilm of metal which is extended over it. If the surfaces ofthe plate of glass are not parallel we shall see two threeand four images of all luminous objects seen obliquely ;but even when the surfaces are parallel two images of anolgect are formed one reflected from the first surfaceof glass and the other from the posterior surface ofmetal; and the distance of these images will increasewith the thickness of the glass. The image reflectedfrom the • glass is however very faint compared withthe other; so that for ordinary purposes a plsxie ^|ba&%314 A Treatise ON OPTICS. PART IT.mirror is sufficiently accurate ; but when a plane mirrorforms a part of an optical instrument where accuracyof vision is required it must be made of steel, or silver,or of a mixture of copper and tin ; and in this case it iscalled a speculum. The formation of images by mirrorsand specula have been fully described in chap. ii.Kaleidoscope.(180.) "Then two plane mirrors are combined in aparticular manner, and placed in a particular poseidonrelative to an object, or series of objects, and the eye,they constitute the kaleidoscope, or an instrument forcreating and exhibiting beautiful forms. If AC, BG,for example, be sections of two plane mirrors, and M Nan object placed between them or in front of each, AeFig. 143. mirror A C will form behind it animage m n of the object M N, in themanner shown in Jig. l6*. In likemanner, the mirror B C will forman image Men' behind it. But, aswe have formerly shown, these imagesmay be considered as new objects, andtherefore the mirror A C will formbehind It an image, M''N'', of the object or image Men',and BC will form behind it an image, mfn^, of the objector image m n. In like manner it will be found thatm''n'' will be the image of the object or image Men",formed by BC, and of the object or image mf ri , formedby AC. Hence m'^nf' will actually consist of twoimages overlapping each other and forming one, providedthe angle A C B is exactly 60°, or the sixth partof a circumference of S60°. In this case all the siximages (two of the six forming only one, m'n\) will,along with the original object, M N, form a perfectequilateral triangle. The object, MN, is drawn perpendicularto the mirror B C, in consequence of whichMN and Men' form one straight line; but if MN ismoved, all the images will move, and the figure of allthe images combed Vi!^ iornv vd^*^^ ^^gos^ ^ ijcrffectcniAP. zxrvn. on the kaleidoscope. 315regularity and exhibiting the most beautiful variationsall ■ of which may be drawn by the methods already'described. In reference to the multiplication andarrangement of the iihages^ this is the principle of theIcaleidoscope ; but the principle of symmetry, which isessential to the instrument depends on the position ofthe object and the eye. This principle will be understoodfrom fig, 144., where ACE and BCE representthe two mirrors inclined at an angle ACB^F^. 144.and having CE for their line of junction or commonintersection. If the object is placed at a distance, asat MN, then there is no position-of the eye at or abovewhich will give a symmetrical arrangement of thesix images shown in ^. 143.; for the correspondingparts of the one will never join the corresponding partsof the other. As the object is brought nearer andnearer, the symmetry increases, and is most completewhen the object M N is quite dose to A B C, the endsof the reflectors. But even here it will not be perfect,unless the eye is placed as near as possible to E, theline of junction of the reflectors. The following, therefore,are the three conditions of symmetry in thekaleidoscope : —1. That the reflectors should be placed at an anglewhich is an even or an odd aliquot part of a circle, whenthe object is regular and similarly situated with respectto' both the mirrors ; or an even aliquot part of a circle,when the object is irregular.2. That out of an infinite number of positions forthe object both within and without the reflectors, thereis only one position where perfect symmetry c^xl \^316 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PART IT.obtained namely by placing the object in carnal withthe ends of the reflectors or between them.3. That out of an infinite number of positions for thesituation of the eye, there is only one where the symmetryis perfect, namely as near as possible to the angularpointy so that the whole of the circular field canbe distinctly seen; and this point is the only one atwhich the uniformity of the reflected light is greatestIn order to give variety to the figures formed by theinstrument the objects consisting of pieces of colouredglass twisted glass of various curvatures &c.^ are placedin a narrow cell between two circular pieces of glass,leaving them just room to tumble about while this clis turned round by the hand. The pictures thus presentedto the eye are beyond all description splendid andbeautiful; an endless variety of symmetrical combinationspresenting themselves to view, and never again recurringwith the same form and colour.For the purpose of extending the power of the in-strumentj and introducing into symmetrical pictures externalobjects, whether animate or inanimate, I applieda convex lens L h, fig, 144., by means of which aninverted image of a distant object, M N, may be formedat the very extremity of the mirrors, and thereforebrought into a position of greater symmetry than can beeffected in any other way. In this construction the leadsis placed in one tube and the reflectors in another; sothat by pulling out or pushing in the tube next the eye,the images of objects at any distance can be formed atthe place of symmetry. In this way, flowers, trees,animals pictures, busts, may be introduced into symmetricalcombinations. Wlien the distance £ fi is lessthan that at which the eye sees objects distinctly, it isnecessary to place a convex lens at £ to give distinctvision of the objects in the picture. See my Treatise onthe Kaleidoscope,OHAP. ZXXVn. PLANE Burning Ribbons. 317Plane burning Mirrors,(181.) A combination of plane burning mirrors formsa powerful burning instrument; and it is highly probablethat it was with such a combination that Archimedesdestroyed the ships of Marcellus. Athanasius Kircher^who first proved the efficacy of a union of plane mirrorswent with his pupil Schemer to Syracuse to examine theposition of the hostile fleet; and they were both satisfiedthat the ships of Marcellus could not have been moretian thirty paces distant from Archimedes.Bufibn constructed a burning apparatus upon thisprinciple which may be easily explained. If we reflectthe light of the sun upon one cheek by a small piece ofplane looking glass we shall experience a sensation ofheat less than if the direct light of the sun fell upon it.If with the other hand we reflect the sun's light uponthe-same cheek with another piece of mirror the warmthwill be increased and so on till with five or six pieceswe can no longer endure the heat. Bufibn combined168 pieces of mirror, 6 inches by 8, so that he could, bya little mechanism connected with each, cause them toreflect the light of the sun upon one spot. Those piecesof .glass were scented which gave the smallest image of&e sun at 250 feet.The following were the effects produced by differentnumbers of these mirrors : —Effects produced.Small combustibles inflamed.Beech plank burned.Tarred beech plank inflamed.Pewter flask 6lb. weight melted.Tarred and sulphuret plank set on fire.Plank covered with wool set on fire*Some thin pieces of silver melted.Tarred fir plank set on fire.Beech plank sulphuret inflamed violently.Tarred plank smoked violently. .154 2»;o chips of fir deal sulphuret and mixed\ with charcoal set on tie.^^4 40 Plates of silver melted.W>.rfDiataaceafUuwn.Otfjcct.20 feetSI 8 A Treatise ON OPTICS. PART IV.As it is dilScult to adjust the mirrors while the sunchanges his place M. Gerard proposes to produce greateffects by mounting each mirror in a separate fiaineicarrying a telescope, by means of which one person candirect the reflected rays to the object which is to beburnt. He conceives that with 590 glasses, about 30inches in diameter, he could reduce a fleet to ashes atthe distance of a quarter of a league, and with glasses ofdouble that size at the distance of half a league.Plane glass mirrors have been combined permanentlyinto a parabolic form, for the purpose of burning oligectsplaced in the focus of the parabola, by the sun's rays ;and the same combination has been used, and is still inuse, for lighthouse reflectors, the light being placed inthe focus of the parabola.Convex and Concave Mirrors,(182.) The general properties of convex and concavemirrors have been already described in chap. ii.Convex mirrors are used principally as household ornaments,and are characterised by their property of formingerect and diminished images of all objects placed beforethem, and these images appear to be situated behind themirror.Concave mirrors are distinguished by their propertyof forming in front of them, and in the air, invertedimages of erect objects, or erect images of inverted objects,placed at some distance beyond their principalfocus. I^ a fine transparent cloud of blue smoke is raised,by means of a chafing dish, around the focus of a largeconcave mirror, the image of any highly illuminatedobject will be depicted, in the middle of it, with greatbeauty. A skull concealed from the observer is sometimesused, to surprise the ignorant ; and when a dish offruit has been depicted in a similar manner, a spectator,stretching out his hand to seize it, is met with the imageof a drawn dagger, which. haa been quickly substitutedfor the fruit at the olivet co\)^^^gl^l&i^)«^tt^^^TsxR!«C^AP.ZZZYII. CURVED AND Concave: Ribbons. Sin .Concave mirrors have been used as lighthouse reflectors,and as burning instruments. When used inlighthouses they are formed of plates of copper platedwith silver and they are hammered into a parabolicform and then polished with the hand. A lamp placedin the focus of the parabola will have its divergent lightthrown after reflexion into something like a parallelbeam which will retain its intensity at a great distance.When concave mirrors are used for burnings they aregenerally made spherical and regularly ground andpolished upon a tool like the specula used in telescopes.The most celebrated of these were made by M. Village,of Lyons who executed five large ones. One of the bestof them which consisted of copper and tin was verynearly four feet in diameter and its focal length thirty-eightinches. It melted a piece of Pompey's pillar infifty seconds a silver sixpence in seven seconds and a half,a halfpenny in sixteen seconds, cast-iron in sixteen seconds,slate in three seconds, and thin tile in four seconds.Cylindrical Mirrors,(183.) All objects seen by reflexion in a cylindricalmirror are necessarily distorted. If an observer looks intosuch a mirror with its axis standing vertically, he will seetheimage of his head of the same length as the original,because the surface of the mirror is a straight line in avertical direction. The breadth of the face will begreatly contracted in a horizontal direction, because thesurface is very convex in that direction, and in intermediatedirections the head will have intermediatedeaths. If the axis of the mirror is held horizontally,Ike twee will be as broad as life, and exceedingly short.If a picture or portrait M N is laid down horizontallybefore the mirror A B^fig. 145., the reflected image ofit will be highly distorted ; but the picture may bedrawn distorted according to regular laws, so that itsimage shall have the most correct proportions.Cylindrical mirrors, which are now very uncommon,led to be made for this purpose and free sgc/^xck^vG^^A TREATISE ON OPTIOS.PABTfr.with a series of distorted figures which when seen hjthe eye have neither shape nor meanings bat when IsMdown before a cylindrical mirror the reflected image ofthem has the most perfect proportions. This effect Isshown in fig. 145.^ where M N is a distorted figurewhose image in the mirror A B has the appearance of aregular portrait.CHAP. XXXVIII.ON SINGLE AND COMPOUND LENSES.Spectacles and reading glasses are among the simplestand most useful of optical instruments. In order toenable a person who has imperfect vision to see smallobjects distinctly when they are not far from the eyesuch as small manuscript or a small type a convex lens ofvery short focus must be used both by those who are longand short sighted.When a shortsighted person, who cannot see wdl at sdistance wishes to weave ^«>^<^x. Nvassi^^x. «a:<) ^^otlcalar4XHAP. X^XVni. ON BURNING LENSES. 321distance he must use a concave lens whose focal lenswill be found thus — Multiply the distance at which hetea oljjectB most distinctly by the distance at which hewishes to see them distinctly with a concave lens anddivide this product by the difference of the above distances.A long-sighted person who cannot see near objectsdistinctive must use a convex lens, whose focal length isfound by the preceding rule.In choosing spectacles however the best way is toselect out of a number those which are found to answerbest the purposes norwich they are particularly intended.Dr. Wollaston introduced a new kind of spectaclescalled episcopacy from their property of giving a widerfield of distinct vision than the common ones. Thelenses used for this purpose as shown at H and Ifig. 19*> ai meniscuses^ in which the convexity predominatesfor long-sighted persons and concavo-convexlenses in which the concavity predominates for shortsightedpersons. Telescopic spectacles decidedly givemore imperfect vision titian common spectacles becausethey increase both the aberration of figure and of colour;but they may be of use in a crowded city in warning usof the oblique approach of objects.Burning and Illuminating Lenses.(184.) Convex lenses possess peculiar advantages forconcentrating the sun's rays and for conveying to animmense distance a condensed and parallel beam of light.M. Buffon found that a convex lens with a long focallengthy was preferable to one of a short focal length for■ftunng metals by the concentration of the sun's rays.A lens for examples 32 inches in diameter and 6 inchesIn focal lengths with the diameter of its focus 8 linesmelted copper in less than a minute ; while a small lensS2 lines in diameter with a focal length of 6 lines andits focus f of a line was scarcely capable of heatingcopper.^ The most perfect burning lens ever constiwcledi \)m322 A Treatise ON 0^?«TICS. PAST IV.executed by Mr. Parker of fleet Street, at an expcpae of7001. It waa made of flint glass was three feet in diametersand weighed 212 pounds. It was 3\ inches tliid:atthe centre ; the focal distance was 6 feet 8 inches and ^diameter of the image of the sun in its focus (me inch Therays refracted by the lens were received on a second leai^in whose focus die objects to be fused were placed* Thissecond lens had an exposed diameter of 13 inches; liscentral thickness was 1^ of an inch ; the length (tf itsfocus was 29 inches. The diameter of the focal imagewas ^ of an inch. Its wight was 21 pounds The combinedfocal length of the two lenses was 5 feet 3 inchesand the diameter of the focal image ^ an inch. By meansof this powerful burning lens platina gold silver copper tin quartz, agate, jaspa*, flint, topaz genet, ashton,&c. were melted in a few seconds.Various causes have prevented philosophers from constructingburning lenses of greater magnitude than thatmade by Mr. Parker. The impossibility of procuringpure flint glass tolerably free oi vans and impurities foralarge solid lens ; the trouble and expense of casting itinto a lenticular form without flaws and impurities ; (hegreat increase of central thickness which becomes necessaryby increasing the diameter of the lens; the enormousobstruction that is thus opposed to the transmissionof the solar rays, and the increased aberration which dissipatesthe rays at the focal point, are insuperable obstaclesto the construction of solid lenses of any considerablesize.(185.) In order to improve a solid lensformed of one piece of glass, whose section isA mp B E D A, Bufibn proposed to cut out allthe glass left white in the figure, viz. the portionsbetween mp,fig. 146., and no and h&>tween n o and the left hand surface of D £*A lens thus constructed would be incomparablysuperior to the solid one Af»pB£DA;hiitsuch a process we conceive to be impracticablyon a large ^caiie, iiQtti ^^ ^^K^acexne difficult.xkxvni. <^ POLTfeONAi6 LEi^sES. 525ef pbUflhing tibe smfaees Am, Bp, Cn, To, and the lefttend fiiQrfkoe of D £ ; and even if it were practicable,die greatest imperfections in the glass night happen tooccur in the parts which are left.In order to remoTe these imperfections, quid to contactlenses of any size, i proposed, in 18 1 1 , to build themxsp of separate zones or rings, each of which rings wasagain to be composed of separate segments, as shownJF% 14X ™ *^® ^0^* ^^^^ of the lens4 in fy, 147. This lens iscomposed of one central lens,A B C D, corresponding withits section D E in Jig, 146., ofa middle ring GEL I correspondingto C D E F in fig. 1 46.,and consisting of Jim segments ; tand another ring, N P R T, cor /'responding to A C F B, andconsisting of eight segments.The preceding construction obviously puts it in ourpower to execute these compound lenses, to which I havegiven the name of polygonal lenses, of pure flint glassfree from veins; but it possesses another great advantagesnamely, that of enabling us to correct, very nearly,due si^iencal aberration, by making the foci of each zonecoincide.One of Ihesie lenses was constructed, under my direction,for the Commissioners of Northern Lighthouses,by Messrs. W. and P. Gilbert. It was made of pure flint^iass, was three feet in diameter, and consisted ofodany zones and segments. Lenses of this kind haveseen made in France of crown glass, and have been introfailed into the principal French lighthouses; a purposex> which they are infinitely better adapted than the bestconstructed diabolic reflectors made of metal.A pity zonal lens of at least four feet in diameter will)e speedily executed as a burning glass, and will, nokmbt^ be the most powerful ever made. The means <sCY 2 ■ >A Treatise ON OPTICS.PART IV.executing it have been to a considerable degree sappedby the scientific liberality of Mr. Wanton and Mr. Cal*der and other gentlemen of Calcutta.chap. XXXIX.ON SIMPLE AND COMPOUND PRISMS.Prismatic Lenses.1 86.) The general properties of the prism in refractingand decomposing light have already been explained;but its application as an optical instrument or as animportant part of optical instruments remain to bedescribed.A rectangular prism ABC^^. 148.^ was first appliedby Sir Isaac Newton as a plane mirror for reflectingto a side the rays which form the image in reflectingtelescopes. The angles Bac BCA^ beingFig. 148.nHHk^^"^each 45°^ and B a right angle rays falling on the faceAB will be reflected by the back surface B C as if itwere a plane metallic mirror ; for whatever be the refractionwhich they suffer at their entrance into theface A B^ they will suffer an equal and opposite one atthe face BC. The great value of such a mirror is, ^as the incident rata faU. u^^n A € at an angle gMSterthan that at w\ttc\i toXaV x«SkEsi«ft. <»\saas2Mi«ik^ti«^ «tf&(AV,tXXIX. OK iPRIglCATIO LENSES. 325nU nfffer total reflexion, and not a ray will be lost;whereas in the best metallic speculum nearly half theHght is lost. A portion of lights however is lost byreflexion at the two surfaces A B^ B C^ and a smallportion by the absorption of the glass itself. Sir IsaacNewton also proposed the convex prism, shown atDEF, the faces DF, FE being ground convex. .Ananalogous prism called the meniscus prism, and shownat GHI^ has been used by M. Chevalier, of Paris, forthe camera obscura. It differs only from Newton's inthe second face, I H, being concave in place of convex.On account of the difficult execution of these prisms,I have proposed to use a hemispherical lens, LMN, thetwo convex surfaces of which are ground at the sametime. When a longer focus is required, a concave lens,RQ, of a longer focus than the hemisphere Pro, maybeplaced or cemented on its lower surface, and if theconcave lens is formed out of a substance of a differentdispersive power, it may be made to correct the colourof the convex lens.A single prism is used with peculiar advantage forinverting pencils of light, or for obtaining an erectimage from pencils that would give an inverted one.This effect is shown in fig, 14*9*> where ABC isa : rectangular prism, and RR^'R^^ a parallel pencilof lights which, after being refracted at the points1, 2, 3, of the face A B, and reflected at the pointsA, b, €, of the base B C, will be again refractedSt the points 1, 2, 3, of the face A C, and-move on inparallel lines, 3/', 2r^, Ir; the ray Rl, iImI ^^'s.l^ppennostj being now undermost, as at Ir.Y 33^6 A TREATISE ON Optics. FABTIf*Compound and Variable(187*) The great difficulty of obtaining glass sufficientlypure for & prim of any size has rendered itextremely difficult to procure good ones ; and they havetherefore not been introduced as they would otherwisehaTe been into optical instalments. The principleupon which polygon lenses are contracted is equallyapplicable to prisms A print constructed like Adfig, 150., if properly executed would have exactly thesame properties as Abc and would be incomparablysuperior to it, from the light passing through sudi asmall thickness of glass. It would obviously be difficultto execute such a prism as A D out of a single piece ofglass, though it is quite practicable; but there is nodifficulty in communing six small prisms all cut out ofone prismatic rod, and therefore necessarily tinaixr.The summit of the rod should have a flat narrow fineparallel to its base, which would be easily done if theprismatic rod were cut out of a plate of thick parallelglass. The separate prisms being cemented to oneanother, as in the figure, will form a compound prism,which will be superior to the common prism for aBpurposes in which it acts solely by refraction.(188.) A compound prism of a different kind, andhaving a variable angle, was proposed by Boseovich, aashown in. 151., where ABC is a hemispherical aonhrex lens, moving in a concave lens, D £ C, sf th*lame curvature, ^ t«xiai$k% ^\i^ ^ ^^NBeuwkxwiniupon die other, the indignation of die face AB, D£,«^X A B, C £, may be made to vary from 0° toabove 90°.(189.) As this apparatus is both troublesome to operateand difficult to use, I have employed on entirelyefferent principle for the constriction of a variableprism, and have used it to a great extent in numerousixperimoita oa the disperse powers of bodies. If weproduce a vertical line of list by nearly closing thewindow shutters, and view the line with a flint (sanprism whose refracting angle is 6o°, the edge of thetefncting angle being held vertical, or parallel to theline of light, the huniuoua line will be seen as abrightly coloured spectrum, and any Email portion of itwill resemble almost exactly the. soir spectrum. Ifwe now turn the prism in the plane of one of itsrefracting faces, so that the inclination of the edge tothe line of light increases gradually from 0° up to 9^°when it is perpendicular to the line of light, ^e spectrumwill gradually grow lead and less coloured, exactlyas if it were formed by a prism of a less and less re-fiactiiig angle, till at an inclination of 9^° not a traceof colour ii left By this simple process, therefore,namely, by rising a line of light instead of a circulardisc, we have produced the very same effect as if theK^ioliiif angle of the priam had been varied from 90°&iwntoO°.- (190.) Lei it now be required to determine the relativediipenire powers of faint glad wad. ntnni i^&»^y i328 A TREATISE ON Optics FABT IT*Place the crown glass prism so as to produce thelargest spectrum from the line of white lights and letthe refracting angle of the prism be 40^. Then placethe flint glass prism between it and the eye, and turn itrounds as before described till it corrects the colourproduced by the crown glass prism or till the line oflight is perfectly colourless. The inclination of theedge of the flint glass prism to the line of light bongknown we can easily find by a simple formula theangle of a prism of flint glass which corrects thecolour of a prism of crovm glass with a refracting anof 40°. See my Treatise on New Philosophical Instruments,p. 291*Multiplying Glass,(191*) This lens is more amusing than useful andis intended to give a number of images of the sameobject. Though it has the circular form of a lens itis nothing more than a number of prisms formed bygrinding various flat faces on the convex surface of aplano-convex glass as shown in fig, 152.^ where AB isthe section of a multiplying glass in which only threeFig, 152.of the planes are seen. A direct image of the object Cwill be seen through the face GH, by the eye at E;another image will be seen at D^ by the refraction of'the face HB, and a third at F, by the refraction of theface Ag an image \)eVa% i^exi i^^raoi:^ wets ^Vwaa fictfCHAP. XL. ON THE CAMERA OBSCURA. 329that is cot upon the lens. The image at C will becolourless and all those formed by planes inclined toAB will be coloured in proportion to the angles whichthe planes form with AB.Natural multiplying glasses may be found amongtransparent minerals which are crossed with veins oppositelycrystallised even though they are ground intoplates with parallel faces. In some specimens of Icelandspar more than a hundred finely coloured imagesmay be seen at once. The theory of such multiplyingglasses has already been explained in Chap. xxix.CHAP. XL.OK THE CAMERA Obscura MAGIC Lanterns ANDCAMERA LUCIDA.(192.) The camera obscura, or dark chamber, is thename of an amusing and useful optical instrument inventedby the celebrated Baptista Porta. In its originalstate it is nothing more than a dark room with an openingin the window shutter in which is placed a convexlens of one or more feet focal length. If a sheet ofwhite paper is held perpendicularly behind the lens andpassing through its focus there will be painted upon itan accurate picture of all the objects seen from the window,in which the trees and clouds will appear to movein the wind, and all living objects to display the samemovements and gestures which they exhibit to the eye.The perfect resemblance of this picture to nature astonishesand delights every person, however often theymay have seen it. The image is of course inverted, butif we look over the top of the paper it will be seen as ifit were erect. The ground on which the picture is receivedshould be hollow, and part of a sphere whoseradius is the focal distance of the convex lens. It iscustomary, therefore, to make it of the whitest plaster of.Paris, with as smooth and accurate a surface as possibleJ30 1. TKBATm ON OPTTOS. f ART IT.'In Older to exhibit the picture to seyenl spectator tfonce, quid to eiuble any penon to w^j it, it is deiiniilBthat the image should be formed upon a horizontal tab)«-This may be done by means of a metallic mirror, placedat an angle of 45° to the reacted raya, which will i^fleet the picture upon the white ground lying horizontally; or, aa in the portable camera obscura, it may b»reflected upward* by ibe mirror, and received on dielower aide of a pUte of grotius ^ass, with ti roog^ tideuppermost, upon which the picture may be pitied witha fine sharp-pointed penciLA very convenient portable camera obscura tordrawing landscapes or other oljiecta ia shown in fy.153., where AB ia a meniscus lent, with its concaveaide uppermost, and the radius of its convex surface beiiigJig. 153. . *° *^ radius of ita concavesurface ai 5 to 8, and C D aplane metallic specnhmi inclinedat an an of 45° tothe hmizon, ao aa to reflect dwlandscape downwards tiiron^the Iras A B. The draughts*man introduces mislead thousandopening in one side, and hiihand with the penal throng\ another opening, made in sadimanner as to allow no lighto fall upon the picture which3 exhibited en the paper itF. The tube containing the mirror and leu can beturned round by a rod within, and the inclination ofthe mirror changed, so as to introduce otQccbs in any partof the horizon.When the camera ia intended for pnUie ezhiUlica, itconsists of (he some parts similarly arranged; but obeyare in this case placed on the top of a building, and therotation of the mirror, and Its motion in a vatican plashare erected by turning two rods within die reach of thtspectator, bo ital \vt can Vn^xoAAM vo.-^ ^qoft inU iWOKAPwUi. our THB MAOIG Lantern. 831victoire from all points of the compass and at aU distances.The picture is received on a tales whose surface is madeof stucco andros the same radius as the lens and thissorfiice is made to rise and fall to accommodate it to thediange of focus produced by objects at different distances.A camera obscura which throws the image down upon ahorizontal surface may be made without any mirror byFling any of the lenticular prisms D £ F^ G H I^ M L N^when the objects are extremely near and P R Q^ fig* 14>8.The convex surfaces of these prisms c<myeige the rayswhich are reflected to their focus by the flat faces D £^6 Hj L N^ and P Q ; these lenticular prisms may beformed by cementing plano-convex or concave lenses onthe faces A B^ B C of the rectangular prism A B C^ orthe convex lens may be placed near to A B.If we wish to form an erect image on^a vertical planethe prism ABC, fi. 148., may be placed in front of theeciivex lens, ex immediately behind it. The same efl^ftmight be produced by three reflexions from three mirrorsor specula.I have found that a peculiarly brilliant-effect is givento the images formed in the camera obscura when theyare received upon the silvered back of a looking glass,soothed by grinding it with a flat and soft hone. Inthe portal camera obscura I And that a film of skimmedBilk, dried upon a plate of glass, is superior to groundI^MS for the reception of images.A modification of the camera obscura, called the megasoope, is intended for taking magnified drawings ofsmall. objects placed near the lens. In this case, thedistance of die image behind the lens is greater than thedistance of the object before it. By altering the distanceof the object, the size of the image may be reduced orenlarged. The hemispherical lens L M N, fi. 148., itparticularly adapted for the megascope.Magic Lantern.(193.) The magic lantern, an invention of Ki^Vvet^^^shown inj!^. 154., where L is a lamp mtlfci a ^^«sS»i^-which IB opposite to the centre of the flame, which aprefaced in its connie. In the opposite de of the lanternia fixed a tube A B, containing a hemispherical illuminatingleon A, and a eoDTex lens fi ; between A and Bthe diameter of the tube is increased for the purpose ofallowing sliders to be introduced through the slit C D.These sliders contain 4 or 5 pictures, sadi painted indhighly coloured with transparent Tamiahes, and, I7sliding them through C D, any of the snl^ecta may beintroduced into the axis of the tube and between the twoleneee A, B. The light of the lamp L, increased bythe light reflected from the mirror falling upon the IonA, is concentrated by it upon the picture in the dicter;and this picture, being in one of the conjugate foci ofthe lens B, an entailed image of it will be painted on *white cloth, or on a screen of white paper, E, standish!or suspended perpendicularly. The distance of the lens Bfrom the object or the slid may be increased or dii'niehed by pulling out or pushing in the tube B, so thata distinct picture of the olyect may be formed of tnjmze and at any distance from B, within moderate limitsthe screen £ F is made of fine Bcmitransparent silvapaper, or fine muslin property prepared, the image ra»/be distinctly seen bj s spectator on die otbtx aide of dufSBJLP,X%MON THE Camera LUCIDA.S33(194.) The phantasmagoria is nothing more than ainagic lantern in which the images are received on atransparent screen which is fixed in view of the spectator.-The magic lantern mounted upon wheels is made torecede from or approach to the screen; the consequenceof which is that the picture on the screen expands to agigantic size or contracts into an invisible object ormere luminous spot. The lens B is made to recedefrom the slider in C D when the lantern approaches thescreens and to approach to it when the lantern recedesfrom the screen in order that the picture upon thescreen may always be distinct. This may be accomplished,according to Dr. Youngss by jointed rods orleers, connected with the screen which pull out or pushin the tube B ; but we are of opinion that the requiredeffect may be much more elegantly and efficaciously producedby the simplest piece of mechanism connectedwith the week.Camera Lucida,(195.) This instrument, invented by Dr. Wollastonin 1807> has come into very general use for drawinglandscapes, delineating objects of natural history, andcopying and reducing drawings.Dr. Wollaston's form of the instrument is shown inJig. 155., where A B C D is a glass prism, the angleBAD being 90^ ADC 67i^ and D C B 135^The rays proceeding from any object, M N, afterjP^. 155.being reflected by the faces DC, CB to the eye, £,place above the angle B, the observer will see an.inutge m n of the otqtd M N projected vcpoa a peer ofpassa at m tt. If the eye i« now broi^t down chow ttthe angle B, u that it at Ae tune time wca into Acprism with one half of the pupil, and part the u^ Bwith the other half, it will obtain distinct yiaaa et tealimage m n, and also see te paper and the point of iklpenciL The drangfatiman has, therefore, only to tactthe outline of the image upon die paper, die im b(iii|been with half of the pupil, and the paper and podwith the other haltMany persona have acquired ^ art of nnng this in*argument with great facility, while other have entiid^failed. In examining the causes of this bilnre, pofOtDiAmici, of Modena, succeeded in removing them, and Iikproposed various forms of the instrument free from thedefects of Dr. Wollaston's.* The one which M. Amidthinks the beat is down in;^. 156., where AbedFig. Miss.is a piece of thick parallel glass, F G H C a metallicmirror, whose fitch, F G, is highly polished, andinclined 45" to B C. Rays from an olyect, M N, afterpasmDg throng the glass Abed, are reflected franF G, and afterwards from the face B C of the ^• An account of thcK luvmu tone-nffi. \x tend In Um JMM*^(PAP.ZIiI. ON SnrOLB MICBOSOQPBB. 335plate to the eye at £^ by which the object M N^ is seenUmn, where the paper is placed. The pencil and thepi^>er are readily seen through the plane glass A B C D.hi order to make the two faces of the glass A D^ B C^perfectly parallel M. Amici forms a triangular prism of^msB, and cuts it through the middle ; he then joins .thetwo prisms or halves A D C^ C A B^ so as to form aparallel plates and by slightly turning round the prismsbe can easily find Uie position in which the two facesue perfectly paralleLCHAP. XLI.ON MICROSCOPES.A Microscope is an optical instrument for examiningand magnifying minute objects. Jansen and Rebelare supposed to have separately invented the single microscopesand Fontana and Galileo seem to have beenthe first who constructed die instrument in its compoundform*Single Microscope.(196.) The single microscope is nothing more thanalais or sphere of any transparent substance in theISocus of which minute objects are placed. The rayswinch issue from each point of the object are refractedby the lens into parallel rays which entering the eyeplaced immediately behind the lens affords distinct visionof the object. The magnifying power of all such microscopesis equal to the distance at which we couldexamine the object most distinctly divided by the focallength of the lens or sphere. If this distance is 5 incheswhich it does not exceed in good eyes when they examineminute objects then the magnifying power of each lenswill be as follows : —336 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PART IT.Focal IcngOi In liBflarmagnifying Superficial nMfull^inchat. power.5 1 11 5 25^ 50 2500TJJo 500 250000The linear magnifying power is the number of timesan object is magnified' in lengthy and the superficialmagnifying power is the number of times that it is magnifiedin surface. If the object is a small square then alens of one inch focus will magnify the side of the square5 times and its area or surface 25 times.The best single microscopes are minute lenses groundand polished on a concave tool ; but as the perfect executionof these requires considerable skilly small sphereshave been often constructed as a substitute. Dr. Hookexecuted these spheres in the following manner : Havingdrawn out a thin strip of window glass into threads bythe flame of a lamp he held one of these threads withits extremity in or near the flame till it run into aglobule. The globule was then cut off and placed abovea small aperture so that none of the rays wldch it transmittedpassed through die part where it was joined to thethread of glass. He sometimes ground off the end ofthe thready and polished that part of the sphere. Fatherdi Torre of Naples improved these globules by placingthem in small cavities in a piece of calcined tripoli andrepeating them with the blowpipe ; the consequence ofwhich was that they assumed a perfectly spherical form.Mr. Butterfield executed similar spheres by taking uponthe wetted point of a needle some fine pounded ^jbu,and melting it by a spirit lamp into a globule. If the partnext the needle was not mdted^ the globule was removedfrom the needle and taken up with the wetted needleon its round side and again presented to the flame till itwas a perfect sphere. M. Sivright^ of Meggetland^ haimade lenses by putting pieces of glass in small roundapertures between the 1 0th and £Both of an incas madein platinum leaf. T\ie>} ^^t^ >&i<sck "Belted by the blow*OHAJP. XU. ON SINGLE MICROSCOPES. 337pipe 80 that the lenses were made and set at the samethine.Mr. Stephen Gray made globules for microscopes byinserting drops of water in small apertures. I havemade them in the same way with oils and varnishes; butthe finest of all single microscopes may be executed byforming minute plano-convex lenses upon glass withdifferent fluids. I have also formed excellent microscopesby using the spherical crystalline lenses of minnowsand other small fish and taking care that the axis of thelens is the axis of vision or that the observer looksthrough the lens in the same manner that the fish did.*The most perfect single microscopes ever executed ofsolid substances are those made of the gems such asgarnet, ruby, sapphire, and diamond. The advantagesof such lenses I first pointed out in my Treatise on PhilosophicalInstruments ; and two lenses one of ruby andanother of garnet were executed for pipe by Mr. PeterHill optician in £dinbu]^h. These lenses performedadmirably in consequence of their producing with surfacesof inferior curvature the same magnifying poweras a glass lens ; and the distinctness of the image wasincreased by their absorbing the extreme blue rays ofthe spectrum. Mr. Pritchard, of London has carriedthis branch of the art to the highest perfections and hasexecuted lenses of sapphire and diamond of great powerand perfection of workmanship.When the diamond can be procured perfectly homogeneousandrew from double refraction it maybe wroughtinto a lens of the highest excellence; but ^e sapphirewhich has double refraction is less fitted for this purpose.Garnet is decidedly the best material for single lensesas it has no double refraction and may be procured witha little attention perfectly pure and homogeneous. I havenow in my possession two garnet microscopes executedby Mr. Adieu which far surpass every solid lens I haveseen. Their focal length is between the 30th and the50th of an inch. Mr. Vetch, of Inchbonny, has LikewiseSee Edinburgh Journal qfSetewXt N0.IIL p. 98.SS8 A rBBABM ON OPTICS. FABIIf-executed Bone admirable garnet lenses out of a GreeBlaaispecimen of that mineral given to me by Sir ChideGieseck^.(1970 ABinglemicroBCope, which occurred to me someyears ago, is shown in fig. 1 sand consists in a new methodof uavng a flemwpAerieo/ few to ax to Main from ittwice the magnifying power vihich it potie»»e» leben uted^the common way. If A B C is a hemispherical lens, njFig 157.issuing iron any olg'ect, R, willie refracted at the sintsurface A C, and, after total reflection at the plane nu-faceB C, will be gun refracted at the second snr&ceA B, and emei^ in parallel directions def, exactly iathe same manner as if they had not been reflected at thepoints a, b, e, but had passed through the other billB A' C of a perfect sphere A B A' C. The object M Rwill therefore be magnified in the same manner, and willbe seen with the same distinctness as if it had been seenthrough a sphere of glass A B A' C. We obtain, consequently,by this contrivance all the advantages of a lyricallens, which we believe never has been executed bygrinding. The periodic principle, which win presentlybe mentioned, may be communicated to this catoptriclens, as it may be called, by merely grinding off the anglesB C, or rough grinding an annular space on the pinesurface B C, The confusion arising from the oblique refractionwill thus be prevented, and the pencils fttmevery part of the olgect wil fall symmetrically upon flielens, and he symmetrically reacted.our. ZLI- IMFBOYED SIIfaLE Microscope. 339Before I had thought of this lens. Dr. Wollaston hadpnpoMd a method of improving lenses, which is shownj^ 158 in ^. 158. He introduced between twopUno-coDvex lenses of equal die andradius a plate of metal with a circularaperture equal to eth of the focal length,\ and when the aperture was well centered,I be found that the visible field waa 2<yn diameter. In this compound lens theoblique pencils pass, like the central ones,at right angles to the surface. If wecompare this lens with the catoplrie oneabove described, we shall see that the effect which is producedin the one case with two spherical and two planesurfaces, all ground separately, is produced in the otherease hy one spherical and one plane surface.(198-) The idea of Dr. Wollaston may, however, beimproved in other ways, by filling up the central aperturewith a cements the same refractive power as tbelenses, or,what is &r better, by takings sphere of glass and grindingaway the equatorial parts, ao as to limit the central over.tare, as shove in;^. l59-i ^ construction which, whenFig. 159. . ■" ■executed in garnet, accused in homogeneonsli^t, we conceiveto be the most perfect of all lenses, either for singlemicroscopes, or for the object lenses of compound ones.When a single microscope is used for opaque objects,the lens is placed within a concave salver speculum,which concentrates parallel or conversing rays upon theface of the object next the eye.340 A Treatise ON OPTICS. PART IT.Compound Microscopes.(199*) When a microscope consists of two or morelenses or specula one of which forms an enlarged imageof objects while the rest magnify that Image it is calleda compound microscope. The lenses, and the progress ofthe rays through them in such an instrument, are shownin fig. l60.y where A B is the object glass, and C D theFig. 160.Ameye glass. An object, M N, placed a little farther fromA B tian its principal focus, will have an enlarged imageof itself formed at m n in an inverted position. If tMsenlarged image is in die focus of another lens, C D, placednearer the* eye than in the figure, it will be again magnified,as if m n were an object. The magnifying effectof the lens A B is found by dividing the distance of theimage m n from the lens A B by the distance of die objectfrom the same lens ; and the magnifying effect of theeye glass C D is found by the rule for single microscopes;and these two numbers being multiplied together, will bethemagnifying power of the compound microscope. Thus,if M A is eth of an inch, and € n ^ an inch, {m n beingsupposed in the focus of C D,) the effect of the lens A Bwill be 20, and that of C D 10, and the whole power200^. A larger lens than any of the other two, calledthe field glass, and shown at £ F, is generally placed betweenA B and the image m n, for the purpose of enlargingthe field of view. It has the effect of diminishing themagnifying power of the instrument by forming a smallerimage at v u, w\:ac\i i^ Tcv«jgMfied by C D.The ingenuity oi ip^aVoso^et^ «si\ <ifl %x^QfiiQik\!iSi&VM3Lp. XLI. COMPOUND MICROSCOPES. 341ly exhausted in devising the hest forms of objectses and of eye glasses for the compound microscope.Coddington has recommended four lenses to be eyedin the eye piece of compound microscopes asm in. 161. ; and along with these he uses as anct glass, the sphere excavated at the equator as inl59-> for the purpose of reducing the aberration andFig. 161.version. '^ With a sphere' says he, '^ properly cuty at the centre, so as to reduce the aberration andversion to insensible quantities, which may be donet completely and most easily, as I have foimd in practicewhole image is perfectly distinct, whatever exodit be taken ; and the radius of curvature of itless than the focal length, so that the one difficultyentirely removed, and the other at least diminished tohalf. Besides all this, another advantage appears inticeto attend this construction, which I did not ',and for which I cannot now at all account I havem1 that when a pencil of rays is admitted into the eye,ch, having passed without deviation through a lens,went by the eye, the vision is never free from the coedfringes produced by eccentric dispersion. Now,1 the sphere I certainly do not perceive this defect,I therefore conceive that if it were possible to makespherical glass on a very minute scale, it would be thet perfect simple microscope, except, perhaps. Dr. Worm'sdoublet * * * Now, the sphere has this advan-i, that it is more peculiarly fitted for the object glassI compound instrument, since it gives a perfect distimage of any required extent, and that, when com-?d with a proper eye piece, it may miStwovjA. ^S&ssste^z 3342 A TBBAngB ON 0PTI08. part IT.be employed for opaque otQects."* The difficulty ofmaking die spherical glass on a Try minute scale, wychMr. Coddington here mention, and which is by no meaninsurmountable, is, I conceive, entirely removed by substitutinga hemisphere, as shown in. I£7->andconDtcC-ing the aperture in the manner there mentioned.Fig. 162,Dr.Wollaaton's microscopic doa-blotshown in fig. 162., consists oftwo plano-convex lenses m, n, withtheir plane aides turned towardsthe otgect. Their focal lengths arcas one to three, and their distancefrom 1-^ 10 1 j inch, the least conveybeing next the eye. The tubeis about dx inches long, having itita lower end, C D, a circular pa-formationabout-^^ of an inch in diameter; through which light radiatingfrom R is reflected by a planemirror a b below it. At the appalend of the tube is a plano-coDveilens A B, about J of an inch foci,with its plane side next the observer,the olgect of which ia toform a distinct image of the circularperforation at e, at the distance ofabout -^ of an inch from A B.With this instrument, Dr. Wollastonsaw the finest strJK and aerrvture upon the scales of the kpitmiand podura, and upon the scales of a gnat's wing.(200.) Double and triple achromatic lenses have beenrecently much used for the object glasses of microscopes,and two or three of them have been combined;but though they perform well they are very expence,and by no means superior to other instruments that areproperly CDnstrucied.f The power of using homagesea EdlAnrti Jo(,NaVUI.DCHAP* ZU. ON Reflecting MICROSCOPES. 34Snous lights indeed renders them in a great measureunnecessary especially as we can employ either of Mr.Herschel's double lenses shown in figs, 43. and 44.^ whichare entirely free of spherical aberration. One of thesefig. 44.^ has been executed ^^ of an inch focus with anaperture of-^3^ of an inch ; and Mr. Pritchard to whomit belongs informs us that it brings out all the testobjects and exhibits opaque ones with facility.In applying the compound microscope to the examinationof objects of natural history I have recommendedthe immersion of the object in a fluids for the purpose ofexpanding it and giving its minute parts their properposition and appearance. In order to render this methodperfect it is proper to immerse the anterior surfaceof the object glass in the same fluid which holds theobject ; and if we use a fluid of greater dispersive powerthan the object glass and accommodate the interior surfaceto the difference of their dispersive power, theobject glass may be made perfectly achromatic. Thesuperiority of such an instrument in viewing animalculeand the molecules of bodies noticed by Mr. Brown, doesnot require to be pointed out.On Reflecting Microscopes.(201 .) The simplest of all reflecting microscopes is aconcave mirror, in which the face of the observer isalways magnified when its focus is more remote thanthe (Server. When the mirror is very concave, a smallobject m n, fig. 14., will have a magnified picture of itformed at M N ; and when this picture is viewed by theeye, we have a single reflecting microscope, which magnifiesas many times as the distance A«n of the objectfrom the mirror is contained in the distance A M of theimage.But if, instead of viewing M N with the naked eye,we magnify it with a lens, we convert the simple reflectingmicroscope into a compound reflecting microscope,composed of a mirror and a lens. This microscope wasz 4544 A TRBATIBB ON OPTIGB. PAST IT.first proposed by Sir Isaac Newton; and after being kngin disuse has been revived in an improved form by professorAmici of Modena. He made use of a concaveellipsoidal reflector whose focal distance was 2 j^ inches.The image is formed in the other focus of the ellipse,and this image is magnified by a single or double eyepieceeight inches from the reflector. As it is impracticableto illuminate the object m n when situated as infig. 14i., professor Amici placed it without the tube orbelow the line B N^ and introduced it into the speculumA B by reflection from a small plane speculum placedbetween m n and A B^ and having its diameter abouthalf that of A B.Dr. Goring to whom microscopes of aU kinds owe somany improvements has greatly improved this instrument.He uses a small plane speculum less than ^ ofthe diameter of the concave speculum and employs thefollowing specula of very short focal distances : —distance in inchesAperture in inches.1-50-61-00-30-60-30-30*3That ingenious artist Mr. Cuthbert, who executedthese improvements, has more recently, under Dr.Goring's direction, finished truly elliptical specula,whose aperture is equal to their focal length. This hehas done with specula having half an inch focus andhalf an inch aperture, and three tenths of an inch focusand three tenths of an inch aperture. Dr. Goring assuresus that this microscope exhibited a set of longitudinallines on the scales of the podura in addition to thetwo sets of diagonal ones previously discovered, and twosets of diagonal lines on the scales of the cabbage butterflyin addition to the longitudinal ones with the crossstripe, hitherto observed.*• See Edinburgh Journal cf Science, "^oAV. tail writes, p. aSLtaiT. XU. mOKOSOOPIO 0BBEBTAII0N8. 345On Test Ot^eeU.(SOS.) Dr. Goring has the merit of having introducedthe use of test tecta, or objects whose textureor markings required a certain excellence in the microscopeto be well seen. A few of these are shown iiE the hair of the mons. The most difficult of all thelest oI^eclH are those in the ecaleti of the podura and(be cabbage butterfly mentioned lore.Suies.for miatucopU! C^tervatiom.(203.) 1. The eye should be protected Avm all extraneouslight, and should not receive any of the light- which proceeds from the illuminating centre, exceptingwhat U transmitted through or reflected from the object.S. Delicate observations should not be made when thefluid which lubricates the cornea is in a viscid state.8. The best position for microscopical observationis when the observer is lying horizontally on hia back.This arises from the perfect stability of hia head, andfrom the equality of the lubricating film of fluid whichcovers the cornea. The worst of all positions is that inwhich we look downwards vertically.4. If we stand straight up and look \uin'usM»&'},pttaiUd musings or lines will be teen mmX-ckxIck&i346 A TREATISE ON 0PTI08. PART IT*when their direction is vertical; viz. the direction inwhich the fabricating fluid descends over the cornea.5. Every part of the object should be excluded, exceptthat which ii under immediate observation.6. The light which illuminates the object shouldhave a very small diameter. In the day-time it shouldbe a single hole in the window-shutter of a darkenedroom, and at nigh( an aperture placed before an Argandlamp.7. In all cases, particularly when high powers areused, the natural diameter of the illuminating lightshould be diminished, and its intensity increased, byoptical contrivances.8. In every case of microscopical observations, homogeneousyellow light, procured from a monochromaticlamp, should be employed. Homogeneous red lightmay be obtained by coloured glasses. *Solar Microscope,(204.) The solar microscope is nothing more than amagic lantern, the light of the sun being used instead ofthat of a lamp. The tube A B, fig. 153^ is inserted in /a hole in the window-shutter, and the sun's light reflectedinto it by a long plane piece of looking-glass, which theobserver can turn round to keep the light in the tube asthe sun moves through the heavens.Living objects, or objects of natural history, are putupon a glass slider, or stuck on the point of a needle,and introduced into the opening C D, so as to be illuminatedby the sun's rays concentrated by the lens A.An enlarged and brilliant image of the object will thenbe formed on the screen E F.Those who wish to see the various external forms ofmicroscopes of all kinds, and the different modes ofputting them up, are referred to the article Microscope,in the Edinburgh Encyclopedia, vol. xiv. p. 215 — 233.In the latest work on the microscope, viz. Dr. GrowingSee tile article Microscope, Edinburgh Enctfcbquettia, yoL xiv. pi SS8LCHAP. XLn. ASTRONOSaCAIi TELESCOPE. 347.and Mr. Pritchard ^' Microscopical Illustrations"London 1830^ the reader will find much valuable andinteresting information.CHAP. XLII.ON REFRACTING AND Reflecting TELESCOPES.Astronomical Telescope,(205.) That the telescope was invented in the thirteenthcentury and perfectly known to Roger Bacon and thatit was used in England by Leonard and Thomas Diggesbefore the time of Jansen or Galileo can scarcely admitof a doubt. The principle of the refracting telescopeand the method of computing its magnifying powerhave been already explained. We shall therefore proceedto describe the different forms which it successivelyassumed.The astronomical telescope is represented in fig, l64.B DIt consists of two convex lenses A B, C D, the formerof which is called the object - glass, from being nextthe object MN, and the latter the eye glass, fromits being next the eye E. The object glass is a lenswith a long focal distance ; and the eye glass is one ofa short focal distance. Aji inverted image mn of anydistant object M N is formed in the focus of the objectglass A B ; and this image is magnified by the eye glassC D, in whose anterior focus it is placed. By tracingthe rays through the two lenses, it will be seen thatthey enter the eye E parallel. If the object M N isnear the observer, the image m n will be found at agreater distance from A B ; and the eye glass C D must348 A TBBATI8B ON OPTICS. part lY.be drawn out from A B to obtain distinct vision of theimage mn. Hence it is usual to fix the object glassA B at the end of a tube longer than its focal distanceand to place the eye glass C D in a small tube calleth theeye tube which will slide out of and into the largertube for the purpose of adjusting it to objects at differentdistances. The magnifying power of this telescopeis equal to the focal length of the object glass divided bythe focal length of the eye glass.Telescopes of this construction were made by campaniaDivini and Huygens of the enormous length of120 and 136 feet ; and it was with instruments 12 and24 feet long that Huygens discovered the ring and diefourth satellite of Saturn. In order to use object glassesof such great focal lengths without the incumbrance oftubes Huygens placed the object glass in a short takeat the top of a very long pole so that the tube could beturned in every possible direction upon a ball and socketby means of a stringy and brought into the same linewith another short tube containing the eye glass whichhe held in his hand.As these telescopes were liable to all the imperfectionsarising from the aberration of refrangibility and thatof spherical figure they could not show objects distinctlywhen the aperture of the object glass was great; andon this account their magnifying power was limited.Huygens found that the following were the proper proportions: —Focal length of theolivet gulfs.Aperture of theobject glass.Focal length of theere glass.Magni^iiiy1 ft.0*545 inches.0*6050-941-0433i1-211-331-71 •1-883-844-205-405-955-906-52In the astronomical telescope the object m n> is alwaysseen inverted.Chap. JJJl,GALILEAN TELESCOPE.84^9Terrestrial Telescope.(206.) In order to accommodate this telescope to landobjects which require to be seen erect the instrument isconstructed as in fig. l65.^ which is the same as theFig. 165.preceding one with the addition of two lenses E F^GH^ which have the same focal length as Cd andare placed at distances equal to double their commonfocal length. If the focal lengths are not equal, thedistance of any two of them must be equal to the sumof their focal lengths. In this telescope the progress ofthe rays is exactly the same as in the astronomical oneas far as L, where the two pencils of parallel rays C li,DL cross in the anterior focus L of the second eyeglassE F. These rays falling on E F form in its principalfocus an erect image n' m!, which is seen erect bythe third eye glass G H, as the rays diverging from n! andm} in the focus of G H enter the eye in parallel pencilsat £. The magnifying power of this telescope ik the sameas that of the former when the eye glasses are equal.Galilean Telescope,(207.) This telescope, which is the one used by Galileo,differs in nothing from the astronomical telescope,excepting in a concave eye glass CD, fig, l6b\ beingFig, 166.substituted for the convex one. The concave lensD is placed between the image m n and the objectglass so that the imsi/gid is in the pimcv^aX ioc^>& ^^▲ TRXATUB €Br ffPTICS.PART It.the lens. The pencils of rays ABn ABm. fall uponC D, converging to its principal focus and will thereforebe refracted into parallel lines which will estateeye at E^ and give distinct vision of the object.The magnifying power of this telescope is found by &esame rule as that for the astronomical telescope: itgives a smaller and less agreeable field of view than theastronomical telescope but it has the advantage ofshowing the object erect and of giving more distinctvision of it.Gregorian Reflecting Telescope,(208.) Father Zucchius seems to have been the firstperson who magnified objects by means of a lens and aconcave speculum ; but there is no evidence that he constructeda reflecting telescope with a small speculum.James Gregory was the first who described the constructionof this instrument but he does not seem tohave executed one; and the honour of doing this with hisown hands was reserved for Sir Isaac Newton.The Gregorian telescope is shown in fig, l&J,,where AB is a concave metallic speculum with aFig. 167.hole in its centre. For very remote objects the curve ofthe speculum should be a parabola. For nearer ones itshould be an ellipse in whose farther focus i» ^e objectand in whose nearer focus is the image; and in boththese cases the speculum would be free from sphericalaberration. But as these curves cannot be communicatedwith certainty to specula opticians are satisfiedwi giving to them a correct spherical figure. In frontGap. Xli. OBEOOBIAN Telescope* 551of the large speculum is placed a small concave one C D^which can be moved nearer to and farther from the largespeculum by means of the screw W at the side of thetube. This speculum should have its curvature an ellipse,though it is generally made spherical. An eyepiececonsisting of two convex lenses, £, F, placed at adistance equal to half the sum of their focal lengths, isscrewed into the tube immediately behind the great speculumAb, and permanently fixed in that position. Ifrays MA, N B, issuing nearly parallel from the extremitiesM and N of a distant object, fall upon the speculumA B, they will form an inverted image of it at mnas more distinctly shown in Jig, 14.If this image mn is farther from the small speculumCD than its principal focus, an inverted image of it,fr n\ or an erect image of the real object, since m n isitself an inverted one, will be formed somewhere betweenand F, the rays passing through the opening in thespeculum. This image m if might have been viewedand magnified by a convex eye glass at F, but it is preferableto receive the converging rays upon a lens £called the field glass, which hastens their convergence, andforms the image of m n in the focus of the lens F, bywhich they are magnified ; or, what is tie same thing,the pencils diverging from the image vri n' are refractedby F, so as to enter the eye parallel, and give distinctvision of the image. If the object M N is broughtnearer the speculum A B, the image of it, m n, will recedefrom A B and approach to C D ; and, consequently,the over image vri n' in the conjugate focus of C D willrecede from its place vfikti y and cease to be seen distinctly.In order to restore it to its place ml n', we have only toturn the screw W, so as to remove CD farther from AB,and consequently farther from m n, which will cause theimage m n' to appear perfectly distinct as before. Themagnifying power of this telescope may be found by thefollowing rule : —Multiply the focal distance of the great speculum bythe distiuice of the small mirror from the image next the▲ TREATISE ON OPTIOS.VABTH.eye, as fanned in the anterior focus of the convex eyeglass and multiply also the focal distance of the smallspeculum by the focal distance of the eye glass. Thequotient arising from dividing the former product by thelatter will be the magnifying power.This rule supposes the eye-piece to consist of a singlelens.The following table showing the focal lengths, i^-tress powers and prices of some of Short's telescopes,will eidiibit die great superiority of reflecting telescopesto refracting ones :•—Focal lengthiinfteCMagnifying powcn.Pticeiagn]:35 to 1004-590 3006*3100 4007-6120 50012-2200 800300 1200Cassegrainian Telescope.(209.) The Cassegrainian telescope, proposed by M.Cassegrain, a Frenchman, differs from the Gregorian onlyin having its small speculum CD, fig. les., convex insteadof concave, she speculum is therefore placed beforeFig. 168.the image mno{ the object M N, and an erect image ofM' N will be formed at m' n' between E and F exactly asii the Gregorian instrument. The advantage of thisform is, that the telescope is shorter than the Grecianby more than twice the focal length of the small speculum;and it is generally admitted that it gives more light, andCHAP. XLII. NEWTONIAN TELESCOPE. 353a distinct image in consequence of the convex speculumcorrecting the aberration of the concave one.Newtonian Telescope,(210.) The Newtonian telescope, which may be regardedas an improvement upon the Gregorian one, is representedin^^. \69'y where AB is a concave speculum,and m n the inverted image which it forms of the objectFig. 169.A Cfrom which the rays Men proceed. As it is impossibleto introduce the eye into the tube to magnify this imagewithout obstructing the light which comes from the object,a small plane speculum C D, inclined 45° to theaxis of the large speculum, and of an oval form, its axesbeing to one another as 7 to 5, is placed between the speculumand the image m n, in order to reflect it to a sideat mfn^y so that we can magnify it with an eye glass E,which causes the rays to enter the eye parallel. The smallmirror is fixed upon a slender arm, connected with aslide, by which the mirror may be made to approach toor recede from the large speculum AB, according as theimage m n approaches to or recedes from it. This adjustmentmight also be effected by moving the eye lens E to crfrom the small speculum. The magnifying power of thistelescope is equal to the focal length of the great speculumdivided by that of the eye glass.As about half of the light is lost in metallic reflexions,sir Isaac Newton proposed to substitute, in place of themetallic speculum, a rectangular prism ABC, fig. 148.,in which ^e light suffers total reflexion. For this purpose,however, the glass required to be perfectly colourA85^ A Treatise OX OPTICS. part HF*less and free of veins and hence such a prism has almostnever been used. Sir Isaac also proposed to make thetwo faces of the prism convex as D E F^ Jig, 148.^ andby placing it between the image m n and the object henot only erected the image but was enabled to vary themagnifying power of the telescope. The original telescopesconstructed by sir Isaac's own hands is preservedin the library of the Royal Society.The following table shows the dimensions of Newtoniantelescopes which we have computed by taking afine telescope made by Hawksbee as a standard: —1 ft. 2*23 inches. 0*129 inches. 932 3-79 0-152 1583 5-14 0-168 2144 6.36 0-181 2656 8-64 0-200 36012 14-50 0-238 60424 24-41 0-283 1017(211.) On account of the great loss of light in metallicreflexion which according to the accurate experimentsof Mr. Reporters amounts to 45 rays in every 100^at an incidence of 45°*, and the imperfections of reflexion,which even with perfect surfaces makes the raysstray eve or six times more than the same imperfectionsin refracting surfaces, I have proposed to construct theNewtonian telescope, as shown in fig. 170., where ABis the concave speculum, m n the image of the object)M N and C D an achromatic prism, which refracts theFig. 170.image m n into an oblique position, so that it can beviewed by the e^e aX 'E* ^twjl^ ^ m&^fying Icn**^* £(ftn&urgh Jot«mal <tf Sc*e*ce,"^o.N\.»T«?n %R!6ses^vSG5^Craft. Xiill. SIB V< HGBSCBBl's Telescope. 355Nothing mort is required by the prism than to turnIfe n^« as much aside as will enable tibe observer tosee the image witiiiOHt obstructing the rays from the•l^eeC M N. As the prisms of crown and flint glasswhich compose the achromatic priam may be cementedby a substance of intermediate refractive power no morelight win be k>8t than what is reflected at the two surfaces.In place of setting the small speculum C D^ of theNewtonian tdesoope^ Jig. 169^ ^ ^5° 9 to the incidentrays I have pressed to place it much more obliquityso as to reflect the image m n,fy^ 170.^ out of the wayof the observer and no farther. This would of courserequire a plane speculum, C D, of much greater length ;bat the greater obliquity of die reflexion would moresan compensate for this inconvenience. It might beadvisable, indeed, to use a small speculum of dark glass,of a high refractive power, which at great incidencereflects as much light as metals, and which is capable ofbeii^ brought to a much finer surface. The fine surfacesof some crystals, such as ruby silver, oxide of tin,or diamond, might.be used.A Newtonian reflector, ioUbau/t an eye glass, may bemade by using a reflecting glass prism, with one or bothof its surfaces concave, when the prism is placed betweenthe image m n and the great speculum, so as to reflectthe tvyt parallel to the eye. The magnifying powerynSi be equal to the focal length of the great speculum,divided by the radius of the concave surface of the^sm if both the surfaces are concave, and of equal<^noavity, or by twice the radius, if only one surface isconcave.Sir WUHam HerseheVs Telescope.(212.) The fine Gregorian telescopes executed byShort were so superior to any other reflectors that theNewtonian form of the instrument fell into disuse.It was revived, however, by sir W. HewtSa!^, 's^Vcswfclabours form the most brilliant epoch in o^Xic-aX. ^cvssw»*AA 2856 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. • part it*With an ardour never before exhibited he constructedno fewer than 200 seven feet Newtonian reflectors, 150ten feet and 80 twenty feet in focal length. Buthis zeal did not stop here. Under the magnificentpatronage of George III., he began in 1785^ to constructa telescope forty feet long, and on the 27th ofAugust 1789^ the day on which it was completed hediscovered with it the sixth satellite of Satin.The great speculum had a diameter of 49^ inchesbut its concave surface was only 48 inches. Its thicknessis about 3^ inches, and its weight when cast was2118 lbs. Its focal length is forty feet, and the lengthof the sheet iron tube which contained it was 39 feet6 inches, and its breadth 4 feet 10 inches. By usingsmall convex lenses Dr. Herschel was enabled to applya power of 6450 to the fixed stars but a very muchlower power was in general used.In diis telescope the observer sat at the 'mouth of dietube, and observed by what is called the front vieux,with his back to the object, without using a plane speculum,the eye lens being applied directly to magnify theimage formed by the great speculum. In order to preventthe head, ^c. from obstructing too much of theincident light, the image was formed out of the axis ofthe speculum and must therefore, have been slightlydistorted.As the frame of this instrument was exposed to theweather, it had greatly decayed. It was, therefore,taken down, and another telescope, of 20 feet focus,with a speculum 18 inches in diameter, was erected inits place, in 1822, by J. F. W. Herschel, Esq., withwhich many important observations have been made.Mr. Ramage's Telescope,(213.) Mr. Ramage, of Aberdeen, has constructedvarious Newtonian telescopes, of great lengths and highpowers. The largest instrument at present in use inthis country, and we \^\e;N^ Voi ^xno^) was contractedby him, and erected aX. \ke ^orj^X C^Xs^eLH^Xarj ^^.^^sms^-^Olaf. Xli. ON Achromatic Telescopes. 357wich in 1820. The great speculum has a focal lengthof 25 feet and a diameter of 1 5 inches. The image isformed out of the axis of the speculum which is inclinedfio as to throw it just to the side of the tubewhere the observer can view it without obstructing theincident rays. The tube is a 12-sided prism of dealand when the instrument is not in use it is lowered intoa box and covered with canvas. The apparatus formoving and directing the telescope is extremely simpleand displays much ingenuity.CHAP. XliiON ACHROMATIC TELESCOPES.(214) The principle of the achromatic telescope hasbeen briefly explained in Chap. VII., and we have thereshown how a convex lens, combined with a concave lensof a longer focus, and having a higher refractive anddispersive power, may produce refraction without colour,and consequently form an image free of the primaryprismatic colours. It has been demonstrated mathematically,and the reader may convince himself of its truthby actually tracing the rays through the lenses, that aconvex and a concave lens will form an achromatic combination,or will give a colourless image, when theirfocal lengths are in the same proportion as their dispersivepotters. That is, if the dispersive power ofcrown and flint glass are as 0*60 to 1, or 6 to 10; thenan achromatic object glass could be formed by combininga convex crown glass lens of 6, or 60, or 600inches with a concave flint glass lens of 10, or 100, or1000 inches in focal length.But though such a combination would form an imagefree of colour, it would not be free of spherical aberration,which can only be removed b'j ^V^m^ ^ Y^<2J^'Etproportion to the curvatures of the ftT«.taii^\'asX.«vxtl^^ifc>▲ A 3S5Bor the two outer Rur&ces of the compound laid. Mr.Ha- 'schel has found that » double object sais trill be nearijfree from aberration, provided the iuUhb «f the extentsurface of the crown leon be &72, and of the flint 14^,the focal length of the combination beii^ lO'OOO, udthe radii of the interior sorfaeca being computed fromthese data by the fomiulE given in dcmentarr wm'kaon optics, bo aa to make the focal lengths of the twoglasses in the direct raro of their dispersive powers.This combination is shown in fig. 171-, where AB iiJ^. Ti. ^^ convex len of crown glass, placed on theoutside towards the object, and C D the tes of flint glass placed towardsthe eye. The two inside surfaces that comein contact are so nearly of the Game curvaturethat they may be ground on the same tool,and united together by a cement to preventthe loss of light at the two surfaces.In the double achromatic olgect glatMsconstructed previous to the publication ofMr. Herschel's investigations, the surface atthe concave lens next the eye was, we believe.Triple achromatic object glasses consist of three lenses-3 AB, CD, EF, fig. 172., AB and B FE being convex lenses of crown glass, and C Da double concave lens of flint glass.The object of using three lenses was U\ obtain a better correction of the spherical\ aberration ; but the greater complexity oftheir construction, the greater risk of perfect canting, or of the axes of the threeI lenses not being in the same strait line,together with the loss of light at mx surfaces,have been considered as more iotacompensating their advantages; and they3 D F have according fallen into disuse.The following were tie iad\\ of two triple achromaticobject glasseS) as coBBtcacWii \i^ TWiaiA.". —Bail ZUII. Oir Achromatic TELESCOPES. 359A B, or first Crown Lens.First OBJECT GLASS. SECOND OBJECT GLASS.Radii of first surface, - 28 inches - - 28^— second surface, 40 - - 35 '5C D, or Flint Lens.Radii of first surface, 20*9 - - 21*1— second surface, 28 - - - 25*75F, or second Crown Lens.Radii of first surface, 28-4 . 28^ second surface, 28*4 - - - 28Focal length of the compoundlens . 46 inches - - 46*3In consequence of the great difficulty of obtainingflint glass free of veins and imperfections the largestachromatic object glasses constructed in England did notgreatly exceed 4 or 5 inches in diameter. The neglectinto which unimportant branch of our national manufactureswas allowed to fall by the ignorance and supinenessof the British government stimulated foreigners torival us in the manufacture of achromatic telescopes.M. Gurnard of Brenetz^ in Switzerland and M. Fraunhofer,of Munich, successively devoted their minds tothe subject of making large lenses of flint glass and bothof them succeeded. Before his deaths M. Fraunhoferexecuted two telescopes with achromatic object-glassesof 9 u) inches and 12 inches in diameter ; and he informedme that he would undertake to execute one 18inches in diameter. The first of these object glasses wasfor the magnificent achromatic telescope ordered by theemperor of Russia for the observatory at IJorpat. Theobject glass was a double one and its focal length was25 feet ; it was mounted on a metallic stand whichweighed 5000 Russian pounds. The telescope could bemoved by the slightest force in any direction all themoveable parts being balanced by counter weights. Ithad four eye glasses, the lowest of wMdiTft»."gMfi«^V\^,and the highest 700 times. Ita "inca 'w^a \^Qi^\.>\s^A. A. 4s360 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PART I?.it was liberally given at prime cost or 9^0/. The objectglass 12 inches in diameter was made for the kingof Bavaria at the price of 27^01, ; but as it was notperfectly complete at the time of Fraunhofer's deaths wedo not know that it is at present in use. In the handsof that able observer professor Strove, the telescope ofDorpat has already made many important discoveries inastronomy.A French optician we believe, M. Lerebours, hasmore recently executed two achromatic object glasses ofglass made by Gurnard. One of them is nearly 12inches in diameter, and another above IS inches. Thefirst of these object glasses was mounted as a telescopeat the Royal Observatory of Paris; and the French governmenthad expended 500/. in the purchase of a standfor it, but had not the liberality to purchase the objectglass, itself. Sir James South, our liberal and activecountryman, saw the value of the two object glasses,and acquired them for his observatory at Kensington.ON ACHROMATIC EYEPIECES.(215.) Achromatic eye pieces when one lens onlyis wanted, may be composed of two or three lensesexactly on the same principles as object glasses. Sucheye pieces, however, are never used, because the colourcan be corrected in a superior manner, by a proper arrangementof single lenses of the same kind of glass.This arrangement is shown in^^. 173., where AB andC D are two plano-convex lenses, AB being theone next the object glass, and CD the one nextthe eye, a ray of wUleli^lit B. A, proceeding from theachromatic object glass, Vil >a^ xeiTwsXfc^Vj k.'^ ^ k^42HAP. Xlii. ON ACHROMATIC TELESCOPES. 36lSO that the red ray A r crosses the axis at r, and theviolet ray A v at v. But these rays being intercepted bythe second lens C D at the points m^ n, at different distancesfrom the axis, will suffer different degrees of refraction.The red ray m r suffering a greater refractionthan the violet one n v, notwithstanding its inferiorrefrangibUity, so that the two rays will emerge parallelfrom the lens C D (and therefore he colourless) asshown at tw /, w v\When these two lenses are made of crown glass, theymust be placed at a distance equal to half the sum oftheir focal lengths, or, what is more accurate, their distancemust be equal to half the sum of the focal distance,of the eye glass C D, and the distance at which thefield glass A B would form an image of the object glassof the telescope. This eyepiece is called the negativeeyepiece. The stop or diaphragm must be placed halfwaybetween the two lenses. The focal length of anequivalent lens, or one that has the same magnifyingpower as the eyepiece, is equal to twice the product of thefocal lengths of the two lenses divided by the sum ofthe same numbers.An eyepeice nearly achromatic, called Ramsden'sEyepiece, and much used in transit instruments andtelescopes with micrometers, is shown in fig. 174.,Fig. 174. where A B, CD, are twoplano-convex lenses vriththeir convex sides inwards.They have the same focallength, and are placedat a distance from eachother, equal to two-thirds of'b the focal length of either.The focal length of an equivalent lens is equal to three-fourthsthe focal length of either lens. The use of thiseyepiece is to give a flat field, or a distinct view of asystem of wires placed at M N. This eyepiece is notquite achromatic, and it might be lendete^ Tcvat^ ^.a \s^increasing the distance of the lenses ; \xuX «& ^5D^» ^w^^A Beans ON OPTICS.PlBT Tf»require the wires at M N to be brought nearer A B^ anyparticles of dust or imperfections in the lens A B wouldbe seen magnified by the lens C D.t The erecting achromatic eyepiece now in uniyeisiluse in all achromatic telescopes for land objects is shownin fig. 175. It consists of four lenses A^ C^ D, B, placedas in the figure. Mr. Coddington has shown that ifFig, 175.{First surfaceSecond surfacep f First surface\ Second surface-p. r First surface1^ Second surfaceT, r First surface^1lo-convex.10-conyex.the focal lengths, reckoning from A, are as the numbers3f As, 4 and 3, and the distances between them on diesame scale 4i, 6, and 5, 2.^ the radii reckoning hornthe outer surface of A^ should be thus : — >V nearly planey a menseg. j- nearly planeSecond surface 24 } ^^'"^^^ ^°'^^^^-The magnifying power of this eyepiece, as usoaUymade, differs little from what would be produced byusing the first or fourth lens alone. I have shown, thatthe magnifying pOwer of this eyepiece may be increasedor diminished by varying the distance between C and D,which even in common eye pieces of this kind may bedone, as A and C are placed in one tube A C, and Dand B in another tube D B, so that the latter can bedrawn out of the general tube. In fig, 175. I haveshown the eyepiece constructed in this way, and capableof having its two parts separated by a screw nut £,and rack. TYd^ cowtnNVcic)e; ^^ ^\«);n^^ a variablemagnifying po-wex, wv co\iafc«^«oSi^'^ ^ ^e^«i:i&ss%^QKAF. Sun. <Hr Achromatic Telescopes. Sesreally a pair of wires fixed before the eye glass I communicatedto Mr. Carey in 1805, and had one of theinstruments constructed by Mr. Die in 1806. It isfully described in my Treatise on Philosophical Instruments,and has been more recently brought out as a newintention by Dr. Kitchener, under the name of thePancreatic Eye Tube,Prism Telescope.(216.) In 1812, I showed that colourless refractionmay be produced by combining two prisms of the samesubstance, and the experiments which led to this resultwere published in my Treatise on New PhilosophicalInstruments in 1815. The practical purposes toniiich this singular principle seemed to be applicablewere the construction of an achromatic telescope withlenses of the sure glass, and the construction of aTelescope, for extending or altering the lineal proportionsof objects.If we take a prism, and hold its refracting edgedownwards and horizontal, so as to see through it oneof the panes of glass in a window, there will be founda position, namely, that in which the rays enter theprism and emerge from it at equal angles, ^s in^^. 20.,where the square pane of glass is of its natured size.If we turn the refracting edge towards the window, thepane will be extended or magnified in its length* orvertical direction, while its breadth remains the same.If we now take the same prism and hold its refractingedge vertically, we shall find, by the same process, thatthe pane of glass is extended or magnified in breadth.If two such prisms, therefore, are combined in thesepositions, so as to magnify the same both in length andbreadth, we have a telescope composed of two prisms, butunfortunately the objects are all highly fringed with theprismatic colours. We may correct these colours in threeways : 1st, We may make the prisms of a kind of glasswhich obstructs all the rays but those oi otv^ V^csisiswigneous colour; or, we may use a piece o£ liXxe «axa^ ^%&364 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PART IV.to absorb the other rays when two common glass prismsare used : 2d, We may use achromatic prisms in placeof common prisms : or 3d, What is best of all forcommon purposes we may place other two prismsexactly similar but in reverse positions or they may beplaced as shown in. I76. which represents the prismtelescope; AB and AC being two prisms of the samekind of glass and of the same refracting angles withtheir planes of refraction vertical and Ed EF^ othertwo perfectly similar prisms similarly placed but withtheir planes of refraction horizontal. A ray of ligfat^Ma, from an object M^ enters the first prism EF^ ata, emerges from the second prism E D^ at b, enters thethird prism AC, at c, emerges from the fourth prism,AB, at d, and enters the eye at O. The object, M, isextended or magnified horizontally by each of the twoprisms, EF, ED, and vertically by each of the twoprisms, AB, AC ; objects are diminished by lookingthrough the prisms.This instrument was made in Scotland by the writerof this Treatise, under the name of a Stethoscope, andalso by Dr. Blair, before it was proposed or executed byprofessor Amici of Modena. Dr. Blair's model is nowbefore me, being composed of four prisms of plate glasswith refracting angles of about 15°. It was presentedto me two years ago by his son ; but as no account ofit was ever published, Mr. Blair could not determinethe date of its construction.In constructing this instrument, the perfect equalityof the four prisms is wow, iafetfes?ax'«j. It jill be sufficientif AB and DB ate e«^«2L, «a^ K.^ wv^^^:^ ,^CHAP. XLIII. ON ACHROMATIC TELESCOPES. SGSthe colour of the one prism can be made to correct thatof the other by a change in its position. For the samereason it is not necessary that they be all made of thesame kind of glass.Achromatic Opera Glasses with Single Lenses.(217>) M. d'Alembert has long ago shown that anachromatic telescope may be constructed with a singleobject glass and a single eye glass of different refractiveand dispersive powers. To effect this the eye glassmust be concave and be made of glass of a muchhigher dispersive power than that of which the objectglass is made ; but the proposal was quite Utopian atthe time it was suggested, as substances with a sufficientdifference of dispersive power were not thenknown. Even now the principle can be applied only toopera glasses.If we use an object glass of very low dispersivepower, the refraction of the violet rays may be correctedby a concave eye lens of a high dispersive power,as will be seen by the following table.Magnifyingpower.HAlthough all the rays are made to enter the eyeparallel in these combinations, yet the correction ofcolour is not satisfactory.Mr. Barrows Achromatic Telescope.(218.) In the year 1813 I discovered the remarkabledispersive power of sulphuret of carbon, having foundthat it "exceeds all fluid bodies in refractive power,surpassing even flint glass, topaz, and tourmaline ; andthat in dispersive power it exceeds every ftx)i"&L «Q5a«\askRfeObject glassmade ofEyeglassmade ofCrown glassFlint glassWaterOil of cassiaRock crystalFlint glassRock crystalOil of aniseseedCrown glassOil of cassiaRock crystalOil of cassiaSS6 A TmsATfiSE OK Optics. PAsrn.except oil of cassia holding an intermediate place be*tween phosphorus and balsam of tola. * * * Alltoigkoil of cassia surpasses the suljAiaret of carbmi in itspower of dispersion jet from the yellow colour vidiwhich it is tinged it is greatly inferior to the latter asan optical fluids unless in cases where a very llun concavelens is required The extreme volatility of diesulphuret is undoubtedly a disadvantage; but as thisvolatility may be restrained we have no hesitation inconsidering the sulphuret of carbon as a fluid qf greatvalue in optical researches, and which may be qf incalculableservice in the construction qf optical instruments"*This anticipation has been realised by Mr.Barlow who has employed sulphuret of carbon as asubstitute for flint glass in correcting the dispersion ofthe convex lens. It had been proposed and the experimenteven tried to place the concave lens betweenthe convex one and its focus for the purpose of correctingthe dispersion of the convex lens with a I^s of lessdiameter, but Mr. Barlow has the merit of having firstcarried this into effect.The telescope which he has made on this principle,consists of a single object lens of plate glass, 7*8inches in clear aperture, with a focal length of 78 inches.At the distance of 4«0 inches from this lens was placeda concave lens of sulphuret of carbon, with a focallength of 59*8 inches, so that parallel rays falling onthe convex plate lens, and converging to its focus, would,when refracted by the fluid concave lens, have theirfocus at the distance of 104 inches from the fluid lens,and 144 inches, or 12 feet, from the plate glass lens.The fluid is contained between two meniscus cheeks,and a glass ring, so that the radius of the concave fluidlens is 144 inches towards the eye, and 56*4 towardsthe object lens. The fluid is put in at a high temperature,and the contraction which it experiences in coolingis said to keep every thing perfectly tight. No demonthe Optical PTODeTl\e& ot ^\A\2\v\xx«\. ^ C«x\a>ti^ la Edinbiirdirra«A voLviil p.285. f€b.l.\%\AuCRAP. Clin. OK AOHBOBIATIO TELESCOPES. 36?position of the fluid has yet been observed. The greatsecondary spectrum which I found to exist in sulphuretof carbon is approximately corrected by the distance ofthe fluid lens from the object glass ; but we are persuadedthat it is not free from secondary colour. Mr.Coddington ranarks^ that the general course of anoblique pencil is bent outward by the fluid lens andthe violet rays more than the red so as to produce indistinctness; but we are not aware that this defect wasobserved in the instrument. The tube of the telescopeis 11 feet, and the eye pieces one foot. 'the telescopes'says Mr. Barlow '' bears a power of 700 onthe closest double stars in Soothes and Herschel's catalogue,although the field is not then so bright as Iwould desire. Venus is beautifully white and well definedwith a power of 120, but shows some colour with360. Saturn, with the 12Q power, is a very brilliantobject, the double ring and belts being well and satisfactorilydefined, and with the 360 power it is stillvery fine." Mr. Barlow remarks, also, fiat the telescopeis not so competent to the opening of the close stars,as it is powerful in bringing to light the more minuteluminous points.Achromatic Solar Telescopes with single Senses.(219*) An achromatic telescope for viewing the sunor any highly luminous object may be constructed byusing a single object glass of plate glass ; and by makingany one of the eye glasses out of a piece of glass whichtransmits only homogeneous light: or the same thingmay be effected by a piece of plane-glass of the samecolour ; but this introduces the errors of other two surfaces.In such a construction it would be preferable toabsorb all the rays but the red ; and there are varioussubstances by which this i^ay be readily effected. Theobject glass of this telescope, though thus renderedmonochromatic, will still be liable to spherical aberration.But if the radii of the lens are properly ad^ustftd, ^<bexcess of solar light will permit us to ^loioi^ ^^ «:^-368 A TREATISE ON OPTICS. PAST IT.ture so as to render the spherical aberration almostimperceptible. Such a telescopes when made of a greatlengthy would we are persuaded be equal to any instrumentthat has yet been directed to the sun. If wecould obtain a solid or a fluid which would absorb allthe other rays of the spectrum but the yellow with aslittle loss as there is in red glasses a telescope of thepreceding construction would answer for day objectsand for all the purposes of astronomy. If ^e art ofgiving lenses a hyperbolic form shall be brought to per-sections which we have no doubt will yet be done thespherical aberration would disappear; and a telescopeupon this principle would be the most perfect of aflinstruments.Even by using red light only a great improvementmight be effected in the common telescopes for day objectsand for astronomical purposes. If the red rays,for examples form-f^th of white light, we have only toincrease the area of the aperture 10 times to make upcompletely for this defect of light. The spherical aberrationis no doubt, greatly increased also: but if weconsider that, when compared to the aberration of colour,it is only as 1 to 1200, we can afford to increase it inorder to gain so great an advantage. Common telescopes,indeed, may be considerably improved by applyingcoloured glasses, which absorb only the extreme rays ofthe spectrum, even though they do not produce anachromatic or homogeneous image.These observations are made for the benefit of thosewho cannot afford expensive instruments, but who mayyet wish to devote themselves to astronomical observationswith the ordinary instruments which they mayhappen to possess.On the Improvement of imperfectly achromatic Telescopes.(220.) There are many achromatic telescopes of considerablesize, in which the flint lens either over correctsor under corrects the colours of the crown glass lens.his defect may "be eaaVi^ iemoNedL\3rj ^Xxxovs^ ^SJss^^CHAP. Nun. ON Achromatic Telescopes. 369the curvature of one or other of the lenses. But allachromatic telescopes whatever when made of crownand flint glass exhibit the secondary colours viz. thewine-coloured and the green fringes. These colours arenot very strong ; and in many if not in all cases wemay destroy them by absorption through glasses thatwill not weaken greatly the intensity of the light. Thepasses requisite for this purpose must be found byactual experiment ; as the secondary tints though generallyof the colours we have mentioned are variouslycomposed according to the nature of the glass of whichthe two lenses are made.B BA nUEAnSB OK OPTICS.APPENDIX.TABLE I.(Referred to from Page 25.)Table of the Refracted Powers of SoM and Fluid Bodies,Index of Bcfrtctian.- 2-549- 2'500- 2-439- 2-322- 2-260- 2-224- 2-148- 1-961Realgar artificialOctohedriteDiamond-nitrateof leadBlende .PhosphorusSulphur meltedZircon .Glass — lead 2 parts, 1flint 1 part JGarnet - -' -Ruby - - -Glass — lead 3 parts,!flint 1 part JSapphireSpindleCinnamon stoneSulphuret of carbonOil of cassiaBalsam of ToluGuaiacumOil of anise seedQuartz .Rock saltSugar meltedCanada balsamAmber - - -1-830'7791-7941-7641-7591-7681-6411-6281-6191-6011-5481-5571-5541-5491-5^1bdexofRcAMtkB.fromPlate glass,1-514 to -Crown glass, from1-525 toOil of cloves -Balsam of capiviGum arabicOil of beech nutCastor oilCaput oilOil of turpentineOil of olives -AlumFluor sparSulphuric acidNitric acidMuriatic acid -Alcohol . . -CryoliteWater - - -Ice - - .Fluids in minerals!1-294 to - JTabasheerEther expanded tothrice its volume\ K\x - - \-000294j•542•534•535•528•502•500•490•483•475•470•457•434-434•410•410•372-349-336-309•131•111•057Appendix.Tail£ of the Refractive Power of Gases*Vapour ofphuret of carbon JPhosgene -Cyanogen - ,ChlorineDefiant gasSulphurous acidSulphuretted hydrogenNitrous oxideHydrocyanic acidMuriatic acidIndex of Reflection.sul-\hy.j1-0011591-0008341-0007721-0006781-0006651-0006441-0005031-0004511-000449IndexCarbonic acidCarburetted hydrogenAmmoniaCarbonic oxide •Nitrous gasAzoteAtmospheric airOxygenHydrogenVacuum -}of Refraction.1-0004491-0004431-0003851-0003401-0003031-0003001-0002941-0002721-0001381*000000TABLE II.(Referred to from Page S&)Table of the absolve Refractive Powers of Bodies*TabasheerCryoliteFluor sparOxygenSulphate of barytesSulphurous acid gasNitrous gas -AirCarbonic acidAzote -ChlorineNitrous oxidePhosgeneSeleniteCarbonic oxideQuartzGlassMuriatic acidSulphuric acidCalcareous sparAlum -Borax - -Index of Refraction.- 0-0976- 0-2*;42- 0-3426- 0-37990-38290-44550-44910-45280-47340M8130-50780-51880-53860-53870-54150-54360-55140-61240-64240-65700-6716Index of Refraction.Nitre -0-7079Rain water -0-7845Flint glass0-7986Cyanogen0-8021Sulphuretted hyshydrogen - J0-8419Vapour of sulphuret |- 0-8743of carbon - JAmmoniaAlcohol rectified1-0121Camphor1-2551Olive oil1-2607Amber1-3654Octohedrite -1*3816Sulphuret of carbon1-4200Diamond1-4566Realgari-eeeeAmbergris1-7000Oil of cassia*1-7634Sulphur2*2000Phosphorus -2-8857Hydrogen^•Q^tj?^See Edinburgh Journal qf Sckme^ iTo. "XSL ^.3K».372 A TREATISE ON OPTICS.No. I.(Referred to from Page 77.)In order to convey to the reader some idea of the variety ofdispersive powers which exist in solid and fluid bodies, I haregiven the following table, selected from a nwch larger one,founded on observations which I made in 1811 and 1813.*The first column contains the difference of the indices ofrefraction for the extreme red and violent rays, or the part ofthe whole refraction to which the dispersion is equal; andthe second column contains the dispersive power.Table of the Disperse Powers of Bodies.»v. - ■- . - IX£F> of Indies^^SfS^i rfR«frKli«iPower. ft,extiwneIUj«Oil of cassia - - - - 0-139 0O89Sulphur after fusion - - - 0-130 0-149Phosphorus - - - - 0-128 0-156Sulphuret of carbon - - - 0-115 0-077Balsam of Tolu - - - - 0-103 0-065Balsam of Peru - - - - 0-093 0-058Barbadoes aloes - - - - 0-085 0-058Oa of bitter almonds - - - 0-079 0-048Oa of anise seed - - - 0-077 0-044Acetate of lead melted - • 0-069 0-040Balsam of styrax - - - 0-067 0-039Guaiacum - - - - 0-066 0-041Oil of cumin - - - - 0-065 0-033Oil of tobacco - - . - 0-064 0-035Gum ammoniac - - - - 0-063 0-037Oil of Barbadoes tar - - - 0-062 0-032Oil of cloves - - - - 0-062 0-033oa of sassafras - - - • - 0-060 0-032Bx)sin - 0-057 0-032Oil of sweet fennel seeds - - 0-055 0-028Oil of spearmint - - - 0-054 0-026Bx)cksalt - - - - - 0O53 0-029Caoutchouc - 0O52 0-028Oil of pimento - - - - 0-052 0-020Flint glass 0-052 0-026oa of angelica - - - - 0-051 0*025oa of thyme 0-050 0-024oa of pathway seeds - - - 0-049 0024Flint glass 0-048 0-029♦ See my IVeotti« o» New PkOotopMcol liw*ni!m««u^v'5Sss^Gum thai . . 0O48Oil of juniper . - 0-047Nitric add . - . . - 0-045Canada balsamCaput oilOil of rhodiumOil of poppyZircon, greatest Ttf.Muriatic Kid . - - . 0-04SGum copal 0-O43Nut oil 0-043Oil of turpentine . - 0-04BFelspar . 0<MSBalsam of capivi . - 0-041Amber . 0O41Calcareous spar — greatest - - 0-040Oil of rape.s«ed . . - . 0-040Uamoad 0-038Oa of olives . - - . 0-038Gum masdc 0-038Oil of rue . 0-037Beryl 0-037Ether 0-037Senile 0-037Castor ml 0-036Crown glass, green . . - - 0-0S6Gum antic - - . . - RoomWater 0035Citric acid . . . - 0-035Glass of borax . . 0-034Garnet .- 0-034ChrysoliteCrown glaaa - - -Oil of wine . - 0-032Glass of phosphoric . 0-031Plate glass . . 0-03SSulphuric add . - - - 0-03)Tartaric acid . . 0-030Nitre, least ref. - .Bona . O-O30Alcohol 0-039Sulphate of barytes - - - 0OS9Buck crystal 0-Q^.BoTMz gUm I. bOT, S. lilez . - - 0-Qa&BB 30-0160O320-036 0-on0-033 0-0B20-030 0-009A TREATISE ON OPTICS.Blue sapphireBluish topazChrysoberylBlue topazSulphate of slztmtitesPrussic acidFluor sparCryob'teDbpcniTCPower.0*0860-0250-0240-0240-0270*0220-022IMff. of IndiesofBeftB ctJoifind (Xtwme Bftjk0-0160-0190-0160-0150-008O-OIO0-007No. II.(Referred to from Page 79.)The following table contains the results of several experimentswhich I made in the manner described in p. 78, 79*The bodies at the top of the table have the least action upongreen light, and those at the bottom of it the greatest. Therelative position of some of the substances is empirical ; buby referring to the original experiments in my Treatise otirNemPhilosophical Instruments p. 354., it will be seen whether ornot the relative action of any two bodies upon green light hasbeen determined.Tale of Transparent Bodies, in the order in which they exercisethe least action upon Green Light.Oil of cassia.Sulphur.Sulphuret of carbon.Balsam of Tolu.Oil of bitter almonds.Oil of anise seeds.Oil of cumin.Oil of sassafras.Oil of sweet fennel seeds.Oil of cloves.Canada balsam.Oil of turpentine.Oil of poppy.Oil of spearmint.Oil of caraway seeds.Oil of nutmeg.Oil of peppermint.Oil of cantor.\Gum copal.Diamond.Nitrate of potash.Nut oil.Balsam of capivi.Oil of rhodium.Flint glass.Zircon.Oil of olives.Calcareous spar.Rock saltGum juniper.Oil of almonds.Crown glass.Gum arable.Alcohol.APPENDIX.Table of Transparent Bodies, ^c* — • coviiiniiedUSelenite.BeryLTopaz.Fluor spar.Citric acid.Acetic acid.Muriatic acid.Nitric add.Rock crystaL :Ice.Water.Phosphorus add.SULFHUUC ACID.NT). III.(Referred to from Page 87.)\ Table, of the Indices of Refraction of several Glasses and Fluids*Spec.OniT.Indies of Refraction fbr the Seen Raya tn the Spectrum marked inJig, 56. with the fbUowmg Letter.Media.• BBed ray.CB«dr^.DOrange.Green.FHie.Glatino.HVioletrater . -dutionoflPotash 3a of Tut 7dentine iown Glassown Glasslint Glass -lint Glass .1*0001*4160-8852-5352-7563-7233*5121-3309351*3996291-4704961*5258321-554774l-62n49l*e0904S1*3317121-4005151*4715301-5268491-5559331*6296811-603800vssssn1*4028051-4744341-5295871*5590751-6350861-6084941-3358511^4056321*4783531*5330051-5631501-6490241*6145321-3378181*4080821*4817361*5360521*5667411-6482661-6200421*3412931*4125791*4881981*5416571*573535l*6602a51*6307721-3441771-4163681*4938741:5465661-J794701-6710G21*640373B B 4INDEX.A.Aberration,' Spherical, of lensesand mirrors; longitudinal; lateral,92. Chromatic, 80.sinus, M., his experiments onaccidental colours, 307.Air, the.absorptive power of, 137.Amici, professor, of Modena, proposesvarious forms of tM cameralucida, ft'ee From the defectsof Dr. Wollaston's, S34. Revivesthe reflecting microscopein an improved form, 344.Analcime, the polarising structureot this mineral ; derives its namefrom its property of not yieldingelectricity by friction, 216.Arago, M., the colours producedby crystallised plates in polarisedlight, studied with success byBiot and other authors, first discoveredby, 183.Archimedes, the manner in whichhe is supposed to have destroyedthe ships of Marcellus, 317.Atmosphere, the refractive powerof the, 255.Axis, of lenses, 28.Barlocci, professor, his experiments: ends that the armed naturalloadstone had its powernearly doubled by twenty-fourI hours' exposure to the strongliehtofthesun, 93.Barlow, his achromatic telescope365.Barton, John, produces ccrfour bygrooved surfaces, and communicatesthese colours by pressureto various substances, 121.Batsha, the tides of, explained byNewton and Halley, 135.Baumgartner, M., his experiments:discovers that a steel wire, someparts of which were polished,the other parts without lustre,became magnetic by exposureto the white light of thesun ; a north pole shearing ateach polished part, and a southpole appearing at each unpolishedpart ; obtains eight poles on awire eis^t inches long, 93.Beam solar, diverging and converging,278.Berard, M., his experiments on theheating power of the spectrum,89.Berzelius. H., his experiments onabsorption, 141.Biot and Arago on polarised light173.Blackwater, some phenomenabothof vertical and lateral mirage,seen by him at Ring George'sBastion, Leith, 26aBlair, Dr., his achromatic lens,84. Constructs a prism telescope,364.Bodies, absorptive power o(; thenature of the power by whichthey absorb light, not yet ascertained;all coloured transparentbodies do not absorb the coloursproportionally, 139. Natural, thecolours of, 280.Vista lycoperdon, the seed of,114.Boyle, his observations on the coloursof thin plates, 100.Brereton,lord, nis observations onthe colours of thin fins, 100.Buchan, Dr., ascribes unusualrefraction to unusual reflection,264.Buffon, constructs a burning appal.ratus^'the principle of it explained,317.Camera obscura, an optical instrument,invented by the celebratedBaptista Porta, 329.Camera lucida, invented by Dr.V/oUaftU»\.2&VCameron TavTiet«\«SSi&.in optical reKudiu ; «iiip1oTedu B luMilule nn aunt glue bjC«i»LM„»irf m! Ridoia icintled bj Rftohia, a).Cu wolf of, :Cuiutio (moiChevalier,' H., oTBdIi. nukH uxCfctSlT MIT'S Woohrii*, hi.ttdwdii, 33.tefncUtm, H8. WhrthH mi.stance liMC In u« of doubleRlVictlaiv Is. A Hurt o f theKitiy,"sL W^ one ^iinHni of cidinnd tIpb in, ^Tlw Infloeic* af unlRni bntand cold on, Less, Com pMlta Inspuphyl.file, 941 tn Iceland par, SM.[^□dm of glu with one noiiaTeui> or doodle leThictlon, £3£.WlUi ■ nere ua of (stilereft-Klioii,SS!LDit, Mr HumphiTi Rpeati Bard'i experiment on tbc b«lag power of the ipectniiBItilf uidatOaMia ; ttwi«If tiioK Of Dr. Hencbd,DeChiulKH, duke, 100.Da«rta.M,DeiUHoii, mgleo^SaDIUIKind,SS.'Ki^hiSToTi^Douc . . .- tfllocne broi^t to ft hi;give of perfection tis, filBiHlefleld, rtr Heir, sei ^^^bT Dr. young, ■ deKi^SnoCthe impression of Ugbt <Bi thentliw,sM TbeeuiM of dnrietldrm with (•« «J«0'<'- *JJET&plecea, achnaiuai:, Sdb-Khnnutlc teleHxpa (Br ludnraoij, nr., nit njaerrnHn welm tinged poirfe with lUDgf-need; lUibKrpttTe pinTaitlet-Fata Morsuu, been In ^e >ti^1>of Madnl^ accounted fin, CB.Fibres, miDnte, arm of, I1&Fit, the tbeoi; of, i inn endedbjltiedoclilne of Interftnnc^■■ ' ■ r polnlBtkn In,|H.BMudIX:rod, conjugate, II.Foci, pdclu), fnrpanllel apt, 9.nile Tor flndinff the principe;Ibr a single CMivei lurttae, Sspectrum { percy umUu*bamtf Ln t)i« light of p1>nr1«» andBud hun, S6, IlluniiDatiaEfowtr of the ipiKtruin, SS.Fremel, M., explain the pheocbBau of Inflexion or dlfiVaettooar]ltht,gl Hit eiHiioMul onMt, in. DUcovniH of, oa^cuW collision, Si,Glim, plane, S7. MulHplTinB,%8. RelVictiaa of light thnnifhGordon, the duchies of, 101.Goring, Dr, hU Improvements InMrTp^tr^Eud on the mictnc^,Grmj," Mr. Stephen, .W7.BiII,Mr.,lnieDtBnt the Influence of, «iHNTHiig powers colourednlbcdiiLUl. HeU and cold,tnnricDt InSuKuaof, 192.Heiwbel, Ur., hi dbeoieiT of■noCtaM wir oTjiriniullc InufsIn Ihinplitee ormotfaer-of'pavl,IK. 'nt^prlndpul data oftheundulatory theory given bj, 136.m erjrtMir wUb lire cI br lit Hmiof thepeerl,:Hook, Ut,I the extraordnaErffliortiDn : Applied bj hiramHandel, an 1 itr^t'bjTii^lLKilddoKOH,!dpleofute/.Uicbei,U»\DitsttOmuitjon mid jHin-INDEX.Kitchener's, Dr., pancreatic eye.'tube, Ses.Landriani, 89.Lantern, niagic, invented by Eli.Cher, Si.Latham, Mr., 381.Labours, M., has lately executedtwo achromatic object-glasses,■ which are in Sir James South'sobservatory at Kensington, 360.Lehot, his work on the seat of vision,S92.Le Maire. 51.Lens, spherical, concavo-convex,double-convex, plano-convex,double-concave, plano-concave,27.— a plano-convex, the principalfocus of, 40.achromatic, sullennessthe formation of imagesby ; their magnifying power, 45.Convex and concave, £^. Burningand illuminating, 3SS.Lenses, polygonal, constructed forthe Commissioners of NorthernLighthouses ; introduced intothe principal French lighthouses,323.Light, the velocity with which itmoves : moves in straight lines,S. Falling upon any surface,the angle of its reflexion equalto the angle of its incidence, 6.The total reflexion of, 3i. Refractionof, through curved surfaces,34. Refraction of, throughspheres, 35. Refraction of,through concave and convexsurfaces, 38. Refraction of,through convex lenses, 39. Refractionof, through concavelenses, 42. Refraction of,throughmeniscus and concavo-convexlenses, 44. On the coloursand decomposition of; whitelight, the composition of, discoveredby Sir I. Newton, 66. Differentresponsibility of the raysof; recomposition of white light,69. Decomposition oL by absorption,71. The inflection ordiffraction of, 95. Several curiousproperties of, 123. Theinterference of, 126l The absorptionof, 137. A new methodproposed of analysing whitemight, 142. Double refraction of,first discovered in Iceland spar,144. Polarisation of, by doublerefraction, 157. Partial polarisationof, by reflection, 172 •, andby ordinary refraction, m. "colours of crystallineplates in, 212. The action ofmetals upon: absorptive powerof, 24aLoadstone, various experimentsby professor Barlocci and Laneson the magnetising powerof lighten, SSLM.Magnetism, exponents illustrativeof; 94.Malus, M , discovers the polar*action of light by reflexion, 168Marriott, his curious discoverythat the base of the optic nervewas incapable of conveying tothe brain the impression of distinctvision, 290. Proved bjcomparative anatomy, S91.Megascope, a modification of thecamera obscura, 231.Meniscus, 27. Its efBsct on parallelrays ; its eWsct on diverging rays,44^Microscope, single, 51. The magnifyingpower of: invented ^Jansen and Drel>eu, 335. Madeof garnet, diamond, ruby, andsapphire, 337.reflecting, 51. Firstproposed by sir Isaac Newton;revived in an improved fbrmbyprofessor Amici of Modena, 314■ compound, 340.solar, 34&\Microscopic observations, rulesfor, 345.Mirage, a name given to certaineffects of unusual refraction, bythe French army, while marchingthrough the sandy desertsof Lower Egypt, 259.Mirrors, 4. Images formed by,15. Concave, formation ofimages by, 16L The properties bywhich they are distinguished:used as lighthouse reflectors, amias burning instruments, 319.Convex, norman of images by,18. Plane, formation of imagesby, 19. Spherical aberration of,58. Plane and curved, SIS.Plane burning, the effect producedby a number of these, 317.Mois, prismatic system of, 202.Morichini, Dr., his experiment onthe magnetising power of thesolar rays; magnetised severalneedles in the presence of sirH, Davy, professor Pla3rfur,axel Q^et English philosophers.INDEX.colours of, obtained from theshell of the pearl oyster ; longemployed in the arts ; the mannerin which its colours may beobserved, 119.N.Newton, sir Isaac, his discovery ofthe composition of white light,66. Recomposes white light 69.inflexion or distraction of lightdescribed by, 95. His method ofproducing a thin plate of air;compares the colours seen by reflectionwith those seen by transmission,102. His observationson the colours of thick platesproduced by concave glass mirrors,109. His theory of thecolours of natural bodies, £81.His experiment of accidentalcolours, 306. Was the first whoImplied a rectangular prism inreflecting telescopes, Sei. Executesa reflecting telescope withhis own hands, 350.Voluminous bodies, 1.O.Objects, test, the use of. Introducedby Dr. Goring, 345.Opacity, Sc.Optical figures, beautifUl, howproduced, 239.Optics, physical. 66lOxides, metallic, exhibit a temporarychange of colour by heat.P.Parabola, 59.Parker, Mr., of Fleet^treet, executesthe most perfect burninglens ever constructed, 322.Fhantasroagoria, 331.Plates, thin, cours of, 100. Of air,water, and%lass, 103. Thick,first observed and described bysir L Newton as produced byconcave mirrors ; a method bywhich the colours may be bestseen and tiidr theory beststudied, 111.Polarisation, circular ; tfiis subjectstudied with much sagacityandsuccess, by M. Blot, 217. Elliptical,224.Porta, Baptista, his invention ofthe camera obscura, 329. "Principal focal distance 9,Prisms, refraction of light through,2aPrisms, crown glass, and diamond,the dispersive powers of, compared,7&Prism, meniscus, used for thecamera obscura, by Bl Chevalierof Paris, 325.Prisms, compound and variable,328.Q.Quartz, 101.R.Radiant point, 10.Rainbow, primary and secondary,265. The light of both whollypolarised in the planes of theradii ofthe arch, 26aRamage, Mr., of Aberdeen, constructsvarious Newtonian telescopes;the largest of these la-erectedat the Royal Observatoryof Greenwich, SelRays, reflection of parallel, 6LReflection of diverging, 7. Reflectionof converging, 8. Reflectionof, strom concave minors,8. Reflection of, fi-om convexmirrors, la Incident ; refracted,22. Focus oi parallel; diverting;converging, 36l Parallel,39. Rule for finding the focusof parallel for a glass unequallyconvex, 40. * Rule for finding thefocus of a convex lens for divergingrays, 41. Rule for findingthe focus of conversing, 4£Rule for finding the focus of aconcave lens for diverging, 4SLSolar rays, the magnetisingpower of, 92. ^Rectangular plates of glass withno double refraction, W5.Reflection by specula and mirrors;angle of, 4. Plane of; 5. fits of;126.Refraction, polarisation ^, 1&Angle of; index of, 22. Thnmjriiprisms, 25. And lenses. 26L Decompositionof white aught discoveredby, 66L Communicatedto bodies by heat, rapid cooling,pressure, and induration, 15&.Unusual, 257.double, the law of, asit exists in Iceland spar, 147.Bless and ^qmx»^1ML«'^^^$»INDEX.pediments on the chemic influenceof the spectrum, 91.Bochon, 8ft&Scheele, the castrated, 90.Scbeiner, the original account ofa parhelion seen by, 273.Scoresbyby, captain, in navigatingthe Greenland seas, obcinveaseveral cases of unusual refraction,25aSeebeck, M., his experiments onthe heating power of the spectrum,90. And on the chemicalinfluence of, 91. Published anaccount of analogous experimentswith cubes and glass cylinder,239.Self-luminous bodies, 1.Senebier, 89.Solar spectrum consists of threespectra of equal lengths, — red,yellow, and blue, 73.Somerville, Mrs., her experiment;produces magnetism in a needle,which was entirely free frommagnetism before, by the solarrays : her experiment repeatedby M. Baumgartner, 93.Spectrum, the, 84. Properties of;the existence of fixed lines in.85. The illuminating power of,88. The heating power of, 89.Chemical influence of, 90.Spectacles, telescopic, invented byDr. Wollaston, 321.Specula, plane, concave, and convex,4.Sphere, rule for finding the focusof, 37.■ of glass, with a number ofaxes of double refraction, 237.Periods, glass, with one axis ofdouble redaction 237.Substances with circular doublerefraction, 156.Sylph uric' acid, 78.Surfaces, grooved, the productionof colour by; and of the communicabilityof these colours tovarious substances; applied tothe arts by John Barton, Esq.,120.T.Tabasheer, the refractive powerof, 285.Talbot, Mr., his experiments onthe colours of thin plates, 108.His observations on filia ofbrown glass, 113.\TdnoKope, a64&Telescope reflecting, SO. Astronomicalrefracting, 51. Actio.raatic, one of the greatest la.mentions of the lait creature,pronounced by Newton to behopeless ; accomplished soonafter his death by Mr. Han;brought to a high degree dperfection by Mr. Blond, SSLTerrestrial, 349. Galilean, S49LGregorian reflecting, 350. Arule to find the magnifyingpower of, 351. Cass^grainim,3S2. Newtonian, an improvementon the Gregorian one, 353LSir William Herschel's, 35&Mr. Ravagers 3S& Achromaticsolar, witili single lenses,367. Imperfectly achromatic;the improvement of, 368.Thenard, the first who observedblackness produced on pho^ho.ru8,142.Tops, Brazilian, 248.Transmission, fits of, 126.U.Undulation, theory of; great progressof, in modern times; thedoctrine of interference in accordancewith, 135.V.Village, M., of Lyons, burning instrumentsmade by, 319.Vince, Dr., his observations onunusual refraction, 257. Andon a most remarkable case ofmirage, 259.Vision, the seat of, 290. Erect,the cause of, from an invertedimage, 294. Distinct, the' lawof, 295. Oblique 297.Visible direction, Uie law of; thecentre of, 294.W.Water, the absorptive power of,85.Wollaston, Dr., his discoveries onthe chemical effects of light ongum guiacum, 9L His inventionof the telescopic spectacles,321. Of the camera lucida, 331.Doublet,341. Refraction throughstrata of air of different densitiesloved by 260.INDEX.Y.Young, Dr., his invention of theinstrument called the eriometer,113. His explanation of thespring and neap tides, 135. Hisexperiments on the interferenceof the rays of light, ISO.Z.Zantedeschi, M., his observationson oxidated magnets and thosewhich are not oxidated ; repcttflMr. Christie's experiments ofneedles vibrating in the sunlight,9aTHE END.LoMDoir;Printed by A. & R. Spottijwoodc,NewJStntt^uare.