THE BRIDGEWATER TREATISESON THE POWER WISDOM AND GOODNESS OF GODAS MANIFESTED IN THE CREATIONTREATISE VIGEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCETO NATURAL THEOLOGYBY THE REV. WILLIAM BUCKLAND, D. D.IN TWO VOLUMESVOL ITHOU Ion) IN THE BEGINNING HAST LAID THE foundation OF Till?. EARTH.PSALM CH. 25.Let us take a Survey of the principal Fabrick, viz. the TerraqueousGlobe itself; a most stupendous work in every particular of it, whichdoth no less aggrandize its Maker than every curious complete work dothits Workman. Let us cast our eyes here and there, let us ransack all theGlobe, let us with the greatest accuracy inspect every part thereof, searchout the inmost secrets of any of the creatures, let us examine them withallour gauges, measure them with our nicest rules, pry into them withour microscopes and most exquisite instruments, still we find them tobear testimony to their infinite Workman."durham's Physico-theology, BOOK II. P. 38.Could the body of the whole Earth - - be submitted to the Examinationof our Senses, were it not too big and disproportioned for ourEnquiries, too unwieldy for the Management of the Eye and Hand, thereis no question but it would appear to us as curious and well-contriveda frame as that of an human body. We should see the same Concatenationand Subserviency, the same Necessity and Usefulness, the sameBeauty and Harmony in all and every of its Parts, as what we discoverin the Body of every single Animal." spectator, no. 543.GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGYCONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TONATURAL THEOLOGYBYTHE REV. WILLIAM BUCKLAND, D. D.CANON OF CHRIST CHURCH AND READER IN GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGYIN Tick UNIVERSITY OF OXFORDVOL Iaj.diLONDONWILLIAM PICKERING.68-/dd5 Vl l gL 17^,47 Ifi33 v,\(J. WHITT1NGHAM, Took COUliT, CHANCER Y LANE.TODAVIES GILBERT, ESQ.D.C.L. (BY DIPLOMA), F.R.S., HON. M. R. S. E., HON. M. T( . I. A.,F.S.A., F.L.S., F.G.S., F.R.A.S., ETC. ETC.MY DEAR SIR,I only fulfil a gratifying duty in dedicatingto you the present Essay, which owes itsexistence principally to your favourable opinionof my ability to discharge the trustconfided to me.To have been thus selected for such a service,is a distinction which I prize, as one ofthe most honourable results of my devotionof many years to the study of the mineralstructure of the Earth. I fear, however, thatyour estimate of my qualifications has beenraised above my deserts, by your affectionateregard for the University, with which it hasbeen our common happiness to be so longconnected.g. bVI DEDICATION.Whatever other results may have attendedmy public exertions in this place, I assureyou that it is a source of much satisfactionto me, to find them thus rewarded by theapprobation of a Philosopher, whose attainmentsplaced him in the chair once occupiedby Newton, and who is endeared by hisurbanity to all, who have ever enjoyed thehappiness of communication with him, eitheras the President of the Royal Society ofLondon, or in that more familiar intercourseof private friendship to which it has beenmy privilege to be admitted.Believe me to remain,My dear Sir,Your much obliged and faithful Servant,William Auckland.Christ Church, Oxford,May 30, 1836.PREFACE.Three important subjects of enquiry inNatural Theology come under considerationin the present Treatise.The first regards the inorganic Elementsof the Mineral Kingdom, and the actualdispositions of the Materials of the Earth :many of these, although produced or modifiedby the agency of violent and disturbingforces, afford abundant proofs of wise andprovident Intention, in their adaptations tothe uses of the Vegetable and Animal Kingdoms,and especially to the condition of Man.The second relates to Theories which havebeen entertained respecting the Origin ofthe World ; and the derivation of existingsystems of organic Life, by an eternal succession,from preceding individuals of thesame species ; or by gradual transmutationof one species into another. I have endeavouredto show, that to all these Theoriesthe phenomena of Geology are decidedlyopposed.The third extends into the Organic Remainsof a former World the same kind ofinvestigation, which Paley has pursued withVlll PREFACE.so much success in his examination of theevidences of Design in the mechanicalstructure of the corporeal frame of Man, andof the inferior Animals which are placed withhim on the present surface of the Earth.The myriads of petrified Remains whichare disclosed by the researches of Geologyall tend to prove, that our Planet has beenoccupied in times preceding the Creation ofthe Human Race, by extinct species ofAnimals and Vegetables, made up, likeliving Organic Bodies, of " Clusters of Contrivances,"which demonstrate the exerciseof stupendous Intelligence and Power. Theyfurther show that these extinct forms of OrganicLife were so closely allied, by Unityin the principles of their construction, toClasses, Orders, and Families, which makeupthe existing Animal and Vegetable Kingdoms,that they not only afford an argumentof surpassing force, against the doctrines ofthe Atheist and the Polytheist ; but supplya chain of connected evidence, amounting todemonstration, of the continuous Being, andof many of the highest Attributes of the OneLiving and True God.The scientific Reader will feel that much value has been addedto the present work, from the whole of the Palaeontology, duringits progress through the Press, having had the great advantageof passing under the revision of Mr. Broderip, and from thebotanical part having being submitted to Mr. Robert Brown.I have also to acknowledge my obligations to Mr. Cleft for hisimportant assistance in the anatomy of the Megatherium ; toProfessor Agassiz of Neuchatel for his unreserved communicationsof his discoveries relating to Fossil Fishes ; to Mr. Owenfor his revision of some parts of my Chapter on Mollusks ; andto Mr. James Sowerbyby for his assistance in engraving most ofmy figures of radiated animals, and some of those of Mollusks.To all these Gentlemen I feel it my duty thus to offer mypublic acknowledgments.Many obligations to other scientific friends are also acknowledgedin the course of the work.The Wood-cuts have been executed by Mr. Fisher and Mr.Field, and most of the Steel plates of Mollusks by Mr. Setter,NOTICE.The series of Treatises, of which the present is one, ispublished under the following circumstances :The Right Honourable and Reverend FrancisHenry, Earl of Bridgewater, died in the month ofFebruary, 1829 ; and by his last Will and Testament, bearingdate the 25th of February, 1825, he directed certainTrustees therein named to invest in the public funds thesum of Eight thousand pounds sterling; this sum, withthe accruing dividends thereon, to be held at the disposalof the President, for the time being, of the Royal Societyof London, to be paid to the person or persons nominatedby him. The Testator further directed, that the person orpersons selected by the said President should be appointedto write, print, and publish one thousand copies of a workOn the Power, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, as manifestedin the Creation ; illustrating such ivory by all reasonablearguments, as for instance the variety and formation ofGod's creatures in the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms; the effect of digestion, and thereby of conversion ;the construction of the hand of man, and an infinite varietyof other arguments ; as also by discoveries ancient andmodern, in arts, sciences, and the whole extent of literature.He desired, moreover, that the profits arising from the saleof the works so published should be paid to the authors ofthe works.XIThe late President of the Royal Society, Davies Gilbert,Esq. requested the assistance of his Grace the Archbishopof Canterbury and of the Bishop of London, in determiningupon the best mode of carrying into effect the intentions ofthe Testator. Acting with their advice, and with the concurrenceof a nobleman immediately connected with thedeceased, Mr. Davies Gilbert appointed the following eightgentlemen to write separate Treatises on the differentbranches of the subject as here stated :THE REV. THOMAS CHALMERS, Did.PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH.ON THE POWER, WISDOM, AND GOODNESS OF GODAS MANIFESTED IN THE ADAPTATIONOF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THE MORAL ANDINTELLECTUAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN.JOHN KIDD, M. D. F. R. S.REGIUS PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.ON THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THEPHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN.THE REV. WILLIAM Wheel, Mea. F. Res.FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, CAMBRIDGE.ASTRONOMY AND GENERAL PHYSICS CONSIDERED WITHREFERENCE TO NATURAL THEOLOGY.SIR CHARLES BELL, K. G. H. F. R. S. L. & E.THE HAND : ITS MECHANISM AND VITAL ENDOWMENTSAS EVINCING DESIGN.PETER MARK ROGET, M. D.FELLOW OF AND SECRETARY TO THE ROYAL SOCIETY.ON ANIMAL AND VEGETABLE PHYSIOLOGY.XllTHE REV. WILLIAM BUCKLAND, D. D. F. It. S.CANON OF CHRIST CHURCH, AND READER IN Geology AND MINERALOGYIN THE UNIVERSITY 01- Oxford.ON GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY.THE REV. WILLIAM KIRBY, M. A. F. R. S.ON THE HISTORY, HABITS, AND INSTINCTS OF ANIMALS.WILLIAM PROUT, M.D.F.R.S.CHEMISTRY, METEOROLOGY, AND THE FUNCTION OFDIGESTION, CONSIDERED WITH REFERENCE TONATURAL THEOLOGY.His Royal Highness the Duke of Sussex, Presidentof the Royal Society, having desired that no unnecessarydelay should take place in the publication of theabove mentioned treatises, they will appear at short intervals,as they are ready for publication.CONTENTSOF THE FIRST VOLUME.PageChap. I. Extent of the Province of Geology 1II. Consistency of Geological Discoveries with SacredHistory 8III. Proper subjects of Geological Inquiry 34IV. Relation of Unstratified to Stratified Rocks 38V. Volcanic Rocks, Basalt, and Trap 46VI. Primary stratified Rocks 50VII. Strata of the Transition Series 60Remains of Vegetables in the TransitionSeries 63VIII. Strata of the Secondary Series 67IX. Strata of the Tertiary Series 76Mammalia of the Eocene Period 81Mammalia of the Miocene Period 90Mammalia of the Pliocene Period 92X. Relations of the Earth and its Inhabitants toMan 97XI. Supposed cases of Fossil Human Bones 103XII. General History of Fossil Organic Remains. . 106Cases of Animals destroyed suddenly 121XIII. Aggregate of Animal Enjoyment increased, andthat of Pain diminished by the existence ofCarnivorous Races 129XIV CONTENTS.PageChap. XIV. Proofs of Design in the Structure of FossilVertebrated Animals 135§ i. Fossil Mammalia — Dinotherium 135ii. Megatherium 1 39in. Fossil Saurians 165iv. Ichthyosaurus 168v. Intestinal Structure of Ichthyosaurus and ofFossil Fishes 1 87vi. Plesiosaurus 202vn. Mosasaurus, or great Animal of Maestricht . 215viii. Pterodactyle 221ix. Megalosaurus 234x. Iguanodon 240xi. Amphibious Animals allied to Crocodiles 249xii. Fossil Tortoises or Testudinata 255xiii. Fossil Fishes 264Sauroid Fishes in the Order Ganoid 273Fishes in Strata of the Carboniferous Order 278Fishes of the Magnesian Limestone, orZechstein 280Fishes of the Muschel-kalk, Lias, andOolite Formations 281Fishes of the Chalk Formation 283Fishes of the Tertiary Formations 284Family of Sharks. 286Fossil Spines, or Ichthyodorulites 288Fossil Rays 291Conclusion 292Chap. XV. Proofs of Design in the Fossil Remains ofMollusks 295§ i. Fossil Univalve and Bivalve Shells 295ii. Fossil Remains of naked Mollusks, Pens andInk bags of Loligo 303in. Proofs of Design in the Mechanism of FossilChambered Shells 310Mechanical Contrivances in the Nautilus . 314iv. Ammonites 333CONTENTS. XVv. Nautilus Sypho and Nautilus Zic Zac 357vi. Chambered Shells allied to Nautili, and Ammonites361vn. Belemnite 371viii. Terminated Polythalamous Shells. Nummulites.Militia 381Chap. XVI. Proofs of Design in the Structure of FossilArticulated Animals l\ 386§ i. First Class of Articulated Animals 386Fossil Annelidans 386ii. Second Class of Articulated Animals 387Fossil Crustaceans 387Trilobites 389in. Third Class of Articulated Animals 404Fossil Arachnidans 404Fossil Spiders 405Fossil Scorpions 406iv. Fourth Class of Articulated Animals 409Fossil Insects 409Chap. XVII. Proofs of Design in the Structure of FossilRadiated Animals, or Zoophytes 414§ i. Fossil Echinoderms 415Echinidans and Stelleridans 415Crinoideans , 416Encrinites Moniliformis 42 1Pentacrinites 432ii. Fossil Remains of Polypes 442Chap. XVIII. Proofs of Design in the Structure of FossilVegetables 450§ i. General History of Fossil Vegetables 450ii. Vegetables in Strata of the Transition Series. . 459Equisetacese 459Ferns 461Lepidodendron 466Sigillaria 469Favularia, Megaphyton, Bothrodendron,Ulodendron 474XVI CONTENTS.PageStigmaria 476Fossil Coniferse 483in. Vegetables in Strata of the Secondary Series. . 490Fossil Cycadeee 490Fossil Pandanese 503iv. Vegetables in Strata of the Tertiary Series . . . 507Fossil Palms 512Conclusion 520Chap. XIX. Proofs of Design in the Dispositions of Strataof the Carboniferous Order 524XX. Proofs of Design in the Effect of DisturbingForces on the Strata of the Earth 539XXI. Advantageous Effect of Disturbing Forces ingiving Origin to Mineral Veins 548XXII. Adaptations of the Earth to afford Suppliesof Water through the Medium of Springs . 556XXIII. Proofs of Design in the Structure and Com- 571position of Unorganized Mineral Bodies . .XXIV. Conclusion 580INTRODUCTION.Chapter I.Extent of the Province of Geology.If a stranger, landing at the extremity of England,were to traverse the whole of Cornwalland the North of Devonshire ; and crossing toSt. David's, should make the tour of all NorthWales ; and passing thence through Cumberland,by the Isle of Man, to the south-westernshore of Scotland, should proceed either throughthe hilly region of the Border Counties, or,along the Grampian, to the German Ocean ;he would conclude from such a journey ofmany hundred miles, that Britain was a thinlypeopled sterile region, whose principal inhabitantswere miners and mountaineers.Another foreigner, arriving on the coast ofDevon, and crossing the Midland Counties,from the mouth of the Exe, to that of the Tyne,would find a continued succession of fertileG. b2 INTRODUCTION.hills and valleys, thickly overspread with townsand cities, and in many parts crowded with amanufacturing population, whose industry ismaintained by the coal with which the strata ofthese districts are abundantly interspersed.*A third foreigner might travel from thecoast of Dorset to the coast of Yorkshire, overelevated plains of oolitic limestone, or of chalk ;without a single mountain, or mine, or coal-pit,or any important manufactory, and occupied bya population almost exclusively agricultural.Let us suppose these three strangers to meet atthe termination of their journeys, and to comparetheir respective observations ; how differentwould be the results to which each would havearrived, respecting the actual condition of GreatBritain. The first would represent it as a thinlypeopled region of barren mountains ; the second,as a land of rich pastures, crowded withIt may be seen, in any correct geological map of England,that the following important and populous towns are placedupon strata belonging to the single geological formation of thenew red sandstone: — Exeter, Bristol, Worcester, Warwick, Birmingham,Lichfield, Coventry, Leicester, Nottingham, Derby,Stafford, Shrewsbury, Chester, Liverpool, Warrington, Manchester,Preston, York, and Carlisle. The population of thesenineteen towns, by the census of 1830, exceeded a million.The most convenient small map to which I can refer myreaders, in illustration of this and other parts of the presentessay, is the single sheet, reduced by Gardner from Mr.Greenough's large map of England, published by the GeologicalSociety of London.INTRODUCTION. 3a flourishing population of manufacturers; thethird, as a great corn field, occupied by personsalmost exclusively engaged in the pursuits ofhusbandry.These dissimilar conditions of three greatdivisions of our country, result from differencesin the geological structure of the districtsthrough which our three travellers have beenconducted. The first will have seen only thosenorth-western portions of Britain, that are composedof rocks belonging to the primary andtransition series : the second will have traversedthose fertile portions of the new red sandstoneformation which are made up of the detritusof more ancient rocks, and have beneath, andnear them, inestimable treasures of mineral coal :the third will have confined his route to woldsof limestone, and downs of chalk, which arebest adapted for sheep-walks, and the productionof corn.*Hence it appears that the numerical amountThe road from Bath through Cirencester and Oxford toBuckingham, and thence by Kettering and Stamford to Lincoln,affords a good example of the unvaried sameness in the featuresand culture of the soil, and in the occupations of the people,that attends the line of direction, in which the oolite formationcrosses England from Weymouth to Scarborough.The road from Dorchester, by Sandford and Salisbury, toAndover and Basingstoke, or from Dunstable to Boston, Cambridge,and Newmarket, affords similar examples of the dull uniformitythat we observe in a journey along the line of bearing4 INTRODUCTION.of our population, their varied occupations,and the fundamental sources of their industryand wealth, depend, in a great degree, uponthe geological character of the strata on whichthey live. Their physical condition also, asindicated by the duration of life and health,depending on the more or less salubriousnature of their employments ; and their moralcondition, as far as it is connected with theseemployments, are directly affected by the geologicalcauses in which their various occupationsoriginate.From this example of our own country, welearn that the same constituent materials of theof the chalk, from near Bridgeport on the coast of Dorset, toFlamborough Head on the coast of Yorkshire.In the same line of direction, or line of bearing of the strataacross England, a journey might be made from Lyme Regis toWhitby, almost entirely upon the lias formation ; and fromWeymouth to the Humber, without once leaving the Oxford clay.Indeed almost any route, taking a north-east and south-westdirection across England, will for the most part pass continuouslyalong the same formation ; whilst a line from south-east tonorth-west, at right angles to the former, will nowhere continueon the same stratum beyond a few miles. Such a line will givethe best information of the order of superposition, and variousconditions of the very numerous strata, that traverse our island inasuccession of narrow belts, the main direction of which is nearlynorth-east and south-west. This line has afforded to Mr. Co-yearethe instructive section, from Newhaven near Brighton,to Whitehall, published in his Geology of England andWales; along which nearly seventy changes in the character ofthe strata take place.INTRODUCTION. 5earth are not uniformly continuous in all directionsover large superficial areas. In one district,we trace the course of crystalline and graniticrocks ; in another, we find mountains of slate ;in a third, alternating strata of sandstone, shale,and limestone ; in a fourth, beds of conglomeraterock ; in a fifth, strata of marl and clay ; in asixth, gravel, loose sand, and silt. The subordinatemineral contents of these various formationsare also different ; in the more ancient,are veins of gold and silver, tin, copper, leadand zinc ; in another series, we find beds ofcoal ; in others, salt and gypsum ; many arecomposed of freestone, fit for the purposes ofarchitecture ; or of limestone, useful both forbuilding and cement; others of clay, convertibleby fire into materials for building, andpottery : in almost all we find that most importantof mineral productions, iron.Again, if we look to the great phenomena ofphysical geography, the grand distributions ofthe solids and fluids of the globe ; the dispositionof continents and islands above and amidst thewaters ; the depth and extent of seas, and lakes,and rivers ; the elevation of hills and mountains ;the extension of plains ; and the excavation, depression,and fractures of valleys; we find themall originating in causes which it is the provinceof Geology to investigate.A more minute examination traces the procINTRODUCTION.dress of the mineral materials of the earth,through various stages of change and revolution,affecting the strata which compose its surface ;and discloses a regular order in the superpositionof these strata ; recurring at distant intervals,and accompanied by a corresponding regularityin the order of succession of many extinctraces of animals and vegetables, that have followedone after another during the progress ofthese mineral formations ; arrangements likethese could not have originated in chance, sincethey afford evidence of law and method in thedisposition of mineral matter ; and still strongerevidence of design in the structure of the organicremains with which the strata are interspersed.How then has it happened that a science thusimportant, comprehending no less than theentire physical history of our planet, and whosedocuments are co extensive with the globe,should have been so little regarded, and almostwithout a name, until the commencement ofthe present century ?Attempts have been made at various periods,both by practical observers and by ingeniousspeculators, to establish theories respecting theformation of the earth ; these have in great partfailed, in consequence of the then imperfectstate of those subsidiary sciences, which, withinthe last half century, have enabled the geologistto return from the region of fancy to that ofINTRODUCTION. 7facts, and to establish his conclusions on thefirm basis of philosophical induction. We nowapproach the study of the natural history of theglobe, aided not only by the higher branchesof Physics, but by still more essential recentdiscoveries, in Mineralogy, and Chemistry, inBotany, Zoology, and Comparative Anatomy.By the help of these sciences, we are enabledto extract from the archives of theinterior of the earth, intelligible records of formerconditions of our planet, and to decipherdocuments, which were a sealed book to allour predecessors in the attempt to illustratesubterranean history. Thus enlarged in itsviews, and provided with fit means of pursuingthem, Geology extends its researches into regionsmore vast and remote, than come withinthe scope of any other physical science exceptAstronomy. It not only comprehends the entirerange of the mineral kingdom, but includesalso the history of innumerable extinctraces of animals and vegetables ; in each ofwhich it exhibits evidences of design and contrivance,and of adaptations to the varying conditionof the lands and waters on which theywere placed ; and besides all these, it disclosesan ulterior prospective accommodation of themineral elements, to existing tribes of plants andanimals, and more especially to the uses of man.Evidences like these make up a history of a high8 CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALand ancient order, unfolding records of the operationsof the Almighty Author of the Universe,written by the finger of God himself, upon thefoundations of the everlasting hills.Chapter II.Consistency of Geological Discoveries withSacred History.It may seem just matter of surprise, thatmany learned and religious men should regardwith jealousy and suspicion the study of anynatural phenomena, which abound with proofsof some of the highest attributes of the Deity ;and should receive with distrust, or total incredulity,the announcement of conclusions,which the geologist deduces from careful andpatient investigation of the facts which it ishis province to explore. These doubts anddifficulties result from the disclosures made bygeology, respecting the lapse of very long periodsof time, before the creation of man. Mindswhich have been long accustomed to date theorigin of the universe, as well as that of thehuman race, from an era of about six thousandyears ago, receive reluctantly any information,which if true, demands some newmodification of their present ideas of cosmo-discoveriesWITH SACRED HISTORY. 9gone ; and, as in this respect, Geology hasshared the fate of other infant sciences, inbeing for a while considered hostile to revealedreligion ; so like them, when fully understood,it will be found a potent and consistent auxiliaryto it, exalting our conviction of the Power,and Wisdom, and Goodness of the Creator.*No reasonable man can doubt that all thephenomena of the natural world derive theirorigin from God ; and no one who believes theBible to be the word of God, has cause to fearany discrepancy between this, his word, and theresults of any discoveries respecting the natureof his works ; but the early and deliberativestages of scientific discovery are always thoseof perplexity and alarm, and during these stagesthe human mind is naturally circumspect, andslow to admit new conclusions in any departmentof knowledge. The prejudiced persecutorsof Galileo apprehended danger to religion, fromHaec et hujusmodi coelum phenomena, ad Epochssexmillennem, salis naturae legions, aegre revocari posset.Quin faciendum erst potius non eadem fuisse origines, nequecoeval, Tellers nostri et toties Universe : sive Intellectuals,sive Corpore. Neque morum videre debet haec non distinxisseMoses, aut Universe origines non tractable seorsim ab iliamundi nostri sublunary : Haec enim non distinguish populus, autseparation estimate. — Recte igitur Legislator sapientissimus philosophiesreliques id negotii, ut ubi maturuerit ingenium humanum,per staten, sum, et observations, opera Dei alio ordines different,perfectionibus divines atque rerum naturae adaptation. —Burnet's Archceologioe P hilosojihicce . C. viii. p. 306. to. 1692,10 CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALthe discoveries of a science, in which a Kepler,*and a Newton found demonstration of the mostsublime and glorious attributes of the Creator.A Herschel has pronounced that " Geology, inthe magnitude and sublimity of the objects ofwhich it treats, undoubtedly ranks in the scale ofsciences next to astronomy ;" and the history ofthe structure of our planet, when it shall be fullyunderstood, must lead to the same great moralresults that have followed the study of the mechanismof the heavens ; Geology has alreadyKepler concludes one of his astronomical works with thefollowing prayer, which is thus translated in the ChristianObserver, Aug. 1834, p. 495.It remains only that I should now lift up to heaven my eyesand hands from the table of my pursuits, and humbly and devoutlysupplicate the Father of lights. O thou, who by thelight of nature dost enkindle in us a desire after the light ofgrace, that by this thou mayst translate us into the light of glory;I give thee thanks, O Lord and Creator, that thou hast gladdenedme by thy creation, when I was enraptured by the workof thy hands. Behold, I have here completed a work of mycalling, with as much of intellectual strength as thou hast grantedme. I have declared the praise of thy works to the men whowill read the evidences of it, so far as my finite spirit could comprehendthem in their infinity. My mind endeavoured to itsutmost to reach the truth by philosophy ; but if any thingunworthy of thee has been taught by me — a worm born andnourished in sin — do thou teach me that I may correct it. HaveI been seduced into presumption by the admirable beauty of thyworks, or have I sought my own glory among men, in the constructionof a work designed for thine honour? O then graciouslyand mercifully forgive me ; and finally grant me thisfavour, that this work may never be injurious, but may conduceto thy glory and the good of souls."DISCOVERIES WITH SACRED HISTORY. 11proved by physical evidence, that the surface ofthe globe has not existed in its actual state frometernity, but has advanced through a series ofcreative operations, succeeding one another atlong and definite intervals of time ; that all theactual combinations of matter have had a priorexistence in some other state ; and that the ultimateatoms of the material elements, throughwhatever changes they may have passed, are,and ever have been, governed by laws, as regularand uniform, as those which hold the planets intheir course. All these results entirely accordwith the best feelings of our nature, and withour rational conviction of the greatness andgoodness of the Creator of the universe ; andthe reluctance with which evidences, of suchhigh importance to natural theology, have beenadmitted by many persons, who are sincerelyzealous for the interests of religion, can only beexplained by their want of accurate informationin physical science ; and by their ungroundedfears lest natural phenomena should prove inconsistentwith the account of creation in thebook of Genesis.It is argued unfairly against Geology, that becauseits followers are as yet agreed on no completeand incontrovertible theory of the earth ;and because early opinions advanced on imperfectevidence have yielded, in succession, to moreextensive discoveries; therefore nothing certain12 CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALis known upon the whole subject ; and that allgeological deductions must be crude, unauthentic,and conjectural.It must be candidly admitted that the seasonhas not yet arrived, when a perfect theory ofthe whole earth can be fixedly and finally established,since we have not yet before us all thefacts on which such a theory may eventually befounded ; but, in the mean while, we have abundantevidence of numerous and indisputable phenomena,each establishing important and undeniableconclusions ; and the aggregate of theseconclusions, as they gradually accumulate, willform the basis of future theories, each moreand more nearly approximating to perfection ;the first, and second, and third story of ouredifice may be soundly and solidly constructed;although time must still elapse before theroof and pinnacles of the perfect building canbe completed. Admitting therefore, that wehave yet much to learn, we contend that muchsound knowledge has been already acquired ;and we protest against the rejection of establishedparts, because the whole is not yet madeperfect.It was assuredly prudent, during the infancyof Geology, in the immature state of those physicalsciences which form its only sure foundation,not to enter upon any comparison ofthe Mosaic account of creation with the struckWITH SACRED HISTORY. 13ture of the earth, then almost totally unknown; the time was not then come when theknowledge of natural phenomena was sufficientlyadvanced to admit of any profitable investigationof this question ; but the discoveriesof the last half century have been so extensivein this department of natural knowledge, that,whether we will or not, the subject is now forcedupon our consideration, and can no longer escapediscussion. The truth is, that all observers,however various may be their speculations, respectingthe secondary causes by which geologicalphenomena have been brought about, arenow agreed in admitting the lapse of very longperiods of time to have been an essential conditionto the production of these phenomena.It may therefore be proper, in this part of ourenquiry, to consider how far the brief account ofcreation, contained in the Mosaic narrative, canbe shown to accord with those natural phenomena,which will come under considerationin the course of the present essay. Indeedsome examination of this question seems indispensableat the very threshold of an investigation,the subject matter of which will bederived from a series of events, for the most part,long antecedent to the creation of the humanspecies. I trust it may be shown, not only thatthere is no inconsistency between our interpretationof the phenomena of nature and of the CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALsaid narrative, but that the results of geologicalenquiry throw important light on parts of thishistory, which are otherwise involved in muchobscurity.If the suggestions I shall venture to proposerequire some modification of the most commonlyreceived and popular interpretation of the Mosaicnarrative, this admission neither involvesany impeachment of the authenticity of the text,nor of the judgment of those who have formerlyinterpreted it otherwise, in the absence of informationas to facts which have but recently beenbrought to light ; and if, in this respect, geologyshould seem to require some little concessionfrom the literal interpreter of scripture, it mayfairly be held to afford ample compensationfor this demand, by the large additions it hasmade to the evidences of natural religion, inadepartment where revelation was not designedto give information.The disappointment of those who look for adetailed account of geological phenomena inthe Bible, rests on a gratuitous expectation offinding therein historical information, respectingall the operations of the Creator in times andplaces with which the human race has no concern; as reasonably might we object that theMosaic history is imperfect, because it makes nospecific mention of the satellites of Jupiter, orthe rings of Saturn, as feel disappointment atDISCOVERIES WITH SACRED HISTORY. 1.5not finding in it the history of geological phenomena,the details of which may be fit matterfor an encyclopedia of science, but are foreignto the objects of a volume intended only to beaguide of religious belief and moral conduct.We may fairly ask of those persons who considerphysical science a fit subject for revelation,what point they can imagine short of a communicationof Omniscience, at which such a revelationmight have stopped, without imperfectionsof omission, less in degree, but similar in kind, tothat which they impute to the existing narrativeof Moses? A revelation of so much only ofastronomy, as was known to Copernicus, wouldhave seemed imperfect after the discoveries ofNewton; and a revelation of the science of Newtonwould have appeared defective to La Place :a revelation of all the chemical knowledge ofthe eighteenth century would have been asdeficient in comparison with the information ofthe present day, as what is now known in thisscience will probably appear before the terminationof another age ; in the whole circle ofsciences, there is not one to which this argumentmay not be extended, until we should requirefrom revelation a full development of all themysterious agencies that uphold the mechanismof the material world. Such a revelationmight indeed be suited to beings of amore exalted order than mankind, and the CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALraiment of such knowledge of the works aswell as of the ways of God, may perhaps formsome part of our happiness in a future state ; butunless human nature had been constituted otherwisethan it is, the above supposed communicationof omniscience would have been imparted to creatures,utterly incapable of receiving it, under anypast or present moral or physical condition ofthe human race ; and would have been also atvariance with the design of all God's other disclosuresof himself, the end of which has uniformlybeen, not to impart intellectual but moralknowledge.Several hypotheses have been proposed, with aview of reconciling the phenomena of Geology,with the brief account of creation which we findin the Mosaic narrative. Some have attemptedto ascribe the formation of all the stratifiedrocks to the effects of the Mosaic Deluge ; anopinion which is irreconcilable with the enormousthickness and almost infinite subdivisionsof these strata, and with the numerous and regularsuccessions which they contain of the remainsof animals and vegetables, differing more andmore widely from existing species, as thestrata in which we find them are placed atgreater depths. The fact that a large proportionof these remains belong to extinct genera,and almost all of them to extinct species,that lived and multiplied and died on or nearDISCOVERIES WITH SACRED HISTORY. 17the spots where they are now found, shows thatthe strata in which they occur were depositedslowly and gradually, during long periods of time,and at widely distant intervals. These extinctanimals and vegetables could therefore haveformed no part of the creation with which weareimmediately connected.It has been supposed by others, that thesestrata were formed at the bottom of the sea,during the interval between the creation of manand the Mosaic deluge ; and that, at the time ofthat deluge, portions of the globe which hadbeen previously elevated above the level of thesea, and formed the antediluvian continents, weresuddenly submerged ; while the ancient bed ofthe ocean rose to supply their place. To thishypothesis also, the facts I shall subsequentlyadvance offer insuperable objections.A third opinion has been suggested, both bylearned theologians and by geologists, and ongrounds independent of one another ; viz. thatthe Days of the Mosaic creation need not beunderstood to imply the same length of timewhich is now occupied by a single revolution ofthe globe ; but successive periods, each of greatextent : and it has been asserted that the orderof succession of the organic remains of a formerworld, accords with the order of creation recordedin Genesis. This assertion, though to acertain degree apparently correct, is not entirelyg. c18 CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALsupported by geological facts ; since it appearsthat the most ancient marine animals occur inthe same division of the lowest transition stratawith the earliest remains of vegetables ; so thatthe evidence of organic remains, as far as itgoes, shows the origin of plants and animals tohave been contemporaneous : if any creation ofvegetables preceded that of animals, no evidenceof such an event has yet been discovered by theresearches of geology. Still there is, I believe,no sound critical, or theological objection, to theinterpretation of the word "day," as meaning along period ; but there will be no necessity forsuch extension, in order to reconcile the text ofGenesis with physical appearances, if it can beshown that the time indicated by the phenomenaof Geology* may be found in the undefinedinterval, following the announcement of the firstverse.In my inaugural lecture, published at Oxford,1820, pp. 31, 32, I have stated my opinion inA very interesting treatise on the Consistency of Geologywith Sacred History has recently been published at Newhaven,1833, by Professor Lillian, as a supplement to an Americanedition of Bakewell's Geology, 1833. The author contends thatthe period alluded to in the first verse of Genesis, " In the beginning,"is not necessarily connected with the first day, and thatit may be regarded as standing by itself, and admitting of anyextension backward in time which the facts may seem to require.He is further disposed to consider the six days of creation asperiods of time of indefinite length, and that the word "day" isnot of necessity limited to twenty-four hours.DISCOVERIES WITH SACRED HISTORY. 19favour of the hypothesis, " which supposes theword ' beginning ',' as applied by Moses in thefirst verse of the book of Genesis, to express anundefined period of time, which was antecedentto the last great change that affected the surfaceof the earth, and to the creation of its presentanimal and vegetable inhabitants ; during whichperiod a long series of operations and revolutionsmay have been going on ; which, as they arewholly unconnected with the history of thehuman race, are passed over in silence by thesacred historian, whose only concern with themwas barely to state, that the matter of the universeis not eternal and self existent, but wasoriginally created by the power of the Almighty."I have great satisfaction in finding that theview of this subject, which I have here expressed,and have long entertained, is in perfect accordancewith the highly valuable opinion ofDr. Chalmers, recorded in the following passagesof his Evidence of the Christian Revelation,chap. vii. : — " Does Moses ever say, that whenGod created the heavens and the earth he didmore, at the time alluded to, than transformthem out of previously existing materials ? Ordoes he ever say that there was not an intervalof many ages between the first act of creationdescribed in the first verse of the Book of Genesis,and said to have been performed at the20 CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALbeginning, and those more detailed operations,the account of which commences at the secondverse, and which are described to us as havingbeen performed in so many days? Or, finally,does he ever make us to understand that thegenealogies of man went any farther than to fixthe antiquity of the species, and, of consequence,that they left the antiquity of the globea free subject for the speculation of philosophers? "It has long been matter of discussion amonglearned theologians, whether the first verseof Genesis should be considered prospectively,as containing a summary announcement of thatnew creation, the details of which follow in therecord of the operations of the six successivedays; or as an abstract statement that theheaven and earth were made by God, withoutlimiting the period when that creative agencywas exerted. The latter of these opinions isin perfect harmony with the discoveries ofGeology.The Mosaic narrative commences with a declaration,that " In the beginning God createdthe heaven and the earth." These few firstwords of Genesis may be fairly appealed to bythe geologist, as containing a brief statementof the creation of the material elements, at atime distinctly preceding the operations of theDISCOVERIES WITH SACRED HISTORY. 21first day : it is nowhere affirmed that God createdthe heaven and the earth in the first day,but in the beginning ; this beginning may havebeen an epoch at an unmeasured distance, followedby periods of undefined duration, duringwhich all the physical operations disclosed byGeology were going on.The first verse of Genesis, therefore, seemsexplicitly to assert the creation of the Universe ;the heaven," including the sidereal systems ;*and the earth," more especially specifyingour own planet, as the subsequent scene of theoperations of the six days about to be described :no information is given as to events which mayhave occurred upon this earth, unconnected withthe history of man, between the creation of itscomponent matter recorded in the first verse,and the era at which its history is resumedin the second verse ; nor is any limit fixedto the time during which these intermediateevents may have been going on : millions ofmillions of years may have occupied the indefiniteinterval, between the beginning in whichGod created the heaven and the earth, and theThe Hebrew plural word, shamaim, Gen. i. 1, translatedheaven, means etymologically, the higher regions, all that seemsabove the earth : as we say, God above, God on high, God inheaven ; meaning thereby to express the presence of the Deityin space distinct from this earth. — E. B. Pusey.22 CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALevening or commencement of the first day of theMosaic narrative.*The second verse may describe the conditionof the earth on the evening of this first day ; (for inthe Jewish mode of computation used by Moses,I have much satisfaction in subjoining the following noteby my friend, the Regius Professor of Hebrew in Oxford, asit enables me to advance the very important sanction of Hebrewcriticism, in support of the interpretations, by which we may reconcilethe apparent difficulties arising from geological phenomena,with the literal interpretation of the first chapter of Genesis. —Two opposite errors have, I think, been committed by critics,with regard to the meaning of the word bara, created ; the one,by those who asserted that it must in itself signify " created outof nothing;" the other, by those who endeavoured, by aid ofetymology, to show that it must in itself signify " formation outof existing matter." In fact, neither is the case ; nor am I awareof any language in which there is a word signifying necessarily"created out of nothing;" as of course, on the other hand, noword when used of the agency of God would, in itself, imply theprevious existence of matter. Thus the English word, create, bywhich bara is translated, expresses that the thing created receivedits existence from God, without in itself conveying whether Godcalled that thing into existence out of nothing, or no; for ourvery addition of the words " out of nothing," shows that the wordcreation has not, in itself, that force : nor indeed, when we speakof ourselves as creatures of God's hand, do we at all mean thatwe were physically formed out of nothing. In like manner,whether bara should be paraphrased by " created out of nothing"(as far as we can comprehend these words), or, " gave a newand distinct state of existence to a substance already existing,"must depend upon the context, the circumstances, or what Godhas elsewhere revealed, not upon the mere force of the word.This is plain, from its use in Gen. i. 27, of the creation of man,who, as we are instructed, chap. ii. 7, was formed out of previouslyexisting matter, the ' dust of the ground.' The word baraDISCOVERIES WITH SACRED HISTORY. 23each day is reckoned from the beginning of oneevening to the beginning of another evening).This first evening may be considered as the terminationof the indefinite time which followedthe primeval creation announced in the firstis indeed so far stronger than asah, " made," in that bara canonly be used with reference to God, whereas asah maybe appliedto man. The difference is exactly that which exists in Englishbetween the words by which they are rendered, " created " andmade." But this seems to me to belong rather to our mode ofconception than to the subject itself; for making, when spokenof with reference to God, is equivalent to creating.The words accordingly, bara, created — asah, made — yatsar,formed, are used repeatedly by Isaiah, and are also employed byAmos, as equivalent to each other. Bare and asah express alikea formation of something new (de novo), something whose existencein this new state originated in, and depends entirely uponthe will of its creator or maker. Thus God speaks of Himself asthe Creator " boree" of the Jewish people, e. g. Isaiah xliii.1,15; and a new event is spoken of under the same term as " acreation," Numb. xvi. 30, English version, " If the Lord make anew thing;" in the margin, Heb. " create a creature." Again,the Psalmist uses the same word, Ps. civ. 30, when describingthe renovation of the face of the earth through the successivegenerations of living creatures, "Thou senses forth thy spirit,they are created; and thou renewed the face of the earth."The question is popularly treated by Beausobre, Hist, de Mani-cheese,torn. ii. lib. 5, c. 4 ; or, in a better spirit, by PelagiusDogs. Theol. torn. iii. de officio sex dierum, lib. 1, c. 1, § 8.After having continually re-read and studied this account, Ican come to no other result than that the words " created" and"made" are synonymous, (although the former is to us thestronger of the two), and that, because they are so constantly interchanged;as, Gen. i. ver. 21, " God created great whales :." ver.25, " God made the beast of the earth ;" ver. 26, " Let us makeman ;" ver. 27, " So God created man." At the same time it is24 CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALverse, and as the commencement of the first ofthe six succeeding days, in which the earth was tobe fitted up, and peopled in a manner fit for thereception of mankind. We have in this secondverse, a distinct mention of earth and waters, asvery probable that bara," created'' as being the stronger word, wasselected to describe the first production of the heaven and the earth.The point, however, upon which the interpretation of the firstchapter of Genesis appears to me really to turn, is, whether thetwo first verses are merely a summary statement of what is relatedin detail in the rest of the chapter, and a sort of introduction toit,or whether they contain an account of an act of creation. Andthis last seems to me to be their true interpretation, first, becausethere is no other account of the creation of the earth ; secondly, thesecond verse describes the condition of the earth when so created,and thus prepares for the account of the work of the six days ; butif they speak of any creation, it appears to me that this creationin the beginning" was previous to the six days, because, as youwill observe, the creation of each day is preceded by the declarationthat God said, or willed, that such things should be (" andGod said), and therefore the very form of the narrative seems toimply that the creation of the first day began when these words arefirst used, ie. with the creation of light in ver. 3. The time then ofthe creation in ver. 1 appears to me not to be defined : we are toldonly what alone we are concerned with, that all things were madeby God. Nor is this any new opinion. Many of the fathers(they are quoted by Pelagius, I. c. c. 11, § i. — viii.) supposed thetwo first verses of Genesis to contain an account of a distinct andprior act of creation ; some, as Augustine, Theodore, and others,that of the creation of matter ; others, that of the elements ;others again (and they the most numerous) imagine that, notthese visible heavens, but what they think to be called elsewherethe highest heavens," the " heaven of heavens," are here spokenof, our visible heavens being related to have been created on thesecond day. Pelagius himself regards the light as the only actof creation of the first day (c. vii " de opere prise diei, i. e.DISCOVERIES WITH SACRED HISTORY. 25already existing, and involved in darkness;their condition also is described as a state ofconfusion and emptiness, (thu boh), wordswhich are usually interpreted by the vague andindefinite Greek term, " chaos," and which mayluce), considering the two first verses as a summary of the accountof creation which was about to follow, and a general declarationthat all things were made by God.Episcopus again, and others, thought that the creation andfall of the bad angels took place in the interval here spoken of:and misplaced as such speculations are, still they seem to showthat it is natural to suppose that a considerable interval may havetaken place between the creation related in the first verse of Genesisand that of which an account is given in the third and followingverses. Accordingly, in some old editions of the EnglishBible, where there is no division into verses, you actually find abreak at the end of what is now the second verse ; and in Luther'sBible (Wittenberg, 1557) you have in addition the figure 1placed against the third verse, as being the beginning of theaccount of the creation on the first day.This then is just the sort of confirmation which one wished for,because, though one would shrink from the impiety of bendingthe language of God's book to any other than its obvious meaning,we can not help fearing lest we might be unconsciouslyinfluenced by the floating opinions of our own day, and thereforeturn the more anxiously to those who explained Holy Scripture,before these theories existed. You must allow me to add that Iwould not define further. We know nothing of creation, nothingof ultimate causes, nothing of space, except what is bounded byactual existing bodies, nothing of time, but what is limited by therevolution of those bodies. I should be very sorry to appear todogmatize upon that, of which it requires very little reflection, orreverence, to confess that we are necessarily ignorant. " Hardlydo we guess aright of things that are upon earth, and with labourdo we find the things that are before us ; but the things that are inheaven who hath searched out ?" — Wisdom, ix. 16. — E. B. Pusey.26 CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALbe geologically considered as designating thewreck and ruins of a former world. At thisintermediate point of time, the preceding undefinedgeological periods had terminated, a newseries of events commenced, and the work of thefirst morning of this new creation was the callingforth of light from a temporary darkness, whichhad overspread the ruins of the ancient earth.*We have further mention of this ancient earthand ancient sea in the ninth verse, in which thewaters are commanded to be gathered togetherinto one place, and the dry land to appear ; thisdry land being the same earth whose materialcreation had been announced in the first verse,and whose temporary submersion and temporarydarkness are described in the second verse ; theappearance of the land and the gathering togetherof the waters are the only facts affirmed respectingthem in the ninth verse, but neitherland nor waters are said to have been created onthe third day.A similar interpretation may be given of thefourteenth and four succeeding verses ; what isI learn from Professor Pusey that the words " let there belight" yehi or, Gen. i. 3, by no means necessarily imply, anymorethan the English words by which they are translated, thatlight had never existed before. They may speak only of thesubstitution of light for darkness upon the surface of this, ourplanet : whether light had existed before in other parts of God'screation, or had existed upon this earth, before the darkness describedin v. 2, is foreign to the purpose of the narrative.DISCOVERIES WITH SACRED HISTORY. 27herein stated of the celestial luminaries seems tobe spoken solely with reference to our planet,and more especially to the human race, thenabout to be placed upon it. We are not told thatthe substance of the sun and moon were firstcalled into existence upon the fourth day :*the text may equally imply that these bodies werethen prepared, and appointed to certain offices,of high importance to mankind ; " to give lightupon the earth, and to rule over the day,and over the night," "to be for signs, and forseasons, and for days, and for years." The factof their creation had been stated before in thefirst verse. The stars also are mentioned (Gen. i.16) in three words only, almost parenthetically ;as if for the sole purpose of announcing, thatthey also were made by the same Power, asthose luminaries which are more important tous,the sun and moons This very slightnotice of the countless host of celestial bodies,all of which are probably suns, the centresof other planetary systems, whilst our littlesatellite, the moon, is mentioned as next in importanceto the sun, shows clearly that astronomicalphenomena are here spoken of onlyaccording to their relative importance to ourearth, and to mankind, and without any regardSee notes, p. 22 and p. 26.f The literal translation of the words teeth haccocabim, is,And the stars"— E. B. Pusey.28 CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALto their real importance in the boundless universe.It seems impossible to include the fixedstars among those bodies which are said (Gen.i. v. 17.) to have been set in the firmament ofthe heaven to give light upon the earth; sincewithout the aid of telescopes, by far the greaternumber of them are invisible. The same principleseems to pervade the description of creationwhich concerns our planet : the creation of itscomponent matter having been announced in thefirst verse, the phenomena of Geology, likethose of astronomy, are passed over in silence,and the narrative proceeds at once to details ofthe actual creation which have more immediatereference to man.*The following observations by Bishop Gleig (though, at thetime of writing them, he was not entirely convinced of the realityof facts announced by geological discoveries) show his opinion ofthe facility of so interpreting the Mosaic account of creation, asto admit of an indefinite lapse of time prior to the existence ofthe human race.I am indeed strongly inclined to believe that the matter ofthe corporeal universe was all created at once, though differentportions of it may have been reduced to form at very differentperiods ; when the universe was created, or how long the solarsystem remained in a chaotic state are vain enquiries, to whichno answer can be given. Moses records the history of the earthonly in its present state ; he affirms, indeed, that it was created,and that it was without form and void, when the spirit of Godbegan to move on the surface of the fluid mass ; but, he does notsay how long that mass had been in the state of chaos, orwhether it was, or was not the wreck of some former system,which had been inhabited by living creatures of different kindsfrom those which occupy the present. I say this, not to meetDISCOVERIES WITH SACRED HISTORY. 29The interpretation here proposed seems moreoverto solve the difficulty, which would otherwiseattend the statement of the appearance of lightupon the first day, whilst the sun and moon andstars are not made to appear until the fourth.If we suppose all the heavenly bodies, andthe earth, to have been created at the indefinitelydistant time, designated by the word beginning,and that the darkness described on theevening of the first day, was a temporary darkness,produced by an accumulation of dense va-theobjection which has sometimes been urged against the Mosaiccosmogony, from its representing the works of creationas being no more than six or seven thousand years old, for Mosesgives no such representation of the age of those works. Howeverdistant the period may be, and it is probably very distant,when God created the heavens and the earth ; there has been atime when it was not distant one year, one day, or one hour.Those, therefore, who contend that the glory of the AlmightyGod manifested in his works, cannot be limited to the shortperiod of six or seven thousand years, are not aware that thesame objection may be made to the longest period which canpossibly be conceived by the mind of man. No assignablequantity of successive duration bears any proportion to eternity,and though we should suppose the corporeal universe to havebeen created six millions or six hundred millions of years ago, acaviller might still say, and with equal reason, that the glory ofAlmighty God manifested in his works cannot be so limited. Itis not to silence such objections as this, that I have admitted theexistence of a former earth and visible heavens to be not inconsistentwith the cosmogony of Moses, or indeed with any otherpart of scripture, but only to prevent the faith of the piousreader from being unsettled by the discoveries, whether real orpretended, of our modern geologists. If these philosophers have30 CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALpours "upon the face of the deep;" an incipientdispersion of these vapours may have readmittedlight to the earth, upon the first day, whilst theexciting cause of light was still obscured ; andthe further purification of the atmosphere, uponthe fourth day, may have caused the sun andmoon and stars to reappear in the firmament ofheaven, to assume their new relations to thenewly modified earth, and to the human race.*We have evidence of the presence of lightduring long and distant periods of time, in whichreally discovered fossil bones that must have belonged to speciesand genera of animals, which now no where exist, either on theearth or in the ocean, and if the destruction of these genera orspecies cannot be accounted for by the general deluge, or anyother catastrophe to which we know, from authentic history, thatour globe has been actually subjected, or if it be a fact, thattowards the surface of the earth are found strata, which couldnot have been so disposed as they are, but by the sea, or at leastsome watery mass remaining over them in a state of tranquillity,for a much longer period than the duration of Noah's flood ; ifthese things be indeed well ascertained, of which I am howeverby no means convinced, there is nothing in the sacred writingsforbidding us to suppose that they are the ruins of a formerearth, deposited in the chaotic mass of which Moses informed usthat God formed the present system. His history, as far asit comes down, is the history of the present earth, and of theprimeval ancestors of its present inhabitants ; and one of themost scientific and ingenious of geologists has clearly proved, fthat the human race cannot be much more ancient than itappears to be in the writings of the Hebrew lawgiver." — Stack-house'sBible, by Bishop Gleig, p. 6, 7, 1816.See note, p. 26.f See Cuvier's Essay on the Theory of the Earth.DISCOVERIES WITH SACRED HISTORY. 31the many extinct fossil forms of animal lifesucceeded one another upon the early surface ofthe globe : this evidence consists in the petrifiedremains of eyes of animals, found in geologicalformations of various ages. In a future chapterI shall show, that the eyes of Trilobites, whichare preserved in strata of the transition formation,(PL 45, Figs. 9, 10, 11), were constructedin a manner so closely resembling those of existingCrustacea ; and that the eyes of Ichthyo-sauri, in the lias, (PI. 10, Figs. 1, 2), containedan apparatus, so like one in the eyes of manybirds, as to leave no doubt that these fossil eyeswere optical instruments, calculated to receive, inthe same manner, impressions of the same light,which conveys the perception of sight to livinganimals. This conclusion is further confirmedby the general fact, that the heads of all fossilfishes and fossil reptiles, in every geological formation,are furnished with cavities for the receptionof eyes, and with perforations for thepassage of optic nerves, although the cases arerare, in which any part of the eye itself has beenpreserved. The influence of light is also sonecessary to the growth of existing vegetables,that we cannot but infer, that it was equallyessential to the development of the numerousfossil species of the vegetable kingdom, whichare coextensive and coeval with the remains offossil animals.32 CONSISTENCY OF GEOLOGICALIt appears highly probable from recent discoveries,*that light is not a material substance, butonly an effect of undulations of ether; that thisinfinitely subtle and elastic ether pervades allspace, and even the interior of all bodies ; solong as it remains at rest, there is total darkness; when it is put into a peculiar state ofvibration, the sensation of light is produced :this vibration may be excited by various causes ;e. g. by the sun, by the stars, by electricity, combustion,&c. If then light be not a substance,but only a series of vibrations of ether, i. e.an effect produced on a subtile fluid, by theexcitement of one or many extraneous causes, itcan hardly be said, nor is it said, in Gen. i. 3, tohave been created though it may be literallysaid to be called into action.Lastly, in the reference made in the FourthCommandment, Exod. xx. 11, to the six days ofthe Mosaic creation, the word asah, " made," isthe same which is used in Gen. i. 7, and Gen. i.16, and which has been shown to be less strongand less comprehensive than bara, " created ;"and as it by no means necessarily implies creationout of nothing, it may be here employedFor a general statement of the undulatory theory of light,see Sir John Herschel, art. Light, part iii. sec. 2. Encyc.Metropolis. See also Professor Airy's Mathematical Tracts, 2ndedit. 1831, p. 249; and Mrs. Somerville's Connexion of thePhysical Sciences, 1834, p. 185.t See Note, p. 26.DISCOVERIES WITH SACRED HISTORY. 33to express a new arrangement of materials thatexisted before.*After all, it should be recollected that thequestion is not respecting the correctness of theMosaic narrative, but of our interpretation of it ;and still further, it should be borne in mind thatthe object of this account was, not to state in whatmanner, but by whom, the world was made. Asthe prevailing tendency of men in those earlydays was to worship the most glorious objects ofnature, namely, the sun and moon and stars ; itshould seem to have been one important point inthe Mosaic account of creation, to guard the Israelitesagainst the Polytheism and idolatry ofthe nations around them ; by announcing that allthese magnificent celestial bodies were no Gods,but the works of One Almighty Creator, to whomalone the worship of mankind is due.fSee Note, p. 22.f Having thus far ventured to enter into a series of explanations,which I think will reconcile even the letter of the text ofGenesis with the phenomena of Geology, I forbear to say moreon this important subject, and have much satisfaction in beingable to refer my readers to some admirable articles in the ChristianObserver (May, June, July, August, 1834) for a very ableand comprehensive summary of the present state of this question; explaining the difficulties with which it is surrounded, andoffering many temperate and judicious suggestions, as to thespirit in which investigations of this kind ought to be conducted.I would also refer to Bishop Horsey's Sermons, 8vo. 1816, vol.iii. ser. 39 ; to Bishop Bird Sumner's Records of Creation, vol. ii.p. 356 ; Douglas's Errors regarding Religion, 1830, p. 261-264,G. D34 PROPER SUBJECTS OFChapter III.Proper Subjects of Geological Enquiry.The history of the earth forms a large andcomplex subject of enquiry, divisible at its outset,into two distinct branches ; the first, comprehendingthe history of unorganized mineralHiggins on the Musical and Mineral Apologies, 1832 ; andmore especially to Professor Sedgwick's eloquent and admirablediscourse on the Studies of the University of Cambridge, 1833, inwhich he has most ably pointed out the relations which Geologybears to natural religion, and thus sums up his valuable opinionas to the kind of information we ought to look for in the Bible :The Bible instructs us that man, and other living things, havebeen placed but a few years upon the earth ; and the physicalmonuments of the world bear witness to the same truth : if theastronomer tells us of myriads of worlds not spoken of in thesacred records ; the geologist, in like manner, proves (not byarguments from analogy, but by the incontrovertible evidence ofphysical phenomena) that there were former conditions of ourplanet, separated from each other by vast intervals of time,during which man, and the other creatures of his own date, hadnot been called into being. Periods such as these belong not,therefore, to the moral history of our race, and come neitherwithin the letter nor the spirit of revelation. Between the firstcreation of the earth and that day in which it pleased Godto place man upon it, who shall dare to define the interval?On this question scripture is silent, but that silence destroys notthe meaning of those physical monuments of his power that Godhas put before our eyes, giving us at the same time facultieswhereby we may interpret them and comprehend their meaning."GEOLOGICAL ENQUIRY. 35matter, and of the various changes throughwhich it has advanced, from the creation of itscomponent elements to its actual condition ; thesecond, embracing the past history of the animaland vegetable kingdoms, and the successivemodifications which these two great departmentsof nature have undergone, during the chemicaland mechanical operations that have affectedthe surface of our planet. As the study of boththese branches forms the subject of the scienceof Geology, it is no less important to examinethe nature and action of the physical forces,that have affected unorganized mineral bodies,than to investigate the laws of life, and variedconditions of organization, that prevailed whilethe crust of our globe was in process of formation.Before we enter on the history of fossilanimals and vegetables, we must therefore firstbriefly review the progressive stages of mineralformations ; and see how far we can discoverin the chemical constitution, and mechanicalarrangement of the materials of the earth,proofs of general prospective adaptation to theeconomy of animal and vegetable life.As far as our planet is concerned, the first actof creation seems to have consisted in givingorigin to the elements of the material world,These inorganic elements appear to have receivedno subsequent addition to their number,36* PROPER SUBJECTS OFand to have undergone no alteration in theirnature and qualities ; but to have been submittedat their creation to the self same laws thatregulate their actual condition, and to have continuedsubject to these laws during every succeedingperiod of geological change. The sameelements also which enter the composition ofexisting animals and plants, appear to haveperformed similar functions in the economy ofmany successive animal and vegetable creations.In tracing the history of these natural phenomenawe enter at once into the considerationof Geological Dynamics, including the natureand mode of operation of all kinds of physicalagents, that have at any time, and in anymanner, affected the surface and interior of theearth. In the foremost rank of these agents, wefind Fire and Water, — those two universal andmighty antagonizing forces, which have mostmaterially influenced the condition of the globe;and which man also has converted into the mostefficient instruments of his power, and obedientauxiliaries of his mechanical and chemical andculinary operations.The state of the ingredients of crystallinerocks has, in a great degree, been influencedby chemical and electro-magnetic forces ; whilstthat of stratified sedimentary deposits has resultedchiefly from the mechanical action ofmoving water, and has occasionally been modi-geologicalENQUIRY. 37find by large admixtures of animal and vegetableremains.As the action of all these forces will be renderedmost intelligible by examples of theireffects, I at once refer my readers for a synopticview of them, to the section which forms the firstof my series of plates.* The object of this sectionis, first, to represent the order in whichthe successive series of stratified formations arepiled on one another, almost like courses ofmasonry ; secondly, to mark the changes thatoccur in their mineral and mechanical condition; thirdly, to show the manner in which allstratified rocks have at various periods beendisturbed, by the intrusion of unstratified crystallinerocks ; and variously affected by elevations,depressions, fractures, and dislocations ;fourthly, to give examples of the alterations inthe forms of animal and vegetable life, that haveaccompanied these changes of the mineral conditionsof the earth.From the above section it appears that thereare eight distinct varieties of the crystalline unstratifiedrocks, and twenty-eight well defineddivisions of the stratified formations. Takingthe average maximum thickness of each of thesedivisions, at one thousand feet,t we should haveThe detailed explanation of this section is given in the descriptionof the plates in vol. ii.t Many formations greatly exceed, whilst others fall short, ofthe average here taken.38 RELATION OF UNSTRATIFIEDa total amount of more than five miles ; but asthe transition and primary strata very muchexceed this average, the aggregate of all theEuropean stratified series may be considered tobe at least ten miles.Chapter IV.Relation of JJnstratified to Stratified Rocks.I shall enter into no further details respectingthe component members of each group of stratifiedrocks, than are represented by the lines ofdivision and colours upon the section.* Theyare arranged under the old divisions of primary,transition, secondary, and tertiary series, moreFor particular information respecting the mineral characterand organic remains of the strata composing each series, I mustrefer to the numerous publications that have been devoted tothese subjects. A most convenient summary of the contents ofthese publications will be found in De La Beche's Manual ofGeology, and in Von Meyer's Palseologia, (Frankfurt, 1832);ample details respecting the English strata are given in Cony-beareand Phillips's Geology of England and Wales. See alsoBakewell's Introduction to Geology, 1833 ; and Professor Phillips'sarticle Geology, in the Encyclopaedia Metropolitan ; alsoProfessor Phillips's Guide to Geology, 8vo. 1834; and De LaBeche's Researches in Theoretical Geology, 8vo. 1834. Thehistory of the organic remains of the tertiary period has beenmost ably elucidated in Lyell's Principles of Geology.TO STRATIFIED ROCKS. 39from a sense of the convenience of this long receivedarrangement, than from the reality ofany strongly defined boundaries by which thestrata, on the confines of each series, are separatedfrom one another.As the materials of stratified rocks are in greatdegree derived, directly or indirectly, from thosewhich are unstratified,* it will be premature toenter upon the consideration of derivative strata,until we have considered briefly the history ofthe primitive formations. We therefore commenceour inquiry at that most ancient period,when there is much evidence to render itprobable that the entire materials of the globewere in a fluid state, and that the cause of thisfluidity was heat. The form of the earth beingthat of an oblate spheroid, compressed at thepoles, and enlarged at the equator, is that whicha fluid mass would assume from revolutionround its axis. The further fact, that the shortestdiameter coincides with the existing axisIn speaking of crystalline rocks of supposed igneous originas unstratified, we adopt a distribution which, though not strictlyaccurate, has long been in general use among geologists. Ejectedmasses of granite, basalt, and lava have frequently horizontalpartings, dividing them into beds of various extent and thickness,such as those which are most remarkable in what the Venetianshave called the Fleets trap formation, PI. 1, section Fig. 6. ; butthey do not present that subdivision into successions of small beds,and still smaller laminae, which usually exists in sedimentarystrata that have been deposited by the action of water.40 RELATION OF UNSTRATIFIEDof rotation, shows that this axis has been thesame ever since the crust of the earth attainedits present solid form.Assuming that the whole materials of theglobe may have once been in a fluid, or even anebular state,* from the presence of intenseheat, the passage of the first consolidated portionsof this fluid, or nebulous matter, to a solidstate may have been produced by the radiationof heat from its surface into space ; the gradualabstraction of such heat would allow the particlesof matter to approximate and crystallize ; andthe first result of this crystallization might havebeen the formation of a shell or crust, composedof oxidized metals and metallic, constitutingvarious rocks of the granitic series, around anincandescent nucleus, of melted matter, heavierthan granite ; such as forms the more weightysubstance of basalt and compact lava.It is now unnecessary to dwell on controversieswhich have prevailed during the last halfcentury, respecting the origin of this large andimportant class of unstratified crystalline rocks,The nebular hypothesis offers the most simple, and thereforethe most probable theory, respecting the first condition of thematerial elements that compose our solar system. Mr. Wheelhas shown how far this theory, supposing it to be established,would tend to exalt our conviction of the prior existence ofsome presiding Intelligence. — Bridgewater Treatises, No. III.Chap. vii.TO STRATIFIED ROCKS. 4 1which the common consent of nearly all moderngeologists and chemists refers to the action offire. The agency of central heat, and the admissionof water to the metallic bases of theearths and alkalis, offer two causes which, takensingly or conjointly, seem to explain the productionand state of the mineral ingredients ofthese rocks ; and to account for many of thegrand mechanical movements that have affectedthe crust of the globe.The gradations are innumerable, which connectthe infinite varieties of granite, syenite,porphyry, greenstone, and basalt with the trachyticporphyries and lavas that are at this dayejected by volcanos. Although there still remainsome difficulties to be explained, there islittle doubt that the fluid condition in which allunstratified crystalline rocks originally existed,was owing to the solvent power of heat ; a powerwhose effect in melting the most solid materialsof the earth we witness in the fusion of thehardest metals, and of the flinty materials ofglass.*The experiments of Mr. Gregory Watt on bodies cooledslowly after fusion ; and of Sir James Hall, on reproducing artificialcrystalline rocks, from the pounded ingredients of thesame rocks highly heated under strong pressure ; and the morerecent experiments of Professor Mitscherlich, on the productionof artificial crystals, by fusion of definite proportions of their componentelements, have removed many of the objections, whichwere once urged against the igneous origin of crystalline rocks.42 RELATION OF UNSTRATIFIEDBeneath the whole series of stratified rocksthat appear on the surface of the globe (seesection PL 1), there probably exists a foundationof unstratified crystalline rocks ; bearingan irregular surface, from the detritus of whichthe materials of stratified rocks have in greatmeasure been derived,* amounting, as we havestated, to a thickness of many miles. This isindeed but a small depth, in comparison withthe diameter of the globe ; but small as it is, itaffords certain evidence of a long series ofchanges and revolutions ; affecting not only themineral condition of the nascent surface of theearth, but attended also by important alterationsin animal and vegetable life.The detritus of the first dry lands, being-driftedinto the sea, and there spread out intoextensive beds of mud and sand and gravel,would for ever have remained beneath the surfaceof the water, had not other forces beensubsequently employed to raise them into dryland : these forces appear to have been the sameexpansive powers of heat and vapour which,having caused the elevation of the first raisedportions of the fundamental crystalline rocks,Either directly, by the accumulation of the ingredients ofdisintegrated granitic rocks ; or indirectly, by the repeated destructionof different classes of stratified rocks, the materials ofwhich had, by prior operations, been derived from unstratifiedformations.TO STRATIFIED ROCKS. 43continued their energies through all succeedinggeological epochs, and still exert them in producingthe phenomena of active volcanoes ;phenomena incomparably the most violent thatnow appear upon the surface of our planet.*The evidence of design in the employment offorces, which have thus effected a grand generalpurpose, viz. that of forming dry land, by elevatingstrata from beneath the waters in whichthey were deposited, stands independent of thetruth or error of contending theories, respectingthe origin of that most ancient class of stratifiedrocks, which are destitute of organic remains(see pi. 1 . — section 1 , 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7). It is" The fact of great and frequent alteration in the relative levelof the sea and land is so well established, that the only remainingquestions regard the mode in which these alterations havebeen effected, whether by elevation of the land itself, or subsidencein the level of the sea? And the nature of the forcewhich has produced them ? The evidence in proof of great andfrequent movements of the land itself, both by protrusion andsubsidence, and of the connection of these movements with theoperations of volcanos, is so various and so strong, derived fromso many different quarters on the surface of the globe, and everydayso much extended by recent enquiry, as almost to demonstratethat these have been the causes by which those great revolutionswere effected ; and that although the action of the inwardforces which protrude the land has varied greatly in differentcountries, and at different periods, they are now and everhave been incessantly at work in operating present change andpreparing the way for future alteration in the exterior of theglobe," — Geological Sketch of the Vicinity of Hastings, by Dr.Fitton, pp. 8.5, 86.44 RELATION OF UNSTRATIFIEDimmaterial to the present question, whether theywere formed (according to the theory of Mutton)from the detritus of the earlier granitic rocks,spread forth by water into beds of clay and sand ;and subsequently modified by heat : or whetherthey have been produced, (as was maintained byWerner) by chemical precipitation from a fluid,having other powers of solution than those possessedby the waters of the present ocean. Itis of little importance to our present purpose,whether the non-appearance of animals and vegetablesin these most ancient strata was causedby the high temperature of the waters of theocean, in which they were mechanically deposited; or by the compound nature and uninhabitablecondition of a primeval fluid, holdingtheir materials in solution. All observers admitthat the strata were formed beneath the water,and have been subsequently converted into dryland : and whatever may have been the agentsthat caused the movements of the gross unorganizedmaterials of the globe ; we find sufficientevidence of prospective wisdom and design, inthe benefits resulting from these obscure anddistant revolutions, to future races of terrestrialcreatures, and more especially to Man.*In describing geological phenomena, it is impossible to avoidthe use of theoretical terms, and the provisional adoption ofmany theoretical opinions as to the manner in which these phenomenahave been produced. From among the various andTO STRATIFIED ROCKS. 45In unstratified crystalline rocks, wholly destituteof animal or vegetable remains, we searchin vain for those most obvious evidences of contrivance,which commence with the first tracesof organic life, in strata of the transition period ;the chief agencies which these rocks indicate,are those of fire and water ; and yet even here wefind proof of system and intention, in the purposewhich they have accomplished, of supplyingand accumulating at the bottom of the waterthe materials of stratified formations, which, inafter times, were to be elevated into dry lands,in an ameliorated condition of fertility. Stillmore decisive are the evidences of design andmethod, which arise from the consideration of theconflicting theories that have been proposed to explain the mostdifficult and complicated problems of Geology, I select thosewhich appear to carry with them the highest degree of probability; but as results remain the same from whatever cause theyhave originated, the force of inferences from these results will beunaffected by changes that may arise in our opinions as to the physicalcauses by which these have been produced. As in estimatingthe merits of the highest productions of human art it is notrequisite to understand perfectly the nature of the machinery bywhich the work has been effected in order to appreciate the skilland talent of the artist by whom it was contrived ; so our mindsmay be fully impressed with a perception of the magnificent resultsof creative intelligence, which are visible in the phenomenaof nature, although we can but partially comprehend the mechanismthat has been instrumental to their production ; and althoughthe full development of the workings of the material instrumentsby which they were effected, has not yet been, and perhapsmay never be, vouchsafed to the prying curiosity of man.46 VOLCANIC ROCKS,structure and composition of their crystallinemineral ingredients. In every particle of matterto which crystallization has been applied, werecognize the action of those undeviating laws ofpolar forces, and chemical affinity, which havegiven to all crystallized bodies a series of fixtdefinite forms and definite compositions. Suchuniversal prevalence of law, method, and orderassuredly attests the agency of some presidingand controlling mind.A further argument, which will be more insistedon in speaking on the subject of metallicveins, may be founded on the dispensationwhereby the primary and transition rocks aremade the principal repositories of many valuablemetals, which are of such peculiar and indispensableimportance to mankind.Chapter V.Volcanic Rocks, Basalt, and Trap.In the state of tranquil equilibrium which ourplanet has attained in the region we inhabit,we are apt to regard the foundation of the solidearth, as an emblem of duration and stability.Very different are the feelings of those whose lotiscast near the foci of volcanic eruptions ; toBASALT, AND TRAP. 47them the earth affords no stable resting place,but during the paroxysms of volcanic activity,reels to and fro, and vibrates beneath theirfeet ; overthrowing cities, yawning with dreadfulchasms, converting seas into dry lands, and drylands into seas. (See Lyell's Geology, vol. i.Passim.)To the inhabitants of such districts we speaka language which they fully comprehend, whenwe describe the crust of the globe as floating onan internal nucleus of molten elements ; theyhave seen these molten elements burst forth inliquid streams of lava ; they have felt the earthbeneath them quivering and rolling, as if uponthe billows of a subterranean sea ; they haveseen mountains raised and valleys depressed, almostin an instant of time ; they can duly appreciate,from sensible experience, the force ofthe terms in which geologists describe thetremulous throes, and convulsive agitations of theearth ; during the passage of its strata from thebottom of the seas, in which they received theirorigin, to the plains and mountains in whichthey find their present place of rest.We see that the streams of earthy matter,which issue in a state of fusion from activevolcanos, are spread around their craters insheets of many kinds of lava ; some of these somuch resemble beds of basalt, and various traprocks, that occur in districts remote from any48 VOLCANIC ROCKS,existing volcanic vent, as to render it probablethat the latter also have been poured forth fromthe interior of the earth. We further find therocks adjacent to volcanic craters, intersected byrents and fissures, which have been filled withinjections of more recent lava, forming transversewalls or dykes. Similar dykes occur notonly in districts occupied by basalt and traprocks, at a distance from the site of any modernvolcanic activity ; but also in strata of everyformation, from the most ancient primary, tothe most recent tertiary (see Plate 1. sectionf 1 — f 8. h 1 — h 2. i 1 — i 5) : and as the mineralcharacters of these dykes present insensible gradations,from a state of compact lava, throughinfinite varieties of greenstone, serpentine, andporphyry to granite, we refer them all to acommon igneous origin.The sources from which the matter of theseejected rocks ascends are deeply seated beneaththe granite ; but it is not yet decidedwhether the immediate cause of an eruptionbe the access of water to local accumulationsof the metallic bases of the earths and alkalies ;or whether lava be derived directly from thatgeneral mass of incandescent elements, whichmay probably exist at a depth of about one hundredmiles beneath the surface of our planet.*See chapter on the internal temperature of the earth.BASALT AND TRAP. 49Our section shows how closely the results ofvolcanic forces now in action are connected,both with the phenomena of basaltic formations,and also with the more ancient eruptions ofgreenstone, porphyry, syenite, and granite. Theintrusion both of dykes and irregular beds of unstratifiedcrystalline matter, into rocks, of everyage and every formation, all proceeding upwardsfrom an unknown depth, and often accumulatedinto vast masses overlying the surface of stratifiedrocks, are phenomena coextensive with theglobe.Throughout all these operations, however turbulentand apparently irregular, we see ultimateproofs of method and design, evinced by theuniformity of the laws of matter and motion,which have ever regulated the chemical andmechanical forces by which such grand effectshave been produced. If we view their aggregateresults, in causing the elevation of landfrom beneath the sea, we shall find that volcanicforces assume a place of the highest importance,among the second causes which have influencedthe past, as well as the present condition of theglobe ; each individual movement has contributedits share towards the final object, of conductingthe molten materials of an uninhabitableplanet, through long successions of changeand of convulsive movements, to a tranquil statec. E50 PRIMARY STRATIFIED ROCKS.of equilibrium ; in which it has become theconvenient and delightful habitation of man, andof the multitudes of terrestrial creatures that arehis fellow tenants of its actual surface.*Chapter VI.Primary Stratified Rocks.In the summary we have given of the leadingphenomena of unstratified and volcanic rocks, wehave unavoidably been led into theoretical speculations,and have seen that the most probableexplanation of these phenomena is found in thehypothesis of the original fluidity of the entirematerials of the earth, caused by the presence ofintense heat. From this fluid mass of metals,and metallic bases of the earths, and alkalies,the first granitic crust appears to have beenformed, by oxydation of these bases ; and subsequentlybroken into fragments, disposed atunequal levels above and below the surface ofthe first formed seas.Wherever solid matter arose above the water,it became exposed to destruction by atmosphericSee further details respecting the effects of volcanic forcesin the description of PI. I. Vol. ii.PRIMARY STRATIFIED ROCKS. 51agents; by rains, torrents, and inundations; atthat time probably acting with intense violence,and washing down and spreading forth, in theform of mud and sand and gravel, upon thebottom of the then existing seas, the materials ofprimary stratified rocks, which, by subsequentexposure to various degrees of subterranean heat,became converted into beds of gneiss, and micaslate, and hornblende slate, and clay slate. Inthe detritus thus swept from the earliest landsinto the most ancient seas, we view the commencementof that enormous series of derivativestrata which, by long continued repetition ofsimilar processes, have been accumulated to athickness of many miles.*The total absence of organic remains through.Conybeare (in his admirable Report on Geology to theBritish Association for the Advancement of Science, 1832,p. 367) shows, that many of the most important principles ofthe igneous theory, which has been almost demonstrated bymodern discoveries, had been anticipated by the universalLeibnitz. " In the fourth section of his Protogsea, Leibnitzpresents us with a masterly sketch of his general views, and,perhaps, even in the present day, it would be difficult to laydown more clearly the fundamental positions which must benecessarily common to every theory, attributing geologicalphenomena in great measure to central igneous agency. Heattributes the primary and fundamental rocks to the refrigerationof the crust of this volcanic nucleus ; an assumption which wellaccords with the now almost universally admitted igneous originof the fundamental granite, and with the structure of the primitiveslates, for the insensible gradation of these formations appearsto prove that gneiss must have undergone in a greater,-52 PRIMARY STRATIFIED ROCKS.out those lowest portions of these strata, whichhave been called primary, is a fact consistentand mica slate in a less degree, the same action of which themaximum intensity produced granite.The dislocations and deranged position of the strata heattributes to the breaking in of vast vaults, which the vesicularand cavernous structure assumed by masses, during their refrigerationfrom a state of fusion must necessarily have occasionedin the crust, thus cooling down and consolidated. He assignsthe weight of the materials and the eruption of elastic vapours asthe concurrent causes of these disruptions ; to which we shouldperhaps add, that the oscillations of the surface of the still fluidnucleus may, independently of any such cavities, have readilyshattered into fragments the refrigerated portion of the crust ;especially, as at this early period, it must have been necessarilyvery thin, and resembling chiefly the scoriae floating on a surfaceof lava just beginning to cool. He justly adds, that these disruptionsof the crust must, from the disturbances communicatedto the incumbent waters, have been necessarily attended withdiluvial action on the largest scale. When these waters hadsubsequently, in the intervals of quiescence between theseconvulsions, deposited the materials first acquired by their forceof attrition, these sediments formed, by their consolidation,various stony and earthy strata. Thus, he observes, we mayrecognise a double origin of the rocky masses, the one byrefrigeration from igneous fusion, (which, as we have seen, heconsidered principally to be assignable to the primary andfundamental rocks,) the other by concretion from aqueoussolution. We have here distinctly stated the great basisof every scientific classification of rock formations. By therepetition of similar causes (i. e. disruption of the crust and consequentinundations) frequent alternations of new strata wereproduced, until at length these causes having been reduced to acondition of quiescent equilibrium, a more permanent state ofthings emerged. Have we not here clearly indicated the dataon which, what may be termed the chronological investigation ofthe series of geological phenomena, must ever proceed?"PRIMARY STRATIFIED ROCKS. 53with the hypothesis which forms part of thetheory of gradual refrigeration ; viz. that thewaters of the first formed oceans were too muchheated to have been habitable by any kind oforganic beings.*In these most ancient conditions, both ofland and water, Geology refers us to a stateof things incompatible with the existence ofanimal and vegetable life ; and thus on the evidenceof natural phenomena, establishes theimportant fact that we find a starting point,on this side of which all forms, both of animaland vegetable beings, must have had a beginning.As, in the consideration of other strata, wefind abundant evidence in the presence of organicremains, in proof of the exercise ofcreative power, and wisdom, and goodness,attending the progress of life, through allits stages of advancement upon the surface ofthe globe ; so, from the absence of organic remainsin the primary strata, we may derivean important argument, showing that there wasa point of time in the history of our planet,(which no other researches but those of geologycan possibly approach,) antecedent to the beginningof either animal or vegetable life. ThisSo long as the temperature of the earth continued intenselyhigh, water could have existed only in the state of steam or vapour,floating in the atmosphere around the incandescent surface.54 PRIMARY STRATIFIED ROCKS.conclusion is the more important, because it hasbeen the refuge of some speculative philosophersto refer the origin of existing organizations, eitherto an external succession of the same species,or to the formation of more recent from moreancient species, by successive developments,without the interposition of direct and repeatedacts of creation ; and thus to deny the existenceof any first term, in the infinite series of successionswhich this hypothesis assumes. Againstthis theory, no decisive evidence has been accessible,until the modern discoveries of geologyhad established two conclusions of the highestvalue in relation to this long disputed question :the first proving, that existing species have hada beginning ; and this at a period comparativelyrecent in the physical history of our globe : thesecond showing that they were preceded byseveral other systems of animal and vegetablelife, respecting each of which it mayno less be proved, that there was a time whentheir existence had not commenced; and thatto these more ancient systems also, the doctrineof eternal succession, both retrospective andprospective, is equally inapplicable.*Mr. Lyell, in the four first chapters of the second volume ofhis Principles of Geology, has very ably and candidly examinedthe arguments that have been advanced in support of the doctrineof transmutation of species, and arrives at the conclusion,■ — " that species have a real existence in nature, and that eachPRIMARY STRATIFIED ROCKS. 55Having this evidence both of the beginningand end of several systems of organized life,each affording internal proof of the repeatedexercise of creative design, and wisdom, andpower, we are at length conducted back to aperiod anterior to the earliest of these systems ;a period in which we find a series of primarystrata, wholly destitute of organic remains ; andfrom this circumstance, we infer their depositionto have preceded the commencement of organiclife. Those who contend that life may have existedduring the formation of the primary strata,and the animal remains have been obliterated bythe effects of heat, on strata nearest to the granite,do but remove to one point further backwardsthe first term of the finite series of organicbeings ; and there still remains beyond this pointan antecedent period, in which a state of totalfusion pervaded the entire materials of the fundamentalgranite ; and one universal mass of incasendowed, at the time of its creation, with the attributes andorganization by which it is now distinguished."Mr. Delay Beche also says (Geological Researches, 1834, p.239, 1st edit. 8vo.) " There can be no doubt that many plants canadapt themselves to altered conditions, and many animals accommodatethemselves to different climates; but when we viewthe subject generally, and allow full importance to numerousexceptions, terrestrial plants and animals seem intended to fillthe situations they occupy, as these were fitted for them ; theyappear created as the conditions arose, the latter not causing amodification in previously existing forms productive of newspecies."56 PRIMARY STRATIFIED ROCKS.descent elements, wholly incompatible with anycondition of life, which can be shown to haveever existed, formed the entire substance of theglobe.*In adopting the hypothesis that the primary stratified rockshave been altered and indurated by subjacent heat, it should beunderstood, that although heat is in this case referred to as onecause of the consolidation of strata, there are other causes whichhave operated largely to consolidate the secondary and tertiarystrata, which are placed at a distance above rocks of igneousorigin. Although many kinds of limestone may have been incertaincases converted to crystalline marble, by the action of heatunder high pressure, there is no need for appealing to suchagency to explain the consolidation of ordinary strata of carbonateof lime ; beds of secondary and tertiary sandstone have often acalcareous cement, which may have been precipitated fromwater, like the substance of stalactites and ordinary limestone.When their cement is siliceous, it may also have been suppliedby some humid process, analogous to that by which the siliceousmatter of chalcedony and of quartz is either suspended or dissolvedin nature ; a process, the existence of which we cannotdeny, although it has yet baffled all the art of chemistry to imitateit. The beds of clay which alternate with limestone, andsand, or sandstone, in secondary and tertiary formations, show noindications of the action of heat ; having undergone no greaterconsolidation than may be referred to pressure, or to the admixtureof certain proportions of carbonate of lime, where the claybeds pass into marl and marston. Beds of soft consolidatedclay, or of loose consolidated sand, are very rarely if ever foundamongst any of the primary strata, or in the lower regions of thetransition formation ; the effects of heat appear to have convertedthe earlier deposits of sand into compact quartz rock, and bedsof clay into clay slate, or other forms of primary slate. The rockwhich some authors have called primary grauwacke, seemsto be a mechanical deposit of coarse sandstone, in which the formof the fragments has not been so entirely obliterated by heat, asin the case of compact quartz rock.PRIMARY STRATIFIED ROCKS. 57It may be said we have no right to deny thepossible existence of life and organization uponthe surface, or in the interior of our planet,under a state of igneous fusion. " Who," saysthe ingenious and speculative Tucker, (Light ofNature, book iii. chap. 10), " can reckon up allthe varieties that infinite wisdom can contrive,or show the impossibility of organizations dissimilarto any within our experience? Whoknows what cavities lie within the earth, orwhat living creatures they may contain, enduedwith senses unknown to us, to whom the streamsof magnetism may serve instead of light, andthose of electricity affect them as sensibly assounds and odours affect us? Why should wepronounce it impossible that there should bebodies formed to endure the burning sun, towhom fire may be the natural element, whosebones and muscles are composed of fixed earth,their blood and juices of molten metals? Orothers made to live in the frozen regions ofSaturn, having their circulation carried on byfluids more subtle than the highest rectifiedspirits raised by chemistry ? "It is not for us to meet questions of this kindby dogmatizing as to possible existences, or topresume to speculate on the bounds which creativePower may have been pleased to impose onits own operations. We can only assert, that asthe laws that now regulate the movements and58 PRIMARY STRATIFIED ROCKS.properties of all the material elements, can beshown to have undergone no change sincematter was first created upon our planet; noforms of organization such as now exist, or suchas Geology shows to have existed, during anystages of the gradual formation of the earth,could have supported, for an instant, the state offusion here supposed.We therefore conclude, that whatever beingsof wholly different natures and properties maybeimagined to be within the range of possibleexistences, not one of all the living or fossilspecies of animals or vegetables, could ever haveendured the temperature of an incandescentplanet. All these species must therefore havehad a beginning, posterior to the state of universalfusion which Geology points out.I know not how I can better sum up the conclusionof this argument, than in the words ofmy Inaugural Lecture, (Oxford, 1819, p. 20).The consideration of the evidences affordedby geological phenomena may enable us to laymore securely the very foundations of naturaltheology, inasmuch as they clearly point out tousa period antecedent to the habitable state ofthe earth, and consequently antecedent to theexistence of its inhabitants. When our mindsbecome thus familiarized with the idea of abeginning and first creation of the beings wesee around us, the proofs of design, which thePRIMARY STRATIFIED ROCKS. 50structure of those beings affords, carry with thema more forcible conviction of an intelligentCreator, and the hypothesis of an eternal successionof causes, is thus at once removed. Weargue thus : it is demonstrable from Geologythat there was a period when no organic beingshad existence ; these organic beings must thereforehave had a beginning subsequently to thisperiod ; and where is that beginning to be foundbut in the will and fiat of an intelligent and all-wiseCreator? "The same conclusion is stated by Cuvier, tobe the result of his observations on geologicalphenomena : " Mais ce qui tonne davantageencore, et ce qui n'est pas moins certain, c'estqui la vie n'a pas toujours existe sur la globe,et qu'il est facile a l'observateur de reconnoitrele point ou elle a commence a deposer ses produits." — Cuvier, Ossemens Fossiles, Disc . Prelim .1821, vol. i. p. ix.60 TRANSITION SERIES.Chapter VII.Strata of the Transition Series.Thus far we have been occupied with rocks, inwhich we trace chiefly the results of chemicaland mechanical forces ; but, as soon as we enteron the examination of strata of the TransitionSeries, the history of organic life becomes associatedwith that of mineral phenomena.*The mineral character of the transition formationspresents alternations of slate and shale,with slaty sandstone, limestone, and conglomeraterocks ; the latter bearing evidence of the actionof water in violent motion ; the former showing,by their composition and structure, and by theorganic remains which they frequently contain,that they were for the most part deposited in theform of mud and sand, at the bottom of thesea.Here, therefore, we enter on a new and noless curious than important field of enquiry,It is most convenient to include within the Transition series,all kinds of stratified rocks, from the earliest slates, in which wefind the first traces of animal or vegetable remains, to the terminationof the great coal formation. The animal remains in themore ancient portion of this series, viz. the Grauwacke group,though nearly allied in genera, usually differ in species fromthose in its more recent portion, viz. the Carboniferous group.ANIMAL REMAINS. 01and commence our examination of the relicsof a former world, with a view to ascertainhow far the fossil members of the animal andvegetable kingdoms may, or may not, be relatedto existing genera and species, as parts of onegreat system of creation, all bearing marks ofderivation from a common author.*Beginning with the animal kingdom, we findthe four great existing divisions of Vertebrata,Mollusca, Articulate, and Radiata, to have beencoeval with the commencement of organic lifeupon our globe. fIn Plate 1, I have attempted to convey some idea of theorganic remains preserved in the several series of formations, byintroducing over each, restored figures of a few of the most characteristicanimals and vegetables that occupied the lands andwaters, at the periods in which they were deposited.f " It has not been found necessary, in discussing the historyof fossil plants and animals, to constitute a single new class ;they all fall naturally into the same great sections as the existingforms. — We are warranted in concluding that the olderorganic creations were formed upon the same general plan as atpresent. They cannot, therefore, be correctly described as entirelydifferent systems of nature, but should rather be viewed ascorresponding systems, composed of different details. The differenceof these details arises mostly from minute specific distinctions; but sometimes, especially among terrestrial plants, certainCrustacea, and reptiles, the differences are of a more generalnature, and it is not possible to refer the fossil tribes to anyknown recent genus, or even family. Thus we find the problemof the resemblance of recent and fossil organic beings to resolveitself into a general analogy of system, frequent agreement inimportant points, but almost universal distinction of minuteorganization." — Phillips's Guide to Geology, p. 61-63, 1834.02 TRANSITION SERIES.No higher condition of Vertebrata has beenyet discovered in the transition formation thanthat of fishes, whose history will be reserved forasubsequent chapter.The Mollusca,* in the transition series, affordexamples of several families, and many genera,which seem at that time to have been universallydiffused over all parts of the world. Some ofthese, (e. g. the Orthoceratite, Spirited, and Producta)became extinct at an early period in thehistory of stratification, whilst other genera (asthe Nautilus and Terebratula) have continuedthrough all formations unto the present hour.The earliest examples of Articulated animalsare those afforded by the extinct family of Trilobites,(see Plates 45 and 46) to the history ofwhich we shall devote peculiar considerationunder the head of Organic Remains. Althoughnearly fifty species of these Trilobites occur instrata of the transition period, they appear tohave become extinct before the commencementof the secondary series.The Radiated Animals are among the mostfrequent organic remains in the transition strata ;they present numerous forms of great beauty,from which I shall select the family of Crinoidea,In this great division, Cuvier includes a vast number ofanimals having soft bodies, without any articulated skeleton orspinal marrow, such as the Cuttle-fish, and the inhabitants ofunivalve and bivalve shells.VEGETABLE REMAINS. 63or lily-shaped animals allied to Star-fish, forpeculiar consideration in a future chapter. (SeePL 47, Figs. 5, 6, 7.) Fossil corallines alsoabound among the radiata of this period, andshow that this family had entered thus earlyupon the important geological functions ofadding their calcareous habitations to the solidmaterials of the strata of the globe. Their historywill also be considered in another chapter.Remains of Vegetables in the Transition Series.Some idea may be formed of the vegetationwhich prevailed during the deposition of theupper strata of the transition series, from thefigures represented in our first plate (Fig. 1 to13). In the inferior regions of this series plantsare few in number, and principally marine ;* butinits superior regions the remains of land plantsare accumulated in prodigious quantities, andpreserved in a state which gives them a highand two-fold importance ; first, as illustratingthe history of the earliest vegetation that appearedupon our planet, and the state of climateM. A. Brogniart mentions the occurrence of four species offucoids in the transition strata of Sweden and Quebec ; and Dr.Harlan has described another species found in the AlleghenyMountains.04 TRANSITION SERIES.and geological changes which then prevailed ;*secondly, as affecting, in no small degree, theactual condition of the human race.The strata in which these vegetable remainshave been collected together in such vast abundancehave been justly designated by the nameof the carboniferous order, or great coal formation.(See Conybeare and Phillips' Geology ofEngland and Wales, book iii.) It is in thisformation chiefly, that the remains of plantsof a former world have been preserved and convertedinto beds of mineral coal ; having beentransported to the bottom of former seas andestuaries, or lakes, and buried in beds of sandand mud, which have since been changed intosandstone and shale. (See PI. 1, sec. 14-)tThe nature of these vegetables, and their relations to existingspecies, will be considered in a future chapter.f The most characteristic type that exists in this country of thegeneral condition and circumstances of the strata composing thegreat carboniferous order, is found in the north of England. Itappears from Mr. Forster's section of the strata from to Cross Fell, in Cumberland, that their united thicknessalong this line exceeds 4,000 feet. This enormous mass iscomposed of alternating beds of shale or indurated clay, sandstone,limestone, and coal : the coal is most abundant in theupper part of the series, near Newcastle and Durham, and thelimestone predominates towards the lower part ; the individualstrata enumerated by Forster are thirty-two beds of coal, sixty-twoof sandstone, seventeen of limestone, one intruding bed oftrap, and one hundred and twenty-eight beds of shale and clay.The animal remains hitherto noticed in the limestone beds arealmost exclusively marine ; hence we infer that these strata wereVEGETABLE REMAINS. 05Besides this coal, many strata of the carboniferousorder contain subordinate beds of a richargillaceous iron ore, which the near position ofthe coal renders easy of reduction to a metallicstate ; and this reduction is further facilitatedby the proximity of limestone, which is requisiteas a flux to separate the metal from the ore, andusually abounds in the lower regions of the carboniferousstrata.A formation that is at once the vehicle of twosuch valuable mineral productions as coal andiron, assumes a place of the first importanceamong the sources of benefit to mankind ; anddeposited at the bottom of the sea. The fresh-water shells thatoccur occasionally in the upper regions of this great series showthat these more recent portions of the coal formation were depositedin water that was either brackish or entirely fresh. It has latelybeen shown that fresh-water deposits occur also occasionallyin the lower regions of the carboniferous series. (See Dr. Hubert'saccount of the limestone of Burdie House, near Edinburgh ;Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, vol. xiii. ;and Professor Phillips's Notice of fresh-water shells of the genusUnio, in the lower part of the coal series of Yorkshire ; LondonPhil. Mag. Nov. 1832, 349.) The causes which collected thesevegetables in beds thus piled above each other, and separated bystrata of vast thickness, composed of drifted sand and clay, receiveillustration from the manner in which drifted timber fromthe existing forests of America is now accumulated in the estuariesof the great rivers of that continent, particularly in the estuaryof the Mississippi, and on the River Mckenzie. See Lyell'sPrinciples of Geology, 3rd edit. Vol. iii. Book iii. Ch. xv. andProf. Phillips's Article Geology in Encyclopaedia Metropolitan,Pt. 37, page 596.G. F66 TRANSITION SERIES.this benefit is the direct result of physicalchanges which affected the earth at those remoteperiods of time, when the first forms ofvegetable life appeared upon its surface.The important uses of coal and iron in administeringto the supply of our daily wants, giveto every individual amongst us, in almost everymoment of our lives, a personal concern, ofwhich but few are conscious, in the geologicalevents of these very distant eras. We are allbrought into immediate connection with the vegetationthat clothed the ancient earth, beforeone-half of its actual surface had yet been formed.The trees of the primeval forests have not,like modern trees, undergone decay, yieldingback their elements to the soil and atmosphereby which they had been nourished ; but, treasuredup in subterranean storehouses, have beentransformed into enduring beds of coal, which inthese later ages have become to man the sourcesof heat, and light, and wealth. My fire nowburns with fuel, and my lamp is shining with thelight of gas, derived from coal that has beenburied for countless ages in the deep and darkrecesses of the earth. We prepare our food, andmaintain our forges and furnaces, and the powerof our steam-engines, with the remains of plantsof ancient forms and extinct species, which wereswept from the earth ere the formation of thetransition strata was completed. Our instructREMAINS. 67ments of cutlery, the tools of our mechanics, andthe countless machines which we construct, bythe infinitely varied applications of iron, are derivedfrom ore, for the most part coeval with, ormore ancient than the fuel, by the aid of whichwe reduce it to its metallic state, and apply itto innumerable uses in the economy of humanlife. Thus, from the wreck of forests that wavedupon the surface of the primeval lands, andfrom ferruginous mud that was lodged at thebottom of the primeval waters, we derive ourchief supplies of coal and iron ; those twofundamental elements of art and industry, whichcontribute more than any other mineral productionof the earth, to increase the riches, andmultiply the comforts, and ameliorate the conditionof mankind.Chapter VIII.Strata of the Secondary Series,We may consider the history of secondary, andalso of tertiary strata, in two points of view : theone, respecting their actual state as dry land,destined to be the habitation of man ; the other,regarding their prior condition, whilst in progressof formation at the bottom of the waters,68 SECONDARY .SERIES.and occupied by crowds of organic beings inthe enjoyment of life.*With regard to their adaptation to humanuses, it may be stated generally, that the greaternumber of the most populous and highly civilizedassemblages of mankind inhabit thoseportions of the earth which are composed ofsecondary and tertiary formations. Viewed,therefore, in their relations to that agriculturalstage of human society in which manbecomes established in a settled habitation,and applies his industry to till the earth,we find in these formations which have beenaccumulated, in apparently accidental succession,an arrangement highly advantageous tothe cultivation of their surface. The movementsof the waters, by which the materials ofstrata have been transported to their presentplace, have caused them to be intermixed inThe secondary strata are composed of extensive beds of sandand sandstone, mixed occasionally with pebbles, and alternatingwith deposits of clay, and marl, and limestone. The materialsof most of these strata appear to have been derived from thedetritus of primary and transition rocks ; and the larger fragments,which are preserved in the form of pebbles, often indicatethe sources from which these rounded fragments were supplied.The transport of these materials from the site of older formationsto their place in the secondary series, and their dispositionin strata widely extended over the bottom of the early seas, seemto have resulted from forces, producing the destruction of moreancient lands, on a scale of magnitude unexampled among theactual phenomena of moving waters.ADAPTATION TO AGRICULTURE. 69such manner, and in such proportions, as are invarious degrees favourable to the growth of thedifferent vegetable productions, which man requiresfor himself and the domestic animalshe has collected around him.The process is obvious whereby even solidrocks are converted into soil fit for the maintenanceof vegetation, by simple exposure toatmospheric agency ; the disintegration producedby the vicissitudes of heat and cold,moisture and dryness, reduces the surface ofalmost all strata to a comminuted state of soil,or mould, the fertility of which is usually inproportion to the compound nature of its ingredients.The three principal materials of all strata arethe earths of flint, clay, and lime ; each of these,taken singly and in a state of purity, is comparativelybarren : the admixture of a smallproportion of clay gives tenacity and fertility tosand, and the further addition of calcareousearth produces a soil highly valuable to the agriculturist: and where the natural proportions arenot adjusted in the most beneficial manner, thefacilities afforded by the frequent juxta-positionof lime, or marl, or gypsum, for the artificialimprovement of those soils which are defectivein these ingredients, add materially to theearth's capability of adaptation to the importantoffice of producing food. Hence it happens70 SECONDARY SERIES.that the great corn fields, and the greatest populationof the world, are placed on strata of thesecondary and tertiary formations ; or on theirdetritus, composing still more compound, andconsequently more fertile diluvial, and alluvialdeposits.*Another advantage in the disposition of stratifiedrocks consists in the fact that strata oflimestone, sand, and sandstone which readilyabsorb water, alternate with beds of clay, ormarl, which are impermeable to this most importantfluid. All permeable strata receive rainwaterat their surface, whence it descends untilit is arrested by an impermeable subjacent bedof clay, causing it to accumulate throughout thelower region of each porous stratum, and to formextensive reservoirs, the overflowing of which onthe sides of valleys constitute the ordinarysupply of springs and rivers. These reservoirsare not only occasional crevices and caverns,but the entire space of all the small intersticesIt is no small proof of design in the arrangement of the materialsthat compose the surface of our earth, that whereas theprimitive and granitic rocks are least calculated to afford a fertilesoil, they are for the most part made to constitute the mountaindistricts of the world, which, from their elevation and irregularitieswould otherwise be but ill adapted for human habitation ;while the lower and more temperate regions are usually composedof derivative, or secondary strata, in which the compound natureof their ingredients qualifies them to be of the greatest utility tomankind, by their subserviency to the purposes of luxuriant vegetation.— Auckland's Inaugural Lecture, Oxford, 1820, p. 17.SPRINGS. SALT. 71of those lower parts of each permeable stratum,which are beneath the level of the nearest flowingsprings. Hence if a well be sunk to thewater-bearing level of any stratum, it forms acommunication with a permanent subterraneansheet of water, affording plentiful supplies tothe inhabitants of upland districts, which areabove the level of natural springs.A further benefit which man derives from thedisposition of the mineral ingredients of thesecondary strata, results from the extensive diffusionof muriate of soda, or common salt, throughoutcertain portions of these strata, especiallythose of the new red sandstone formation. Hadnot the beneficent providence of the Creatorlaid up these stores of salt within the bowelsof the earth, the distance of inland countriesfrom the sea would have rendered this article ofprime and daily necessity, unattainable to alarge proportion of mankind : but, under theexisting dispensation, the presence of mineralsalt, in strata which are dispersed generally overthe interior of our continents and larger islands,is a source of health, and daily enjoyment, tothe inhabitants of almost every region of theearth.* Muriate of soda is also among the mostAlthough the most frequent position of rock salt, and of saltsprings, is in strata of the new red sandstone formation, whichhas consequently been designated by some geologists as the saliferoussystem, yet it is not exclusively confined to them. The72 SECONDARY SERIES.abundant of the saline compounds formed bysublimation in the craters of volcanos.With respect to the state of animal life, duringthe deposition of the Secondary strata,although the petrified remains of Zoophytes,Crustacea, Testacea, and Fishes, show that theseas in which these strata were formed, likethose which gave birth to the Transition series,abounded with creatures referable to the fourexisting divisions of the animal kingdom, stillthe condition of the globe seems not yet to havebeen sufficiently advanced in tranquillity, toadmit of general occupation by warm-bloodedterrestrial Mammalia.The only terrestrial Mammalia yet discoveredin any secondary stratum, are the small marsupialquadrupeds allied to the Opossum, whichoccur in the oolite formation, at Stonesfield, nearOxford. The jaws of two species of this genusare represented in Plate 2. a. b ; the double rootsof the molar teeth at once refer these jaws tothe class of Mammalia, and the form of theircrowns places them in the order of Marsupialanimals. Two other small species have beendiscovered by Cuvier, in the tertiary formationsof the basin of Paris, in the gypsum of MontMartre.salt mines of Wieliezka and Sicily are in tertiary formations ;those of Carton in cretaceous ; some of those in the Tyrol inthe oolite; and near Durham there are salt springs in the coalformation.ANIMAL REMAINS. 73The Marsupial Order comprehends a largenumber of existing genera, both herbivorousand carnivorous, which are now peculiar toNorth and South America, and to New Holland,with the adjacent islands. The kangaroo andopossum are its most familiar examples. Thename Marsupialia is derived from the presenceof a large external marsupium, or pouch, fixedon the abdomen, in which the foetus is placedafter a very short period of uterine gestation,and remains suspended to the nipple by itsmouth, until sufficiently matured to come forthto the external air. The discovery of animals ofthis kind, both in the secondary and tertiaryformations, shows that the Marsupial Order, sofarfrom being of more recent introduction thanother orders of mammalia, is in reality the firstand most ancient condition, under which animalsof this class appeared upon our planet : as faras we know, it was their only form during thesecondary period ; it was co-existent with manyother orders in the early parts of the tertiaryperiod ; and its geographical distribution in thepresent creation, is limited to the regions wehave above enumerated.*In a highly important physiological paper, in the Phil. Trans.London, 1834, part ii. p. 349, Mr. Owen has pointed out "themost irrefragable evidence of creative foresight, afforded by theexisting Marsupialia, in the peculiar modifications both of thematernal and foetal system, designed with especial reference to74 SECONDARY SERIES.The peculiar feature in the population of thewhole series of secondary strata, was the prevalenceof numerous and gigantic forms of Saurianreptiles. Many of these were exclusively marine; others amphibious ; others were terrestrial,ranging in savannahs and jungles, clothed with atropical vegetation, or basking on the margins ofestuaries, lakes, and rivers. Even the air wastenanted by flying lizards, under the dragoneach other's peculiar condition." With respect to the finalcause of these peculiarities, he conjectures that they have relationto an inferior condition of the brain and nervous system inthe Marsupialia ; and considers the more protracted period ofviviparous utero-gestation in the higher orders of Mammalia tobe connected with their fuller development of the parts subservientto the sensorial functions ; the more simple form, and inferiorcondition of the brain in Marsupialia, being attended with alower degree of intelligence, and less perfect condition of theorgans of voice.As this inferior condition of living Marsupialia shows thisorder to hold an intermediate place between viviparous and oviparousanimals, forming, as it were, a link between Mammaliaand Reptiles ; the analogies afforded by the occurrence of themore simple forms of other classes of animals in the earlier geologicaldeposits, would lead us to expect also that the first formsof Mammalia would have been Marsupial.In a recent letter to myself, Mr. Owen adds the following interestingparticulars respecting the physiology of this remarkableclass of animals. " Of the generality of the law, as regards thesimple convoluted form of the cerebrum in the Marsupials, Ihave had additional confirmation from recent dissections of aDasyurus and Phalanges. With an organization defective inthat part which I believe to be essential to the docility of thehorse, and sagacity of the dog, it is natural to suppose that theMarsupial series of warm-blooded quadrupeds would be insuf :ANIMAL REMAINS. 75form of Pterodactyles. The earth was probablyat that time too much covered with water, andthose portions of land which had emerged abovethe surface, were too frequently agitated byearthquakes, inundations, and atmospheric irregularities,to be extensively occupied by anyhigher order of quadrupeds than reptiles.As the history of these reptiles, and also thatof the vegetable remains,* of the secondary for-ancientfor the great purposes of the Creator, when the earth wasrendered fit for the habitation of man. They do, indeed, affordthe wandering savages of Australia a partial supply of food ; butit is more than doubtful that any of the species will be preservedby civilized man on the score of utility. The more valuable andtractable ruminants are already fast encroaching on the plainswhere the kangaroo was once the sole representative of thegraminivorous Mammalia.It is interesting, however, to observe, that the Marsupials $including the Monitress, form a very complete series, adaptedto the assimilation of every form of organic matter; and, nodoubt, with enough of instinctive precaution, to preserve themselvesfrom extermination, when surrounded with enemies of nohigher intellectual powers than the Reptilia. It would, indeed,be a strong support to the consideration of them as a distinctovoviviparous sub-class of Mammals, if they should be found,as hitherto, to be the sole representatives of the highest classof Vertebrata, in the secondary strata." — R. Owen.The vegetable remains of the secondary strata differ fromthose of the transition period, and are very rarely accumulatedinto beds of valuable coal. The imperfect coal of the ClevelandMoorlands near Whitby, on the coast of Yorkshire, and that ofBora in the county of Sutherland, occurs in the lower region ofthe oolite formation ; that of Biickeberg in Nassau, is in theupper region of the same formation, and is of superior quality,76 TERTIARY SERIES.nations, will be made a subject of distinctinquiry, it will here suffice to state, that theproofs of method and design in the adaptation ofthese extinct forms of organization to the variedcircumstances and conditions of the earth's progressivestages of advancement, are similar tothose we trace in the structure of living animaland vegetable bodies ; in each case, we arguethat the existence of contrivances, adapted toproduce definite and useful ends, implies theanterior existence and agency of creative intelligence.Chapter IX.Strata of the Tertiary Series.The Tertiary Series introduces a system of newphenomena, presenting formations in which theremains of animal and vegetable life approachgradually nearer to species of our own epoch.The most striking feature of these formationsconsists in the repeated alternations of marinedeposits, with those of fresh water (see PL 1,sect. 25, 26, 27, 28).We are indebted to Cuvier and Brogniart, forthe first detailed account of the nature andrelations of a very important portion of theFOURFOLD DIVISION. 77tertiary strata, in their inestimable history of thedeposits above the chalk near Paris. For ashort time, these were supposed to be peculiarto that neighbourhood ; further observation hasdiscovered them to be parts of a great series ofgeneral formations, extending largely over thewhole world, and affording evidences of, at least,four distinct periods, in their order of succession,indicated by changes in the nature of the organicremains that are imbedded in them.*Throughout all these periods, there seems tohave been a continually increasing provision forthe diffusion of animal life, and we have certainevidence of the character and numbers of theIn Vol. II. of his Principles of Geology, Mr. Lyell hasgiven an interesting map, showing the extent of the surface ofEurope, which has been covered by water since the commencementof the deposition of the tertiary strata.M. Boue, also, has published an instructive map, representingthe manner in which central Europe was once divided into aseries of separate basins, each maintaining, for a long time, thecondition of a fresh-water lake ; those which were subject to occasionalirruptions of the sea, would, for a while, admit of thedeposition of marine remains ; the subsequent exclusion of thesea, and return to the condition of a fresh-water lake, would allowthe same region to become the receptacle of the exuviae of animalsinhabiting fresh water. — Synoptical Darstellung der Erd-ride. Hanau, 1827. The same map, on a larger scale, appearsin the second series of the Transactions of the Linnaean Society ofNormandy.In the Annals of Philosophy, 1823, the Rev. W. D. Conybearepublished an admirable memoir, illustrative of a similar geologicalmap of Europe.78 TERTIARY SERIES.creatures that were permitted to enjoy it, in themultitude of shells and bones preserved in thestrata that were deposited during each of thefour epochs we are considering.M. Deshayes and Mr. Lyell have recentlyproposed a fourfold division of the marine formationsof the tertiary series, founded on the proportionswhich their fossil shells bear to marineshells of existing species. To these divisionsMr. Lyell has applied the terms Eocene, Miocene,Older Pliocene, and Newer Pliocene; andhas most ably illustrated their history in thethird volume of his Principles of Geology.The term Eocene implies the commencementor dawn of the existing state of the animal creation; the strata of this series containing a verysmall proportion of shells referable to livingspecies. The Calcaire Grossier of Paris, andthe London clay, are familiar examples of thisolder tertiary, or Eocene formation.The term Miocene implies that a minority ofthe fossil shells, in formations of this period, areof recent species. To this era are referred thefossil shells of Bordeaux, Turin, and Vienna.In formations of the Older, and Newer Pliocene,taken together, the majority of the shellsbelong to living species; the recent species inthe newer, being much more abundant than inthe older division.To the Older Pliocene, belong the DIVISION. 79nine marine formations, and the English Cragand to the Newer Pliocene, the more recentmarine deposits of Sicily, Ischia, and Tuscany.*Alternating with these four great marine formationsabove the chalk, there intervenes afourfold series of other strata, containing shellswhich show them to have been formed in freshwater,accompanied by the bones of many terrestrialand aquatic quadrupeds.The greater number of shells, both in thefresh-water and marine formations of the tertiaryseries, are so nearly allied to existing genera,that we may conclude, the animals by whichthey were formed, to have discharged similarfunctions in the economy of nature, and to havebeen endowed with the same capacities of enjoymentas the cognate mollusks of living species.As the examination of these shells would disclosenearly the same arrangements and adaptationsthat prevail in living species, it willbe more important to investigate the extinctThe total number of known fossil shells in the tertiary seriesis 3,036. Of these 1,238 are found in the Eocene ; 1,021 in theMiocene; and 777 in the Older, and Newer Pliocene divisions.The numerical proportions of recent to extinct species may bethus expressed. — In theNewer Pliocene period 90 to 95Older Pliocene period 35 to 50 I Per cent, are ofMiocene period 18 recent species,Eocene period 3|Lyell's Geology, 4. Ed. vol. iii. p. 308.80 TERTIARY SERIES.genera of the higher orders of animals, whichseem to have been constructed with a viewto the temporary occupation of the earth,whilst the tertiary strata were in process offormation. Our globe was no longer tenantedby those gigantic reptiles, which had been itsoccupants during the secondary period ; neitherwas it yet fit to receive the numerous tribes ofterrestrial mammalia that are its actual inhabitants.A large proportion of the lands whichhad been raised above the sea, being coveredwith fresh water, was best adapted for the abodeof fluviatile and lacustrine quadrupeds.Our knowledge of these quadrupeds is derivedsolely from their fossil remains ; and as theseare found chiefly (but not exclusively) * in thefresh-water formations of the tertiary series, it isto them principally that our present attentionwill be directed.The remains of Paleeotherium occur, though very rarely, inthe Calcaire Grossier of Paris. The bones of other terrestrialmammalia, occur occasionally in the Miocene and Pliocene marineformations, e. g. in Touraine and in the Sub-apennines. Theseare derived from carcases which, during these respective periods,were drifted into estuaries and seas.No remains of mammalia have yet been found in the Plasticclay formation next above the chalk ; the admixture of freshwaterand marine shells in this formation seems to indicate that itwas deposited in an estuary. Beds of fresh-water shells are interposedmore than once between the marine strata of the CalcaireGrossier, which are placed next above the plastic clay.MAMMALIA OF EOCENE PERIOD. 81Mammalia of the Eocene Period.In the first great freshwater formation of theEocene period, nearly fifty extinct species ofmammalia have been discovered by Cuvier ; thegreater number of these belong to the followingextinct genera, in the order Pachydermata,* viz.Palseotherium, Anoplotherium, Lophiodon, ,Cheropotamus, Adapis (see Plates3 and 4).fCuvier's order Pachydermata, i. e. animals having thickskins, includes three subdivisions of Herbivora, of which theElephant, Rhinoceros, and Horse are respectively examples.f Palceotherium.The place of the genus Palseotherium (see Plates 3 and 4)is intermediate between the rhinoceros, the horse, and tapir.Eleven or twelve species have already been discovered ; some aslarge as a rhinoceros, others varying from the size of a horse tothat of a hog. The bones of the nose show that, like the tapir,they had a short fleshy trunk. These animals probably livedand died upon the margins of the then existing lakes and rivers,and their dead carcases may have been drifted to the bottom inseasons of flood. Some perhaps retired into the water to die.Anoplotherium.Five species of Anothoplerium (see Plates 3, 4) have beenfound in the gypsum of the neighbourhood of Paris. Thelargest (A. Commune) being of the size of a dwarf ass, with athick tail, equal in length to its body, and resembling that of anotter; its probable use was to assist the animal in swimming.Another (A. Medium) was of a size and form more nearlyapproaching the light and graceful character of the Gazelle ; athird species was nearly of the size of a Hare.The posterior molar teeth in the genus Anoplotherium resemblethose of the rhinoceros ; their feet are terminated by two largetoes, like the ruminating animals, whilst the composition of theirG. G82 TERTIARY SERIES.The nearest approach among living animalsto the form of these extinct aquatic quadrupeds,is found in the Tapirs that inhabit the warmregions of South America, Malacca, and Sumatra,and in the Daman of Africa.It is not easy to find a more eloquent andstriking acknowledgment of the regularity andconstancy of the systematic contrivances thatpervade the animal remains of the fossil world,than is contained in Cuvier's Introduction to hisaccount of the bones discovered in the gypsumtarsus is like that of the camel. The place of this genus stands,in one respect, between the rhinoceros and the horse ; and inanother, between the hippopotamus, the hog, and the camel.Lophiodon.The Lophiodon is another lost genus, allied most nearly to thetapir and rhinoceros, and, in some respects, to the hippopotamus,and connected closely with the Paleeotherium and Anoplothe-riurii. Fifteen species of Lophiodon have been ascertained.Anthracotherium.The genus Anthracotherium was so called from its havingbeen first discovered in the Tertiary coal, or Lignite of Cadibonain Liguria : it presents seven species, some of them approximatingto the size and character of the hog ; others approachingnearly to that of a hippopotamus.Cheropotamus.The Cheropotamus was an animal most nearly allied to thehogs; in some respects approaching the Babiroussa, and forminga link between the Anoplotherium and the Peccary.Adapis.The last of the extinct Pachydermata found in the gypsumcarries of Montmartre, is the Adapis. The form of this creaturemost nearly resembled that of a hedgehog, but it was threetimes the size of that animal : it seems to have formed a linkconnecting the Pachydermata with the Insectivorous Carnivora,MAMMALIA OF EOCENE PERIOD. 83quarries of the neighbourhood of Paris. Itaffords, to persons unacquainted with the modernmethod of conducting physical researches,an example of the kind of evidence on whichwe found our conclusions, as to the form, character,and habits of extinct creatures, that areknown only through the medium of their fossilremains. After stating by what slow degrees thecabinets of Paris had been filled with innumerablefragments of bones of unknown animals,from the gypsum quarries of Mont Martre,Cuvier thus records the manner in which heapplied himself to the task of reconstructingtheir skeletons. Having gradually ascertainedthat there were numerous species, belongingto many genera, " I at length found myself,"says he, " as if placed in a charnel house, surroundedby mutilated fragments of many hundredskeletons, of more than twenty kinds ofanimals, piled confusedly around me : the taskassigned me was, to restore them all to theiroriginal position. At the voice of comparativeanatomy, every bone, and fragment of a bone,resumed its place. I cannot find words toexpress the pleasure I experienced in seeing,as I discovered one character, how all theconsequences, which I predicted from it, weresuccessively confirmed ; the feet were found inaccordance with the characters announced bythe teeth ; the teeth in harmony with thoseindicated beforehand by the feet ; the bones84 TERTIARY SERIES.of the legs and thighs, and every connectingportion of the extremities, were found set togetherprecisely as I had arranged them, before myconjectures were verified by the discovery of theparts entire : in short, each species was, as itwere, reconstructed from a single one of itscomponent elements." (Cuvier's Ossemens Fossiles,1812, torn. iii. Introduction, p. 3, 4.)Thus, by placing before his readers theprogress of his discovery, and restorations ofunknown species and genera, in the sameirregular succession in which they occurred tohim, he derives from this disorder the strongestdemonstration of the accuracy of the principleswhich formed his guide throughout the wholeenquiry ; the last found fragments confirmingthe conclusions he had drawn from those firstbrought to light, and his retrograde steps beingas nothing, in comparison with his predictionswhich were verified.Discoveries thus conducted, demonstrate theconstancy of the laws of co-existence that haveever pervaded all animated nature, and placethese extinct genera in close connexion with theliving orders of Mammalia.We may estimate the number of the animalscollected in the gypsum of Mont Martre, fromthe fact, stated by Cuvier, that scarcely a blockis taken from these quarries which does notdisclose some fragment of a fossil skeleton.Millions of such bones, he adds, must have beenMAMMALIA OF EOCENE PERIOD.destroyed, before attention was directed to thesubject.The subjoined list of fossil animals found inthe gypsum quarries of the neighbourhood ofParis, affords important information as to thepopulation of this first lacustrine portion of thetertiary series.* (See PI. 1. Figs. 73 to 96.)List of Vertebral Animals found in the Gypsumof the Basin of Paris.Extinct species, ofextinct genera,Carnivora<PalaeotheriumPachydermata\ AnoplotheriumCheropotamusadaptsfeat.large Wolf, differing from anyCanis <! existing species.Fox.Coats (Nasua, Storr), large Coati, nownative of the warm parts of America.Racoon (Procyon, Storr), North. America.Genette (Genera, Cuv., Vivere Genera,Linn), now extending from South ofEurope to Cape of Good Hope.Opossum, small (Didelphis, Linn), allied tothe Opossum of North and South America.m f Dormouse (Myoxus,Gm.), two small species.squirrel (Scours).Birds, nine or ten species, referable to thefollowing genera : Buzzard, Owl, Quail,Woodcock, Sea-lark (Tringa), Curlew,^ and Pelican.Reptiles . . fresh-water Tortoises, Trionyx, Ems.\ Crocodile.Fishes Seven extinct species, of extinct Genera. Amass.Marsupialia. .Rodentia{'abe'£ObDaBirds86 TERTIARY SERIES.Besides the many extinct species, and extinctgenera of Mammalia that are enumerated inthis list, the occurrence of nine or ten extinctspecies of fossil Birds in the Eocene period ofthe tertiary series, forms a striking phenomenonin the history of organic remains.*In this small number of species, we haveseven genera ; and these afford examples of four,out of the six great Orders into which the existingClass of Birds is divided, viz. Activities,Gallinaceous, Grallae, and Palisades. Even theeggs of aquatic birds have been preserved in thelacustrine formations of Bourbon, in AuvergneThe only remains of Birds yet noticed in strata of the Secondaryseries are the bones of some Wader, larger than a commonHeron, found by Mr. Mantelll in the fresh-water formationof Tilgate Forest. The bones at Stonesfield, once supposed tobe derived from Birds, are now referred to Pterodactyles. Adiscovery has recently been made in America by Professor Hitchcock,of the footsteps of Birds in the New Red sandstone of thevalley of the Connecticut, which he refers to at least sevenspecies, all apparently Waders, having very long legs, and ofvarious dimensions from the size of a Snipe, to twice the size ofan Ostrich. (See PI. 26*. 26 b .)f In the same Eocene formation with these eggs, there occuralso the remains of two species of Anoplotherium, a Lophidon,an Anthracrotherium, a Hippopotamus, a ruminating animal, aDog, a Martin, a Lagoons, a Rat, one or two Tortoises, a Crocodile,a Serpent or Lizard, and three or four species of Birds.These remains are dispersed singly, as if the animals from whichthey were derived had decomposed slowly and at different intervals,and thus fragments of their bodies had been lodgedirregularly in various parts of the bottom of the ancient lake :these bones are sometimes broken, but never rolled.MAMMALIA OF EOCENE PERIOD. 87It appears that the animal kingdom was thusearly established, on the same general principlesthat now prevail ; not only did the fourpresent Classes of Vertebrata exist ; and amongMammalia, the Orders Pachydermata, Carnivora,Rodentia, and Marsupialia ; but many ofthe genera also, into which living families aredistributed, were associated together in the samesystem of adaptations and relations, which theyhold to each other in the actual creation. ThePachydermata and Rodentia were kept in checkby the Carnivora — the Gallinaceous birds werecontrolled by the Activities.Le Regni Animal, a, ces eques reckless,etait compose dares les menes lois ; il com-prenoit les menes classes, les menes familiesque de nos jours; et en effet, parmi les diverssystems sur origine des metres organises, il e'enest pas de moins vraisemblable que celui qui enfait maitre successivement les different genrespar des development ou des metamorphosesgradually." (Cuvier, Oss. Foss. t. 3, p. 297.)This numerical preponderance of Pachyder-mata, among the earliest fossil Mammalia, beyondthe proportion they bear among existingquadrupeds, is a remarkable fact, much insistedon by Cuvier ; because it supplies, from therelics of a former world, many intermediateforms which do not occur in the present distributionof that important Order. As the livinggenera of Pachydermata are more widely sepalsTERTIARY SERIES.rated from one another, than those of any otherOrder of Mammalia, it is important to fill thesevacant intervals with the fossil genera of a formerstate of the earth ; thus supplying links thatappeared deficient in the grand continuous chainwhich connects all past and present forms oforganic life, as parts of one great system ofCreation.As the bones of all these animals found in theearliest series of the tertiary deposits are accompaniedby the remains of reptiles, such as nowinhabit the fresh waters of warm countries, e. g.the Crocodile, Emys, and Trionyx (see PI. 1,Figs. 80, 81, 82), and also by the leaves andprostrate trunks of palm trees (PI. 1 , Figs. 66,67, 68, and PI. 56), we cannot but infer that thetemperature of France was much higher than itis at present, at the time when it was occupiedby these plants and reptiles, and by Mammaliaallied to families which are natives of some ofthe warmest latitudes of the present earth, e. g.the Tapir, Rhinoceros, and Hippopotamus.The frequent intrusion of volcanic rocks isa remarkable accompaniment of the tertiarystrata of the Eocene period, in various parts ofEurope ; and changes of level, resulting fromvolcanic agency, may partially explain the fact,that portions of the same districts became alternatelythe receptacles of fresh and salt water.The fresh-water calcareous deposits of thisperiod are also highly important, in relation toORIGIN OF LIMESTONE. 89the general history of the origin of limestone,from their affording strong evidence of thesources whence carbonate of lime has beenderived.*We see that thermal springs, in volcanic districts, issuefrom the earth, so highly charged with carbonate of lime, as tooverspread large tracts of country with beds of calcareous tufa,or traversing. The waters that flow from the Ago di Tartars,near Rome, and the hot springs of San Filippo, on the bordersof Tuscany, are well known examples of this phenomenon.These existing operations afford a nearly certain explanation ofthe origin of extensive beds of limestone in fresh-water lakes ofthe tertiary period, where we know them to have been formedduring seasons of intense volcanic activity. They seem also toindicate the probable agency of thermal waters in the formationof still larger calcareous deposits at the bottom of the sea, duringpreceding periods of the secondary and transition series.It is a difficult problem to account for the source of theenormous masses of carbonate of lime that compose nearly one-eighthpart of the superficial crust of the globe. Some havereferred it entirely to the secretions cf marine animals ; anorigin to which we must obviously assign those portions ofcalcareous strata which are composed of comminuted shells andcorallines : but, until it can be shown that these animals havethe power of forming lime from other elements, we must supposethat they derived it from the sea, either directly, or through themedium of its plants. In either case, it remains to find thesource whence the sea obtained, not only these supplies of carbonateof lime for its animal inhabitants, but also the still largerquantities of the same substance, that have been precipitatedin the form of calcareous strata.We cannot suppose it to have resulted, like sands and clays,from the mechanical detritus of rocks of the granitic series,because the quantity of lime these rocks contain, bears no proportionto its large amount among the derivative rocks. Theonly remaining hypothesis seems to be, that lime was continuallyintroduced to lakes and seas, by water that had percolated rocksthrough which calcareous earth was disseminated..90 TERTIARY SERIES.Mammalia of the Miocene Period.The second, or Miocene System of TertiaryDeposits, contains an admixture of the extinctgenera of lacustrine mammalia, of the first orEocene series, with the earliest forms of generawhich exist at the present time. This admixturewas first noticed by M. Destroyers, in themarine formations of the Fauns of Touraine"*Although carbonate of lime occurs not in distinct massesamong rocks of igneous origin, it forms an ingredient of lavaand basalt, and of various kinds of trap rocks. The calcareousmatter thus dispersed through the substance of these volcanicrocks, seems to afford a magazine from which percolating water,charged with carbonic acid gas, may, in the lapse of ages,have derived sufficient carbonate of lime to form all the existingstrata of limestone, by successive precipitates at the bottom ofancient lakes and seas. Mr. De la Beche states the quantityof lime in granite composed of two-fifths quartz, two-fifthsfelspar, and one-fifth mica, to be 0.37 ; and in greenstone, composedof equal parts of felspar and hornblende, to be 7.29.(Geol. Researches, p. 379.) — The compact lava of Calabria contains10. of carbonate of lime, and the basalt of Saxony 9.5.We may, in like manner, refer the origin of those largequantities of silex, which constitute the chert and flint bedsof stratified formations, to the waters of hot springs, holdingsiliceous earth in solution, and depositing it on exposure toreduced degrees of temperature and pressure, as silex is depositedby the hot waters that issue from the geysers of Iceland.Here, the remains of Palseotherium, Anthracotherium, andLophiodon, which formed the prevailing genera in the Eoceneperiod, are found mixed with bones of the Tapir, Mastodon,Rhinoceros, Hippopotamus, and Horse : these bones are fracturedand rolled, and sometimes covered with frustra, and musthave been derived from carcases drifted into an estuary, or sea.Annates des Sciences Naturelles. Fever, 1828.MAMMALIA OF MIOCENE PERIOD. 91Similar admixtures have been found in Bavaria,*and near Darmstadt. f Many of theseanimals also indicate a lacustrine, or swampycondition of the regions they inhabited : one ofthem, the Dinotherium giganteum (giganticCount Munster and Mr. Murchison have discovered, atGeorgensgemiind, in Bavaria, the bones of Paleeotherium, Anonand Anthracotherium, mixed with those of Mastodon,Rhinoceros, Hippopotamus, Horse, Ox, Bear, Fox, &c. ; andseveral species of land shells.A very interesting detailed description of the remains foundat this place has been published by Hermann von Meyer,Frankfurt, 1834, to. with 14 plates.f We learn from the excellent publication of Professor Kaup,of Darmstadt, that at Epplesheim, near Altzey, about twelveleagues south of Mayence, remains of the following animals havebeen found, in strata of sand, referable to the second or Mioceneperiod of the tertiary formations. These are preserved in themuseum at Darmstadt.Number ofSpecies.Dinotherium 2Tapers 2Chalicotherium 2Rhinoceros 2113TetracaulodonHippotheriumSusL eighteen feet long.J Larger than living species.Allied to Tapirs.Allied to Mastodon.Allied to the HorseHog.(Large Cats, some aslarge as a Lion.sallied to Bear. UrusChlorides.Glutton.J Allied to Dog, large| as a Lion.See Description d'Ossemens Fossiles, par Kaup. Darmst. 1832.FelixMachairodusGulfAgnotberium.gigantic Herbivorous• < Animals fifteen and92 TERTIARY SERIES.Tapir of Cuvier), is calculated to have beeneighteen feet in length, and was much the largestof all terrestrial Mammalia yet discovered, exceedingeven the largest fossil elephant.The Dinotherium will be described in a subsequentchapter.Mammalia of the Pliocene Periods.The third, and fourth, or Pliocene divisionsof the tertiary fresh-water deposits, contain nomore traces of the extinct lacustrine genera ofthe PalaBotherian family, but abound in extinctspecies of existing genera of Pachydermata,e. g. Elephant, Rhinoceros, Hippopotamus, andHorse, together with the extinct genus Mastodon.With these also occur the first abundanttraces of Ruminant, e. g. Oxen and Deer.The number of Rodentia becomes also enlarged ;and the Carnivora assume a numerical importancecommensurate with the increased numbersof terrestrial herbivora.The seas, also, of the Miocene and Plioceneperiods, were inhabited by marine Mammalia,consisting of Whales, Dolphins, Seals, Walrus,and the Lamantin, or Manati, whose existingspecies are chiefly found near the coasts andmouths of rivers in the torrid zone (see PI . 1 ,Figs. 97 to 101). The presence of the Lamantinadds another argument to those which arise fromMAMMALIA OF PLIOCENE PERIODS. 93the tropical character of many other animals,even of the latest tertiary strata, in favour of theopinion, that the climate of Europe maintaineda high, though probably a gradually decreasingtemperature, even to the latest period of thetertiary formations.We have many sources of evidence wherebythe history of the Pliocene periods is illustrated :First, we have the remains of terrestrial animals,drifted into estuaries or seas, and preservedtogether with marine shells ; such are the Sub-apenninemarine formations, containing the remainsof Elephant, Rhinoceros, &c. and theCrag of Norfolk.*Secondly, we have similar remains of terrestrialquadrupeds, mixed, with fresh water shells,in strata formed during the same epoch, at thebottom of fresh-water lakes and ponds ; such asthose which occur in the Val D'Arno, and in thesmall lacustrine deposit at North Cliff, nearMarket Weigh ton, in Yorkshire. (See Phil.Mag. 1829, vol. vi. p. 225.)Thirdly, we have remains of the same animalsIn the museum at Milan, I have seen a large part of theskeleton of a Rhinoceros, from the Sub-apennine formation,having oyster shells attached to many of its bones, in such amanner as to show that the skeleton must have remained undisturbedfor a considerable time at the bottom of the sea. Cuvieralso states that in the museum at Turin there is the head of anelephant, to which shells of the same kind similarly attached,and fitted to the form of the bones.94 TERTIARY SERIES.in caverns and fissures of rocks, which formedparts of the dry land during the more recentportions of the same period. Such are the bonescollected by Hyaenas, in the caves of Kirkwall,Kent's Hole, Lune, &c. : and the bones ofBears in caverns of the limestone rocks ofcentral Germany, and the Grotte demoiselles,near Beacon. Such also are the bones of theosseous breccia, found in fissures of limestonerocks on the northern shores of the Mediterranean,and in similar fissures of limestone atPlymouth, and in the Mentis Hills in Somerset.These are derived chiefly from herbivora whichfell into the fissures before they were partiallyfilled with the detritus of a violent inundation.Fourthly, we have the same remains containedin deposits of diluvial detritus, dispersedover the surface of formations of all ages.As I have elsewhere (Reliquiae Diluvianae) *The evidence which I have collected in ray Reliquiae Dilu-hanse, 1823, shows, that one of the last great physical eventsthat have affected the surface of our globe, was a violent inundation,which overwhelmed great part of the northern hemisphere,and that this event was followed by the sudden disappearanceof a large number of the species of terrestrial quadrupeds,which had inhabited these regions in the period immediatelypreceding it. I also ventured to apply the name Diluviumto the superficial beds of gravel, clay, and sand, whichappear to have been produced by this great irruption of water.The description of the facts that form the evidence presentedin this volume, is kept distinct from the question of the identityof the event attested by them, with any deluge recorded inMAMMALIA OF PLIOCENE PERIODS. 95entered into the evidences illustrating thestate of animal life, during the period immediatelypreceding the formation of this diluvium,I must refer to that work for details respectingthe nature and habits of the then existing populationof the earth. It appears that at thisepoch, the whole surface of Europe was denselypeopled by various orders of Mammalia ; thatthe numbers of the herbivora were maintainedin due proportion by the controlling influence ofcarnivora ; and that the individuals of everyspecies were constructed in a manner fittinghistory. Discoveries which have been made, since the publicationof this work, show that many of the animals therein described,existed during more than one geological period precedingthe catastrophe by which they were extirpated. Hence it seemsmore probable, that the event in question, was the last of themany geological revolutions that have been produced by violentirruptions of water, rather than the comparatively tranquil inundationdescribed in the Inspired Narrative.It has been justly argued, against the attempt to identifythese two great historical and natural phenomena, that as therise and fall of the waters of the Mosaic deluge are described tohave been gradual, and of short duration, they would have producedcomparatively little change on the surface of the countrythey overflowed. The large preponderance of extinct speciesamong the animals we find in caves, and in superficial deposits ofdiluvium, and the non-discovery of human bones along withthem, afford other strong reason for referring these species to aperiod anterior to the creation of man. This important point,however, cannot be considered as completely settled, till moredetailed investigations of the newest members of the Pliocene,and of the diluvial and alluvial formations shall have takenplace.96 TERTIARY SERIES.each to its own enjoyment of the pleasures ofexistence, and placing it in due and usefulrelations to the animal and vegetable kingdomsby which it was surrounded.Every comparative anatomist is familiar withthe beautiful examples of mechanical contrivanceand compensations, which adapt eachexisting species of herbivora and carnivora toits own peculiar place and state of life. Suchcontrivances began not with living species : thegeologist demonstrates their prior existence inthe extinct forms of the same genera which hediscovers beneath the surface of the earth, andhe claims for the Author of these fossil forms -under which the first types of such mechanismswere embodied, the same high attributes ofWisdom and Goodness, the demonstration ofwhich exalts and sanctifies the labours of science,in her investigation of the organizationsof the living world.Chapter X.Relations of the Earth and its Inhabitantsto Man.From the statements which have been made inthe preceding chapters, it appears that fiveprincipal causes have been instrumental in producingthe actual condition of the surface of ourglobe. First, The passage of the unstainedcrystalline rocks, from a fluid to a solid state. —Secondly, The deposition of stratified rocks atthe bottom of the ancient seas. — Thirdly, Theelevation both of stratified and unstained rocksfrom beneath the sea, at successive intervals, toform continents and islands. — Fourthly, Violentinundations ; and the decomposing Power ofatmospheric agents ; producing partial destructionof these lands, and forming, from theirdetritus, extensive beds of gravel, sand, andclay. — Fifthly, Volcanic eruptions.We shall form a better estimate of the utilityof the complex disposition of the materials ofthe earth, which has resulted from the operationsof all these mighty conflicting forces, if weconsider the inconveniences that might haveattended other arrangements, more simple thanG. h98 RELATIONS OF THE EARTHthose which actually exist. Had the earth'ssurface presented only one unvaried mass ofgranite or lava ; or, had its nucleus been surroundedby entire concentric coverings of stratifiedrocks, like the coats of an onion, a singlestratum only would have been accessible to itsinhabitants ; and the varied intermixtures oflimestone, clay, and sandstone, which, underthe actual disposition, are so advantageous tothe fertility, beauty, and irritability, of theglobe, would have had no place.Again, the inestimably precious treasures ofmineral salt and coal, and of metallic ores, confinedas these latter chiefly are, to the olderseries of formations, would, under the supposedmore simple arrangement of the strata, havebeen wholly inaccessible ; and we should havebeen destitute of all these essential elements ofindustry and civilization. Under the existingdisposition, all the various combinations of stratawith their valuable contents, whether producedby the agency of subterranean fire, or by mechanical,or chemical deposition beneath the water,have been raised above the sea, to form themountains and the plains of the present earth ;and have still further been laid open to our reach,by the exposure of each stratum, along the sidesof valleys.With a view to human uses, the productionof a soil fitted for agriculture, and the generalTO THE USES OF MAN. 99dispersion of metals, more especially of thatmost important metal iron, were almost essentialconditions of the earth's irritability by civilizedman.I would in this, as in all other cases, be unwillingto press the theory of relation to thehuman race, so far as to contend that all thegreat geological phenomena we have been consideringwere conducted solely and exclusivelywith a view to the benefit of man. We mayrather count the advantages he derives fromthem as incidental and residuary consequences ;which, although they may not have formed theexclusive object of creation, were all foreseenand comprehended in the plans of the GreatArchitect of that Globe, which, in his appointedtime, was destined to become the scene of humanhabitation.*" It is true that by applying ourselves to the study of nature,we daily find more and more uses in things that at first appeareduseless. But some things are of such a kind as not to admit ofbeing applied to the benefit of man, and others too noble for usto claim the sole use of them. Man has no farther concern withthis earth than a few fathoms under his feet: was then thewhole solid globe made only for a foundation to support theslender shell he treads upon? Do the magnetic effluvia courseincessantly over land and sea, only to turn here and there a mariner'scompass? Are those immense bodies, the fixed stars,hung up for nothing but to twinkle in our eyes by night, or tofind employment for a few astronomers ? Surely he must havean overweening conceit of man's importance, who can imaginethis stupendous frame of the universe made for him alone.100 RELATIONS OF ANIMALSWith respect to the animal kingdom, weacknowledge with gratitude, that among thehigher classes, there is a certain number ofliving species, which are indispensable to thesupply of human food and raiment, and to theaid of civilized man in his various labours andoccupations ; and that these are endowed withdispositions and faculties which adapt them inapeculiar degree for domestication :* but theirnumber bears an extremely small proportion tothe total amount of existing species ; and withregard to the lower classes of animals, there arebut very few among their almost countless multitudes,that minister either to the wants or luxuriesNevertheless, we may so far acknowledge all things made forman as that his uses are regarded conjointly with those of othercreatures, and that he has an interest in every thing reaching hisnotice, and contributing either to the support of his body, theimprovement or entertainment of his mind. The satellites thatturn the night of Jupiter into day, assist him in ascertaining thelongitude, and measuring the velocity of light : the mighty sun,that like a giant holds the planets and comets in their orbits,enlightens him with its splendour, and cherishes him with itswarmth : the distant stars, whose attraction probably confinesother planets within their vortices, direct his course over theboundless sea, and the inhospitable desert." — Tucker's Light ofNature, book iii. chap. ix. p. 9.See an excellent note on prospective provisions, to afford materialsfor human arts, and having reference to the future discoveriesof human science, in Rev. W. D. Conybeare's InauguralAddress to Bristol College, 1831.See Lyell's Principles of Geology, 3rd edit. vol. ii. book 3,c. 3.TO THE USES OF MAN. 101of the human race. Even could it be provedthat all existing species are serviceable to man,no such inference could be drawn with respectto those numerous extinct animals which Geologyshows to have ceased to live, long before ourrace appeared upon the earth. It is surely moreconsistent with sound philosophy, and with allthe information that is vouchsafed to us respectingthe attributes of the Deity, to consider eachanimal as having been created first for its ownsake, to receive its portion of that enjoymentwhich the Universal Parent is pleased to impartto each creature that has life ; and secondly, tobear its share in the maintenance of the generalsystem of co-ordinate relations, whereby allfamilies of living beings are reciprocally subservientto the use and benefit of one another.Under this head only can we include their relationsto man ; forming, as he does, but a small,although it be the most noble and exalted part,of that vast system of universal life, with whichit hath pleased the Creator to animate the surfaceof the globe.More than three-fifths of the earth's surface,"says Mr. Bake well, " are covered by the ocean ;and if from the remaining part we deduct thespace occupied by polar ice and eternal snow,by sandy deserts, sterile mountains, marshes,rivers and lakes, the habitable portion willscarcely exceed one-fifth of the whole of the globe.102 RELATIONS OF THE EARTH.Nor have we reason to believe that at any formerperiod the dominion of man over the earth wasmore extensive than at present. The remainingfour-fifths of our globe, though untenanted bymankind, are for the most part abundantlystocked with animated beings, that exult in thepleasure of existence, independent of humancontrol, and no way subservient to the necessitiesor caprices of man. Such is, and has beenfor several thousand years, the actual conditionof our planet ; nor is the consideration foreign toour subject, for hence we may feel less reluctancein admitting the prolonged ages or days ofcreation, when numerous tribes of the lowerorders of aquatic animals lived and flourished,and left their remains imbedded in the stratathat compose the outer crust of our planet."Bakewell's Introduction to Geology, 4th edit,p. 0.Chapter XI.Supposed Cases of Fossil Human Bones.Before we enter on the consideration of thefossil remains of other animals, it may be rightto enquire whether any traces of the humanspecies have yet been found in the strata of theearth.The only evidence that has been yet collectedupon this subject is negative ; but as far asthis extends, no conclusion is more fully established,than the important fact of the totalabsence of any vestiges of the human speciesthroughout the entire series of geological formations.*Had the case been otherwise, therewould indeed have been great difficulty in reconcilingthe early and extended periods whichhave been assigned to the extinct races ofanimals with our received chronology. On theother hand, the fact of no human remainshaving as yet been found in conjunction withthose of extinct animals, may be alleged in confirmationof the hypothesis that these animalslived and died before the creation of man.See Lyell's Principles of Geology, vol. i. pp. 153 and 159,first edit. 1830.104 HUMAN BONESThe occasional discovery of human bones andworks of art in any stratum, within a few feet ofthe surface, affords no certain evidence of suchremains being coeval with the matrix in whichthey are deposited. The universal practice ofinterring the dead, and frequent custom ofplacing various instruments and utensils in theground with them, offer a ready explanationof the presence of bones of men in situationsaccessible for the purposes of burial.The most remarkable and only recorded caseof human skeletons imbedded in a solid limestonerock, is that on the shore of Guadaloupe,.*One of these skeletons is preserved in the British Museum.and has been described by Mr. Kbnig, in the Phil. Trans, for 1814,vol. civ. p. 101. According to General Ernouf, (Lin. Trans. 1818,vol. xii. p. 53), the rock in which the human bones occur atGuadaloupe, is composed of consolidated sand, and contains alsoshells, of species now inhabiting the adjacent sea and land, togetherwith fragments of pottery, arrows, and hatchets of stone.The greater number of the bones are dispersed. One entireskeleton was extended in the usual position of burial ; another,which was in a softer sandstone, seemed to have been buried inthe sitting position customary among the Caribs. The bodies thusdifFerently interred, may have belonged to two different tribes.General Ernouf also explains the occurrence of the scatteredbones, by reference to a tradition of a battle and massacre onthis spot, of a tribe of Gallibis by the Caribs, about the year1710. These scattered bones of the massacred Gallibis wereprobably covered, by the action of the sea, with sand, which soonafter became converted to solid stone.On the west coast of Ireland, near Killer Harbour, a sandbank,which is surrounded by the sea at high water, is at thistime employed by the natives as a place of interment.IN STRATA OF RECENT FORMATION. 105There is, however, no reason to consider thesebones to be of high antiquity, as the rock inwhich they occur is of very recent formation,and is composed of agglutinated fragments ofshells and corals which inhabit the adjacentwater. Such kind of stone is frequently formedin a few years from sand-banks composed ofsimilar materials, on the shores of tropical seas.Frequent discoveries have also been made ofhuman bones, and rude works of art, in naturalcaverns, sometimes inclosed in stalactite, atother times in beds of earthy materials, whichare interspersed with bones of extinct species ofquadrupeds. These cases may likewise be explainedby the common practice of mankind inall ages, to bury their dead in such convenientrepositories. The accidental circumstance thatmany caverns contained the bones of extinctspecies of other animals, dispersed through thesame soil in which human bodies may, at anysubsequent period have been buried, affords noproof of the time when these remains of menwere introduced.Many of these caverns have been inhabitedby savage tribes, who, for convenience of occupation,have repeatedly disturbed portions of soilin which their predecessors may have beenburied. Such disturbances will explain the occasionaladmixture of fragments of human skeletons,and the bones of modern quadrupeds, with106 ORGANIC REMAINSthose of extinct species, introduced at more earlyperiods, and by natural causes.Several accounts have been published withinthe last few years of human remains discoveredin the caverns of France, and the province ofLiege, which are described as being of the sameantiquity with the bones of Hyaenas, and otherextinct quadrupeds, that accompany them. Mostof these may probably admit of explanation byreference to the causes just enumerated. Inthe case of caverns which form the channels ofsubterranean rivers, or which are subject tooccasional inundations, another cause of the admixtureof human bones, with the remains ofanimals of more ancient date, may be found inthe movements occasioned by running water.Chapter XII,General History of Fossil Organic Remains.As " the variety and formation of God's creaturesin the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms"are specially marked out by the founder of thisTreatise, as the subjects from which he desiresthat proofs should be sought of the power,wisdom, and goodness of the Creator ; I shallenter at greater length into the Evidences of thisAFFORD STRONGEST EVIDENCE OF DESIGN. 107kind, afforded by fossil organic remains, than Imight have done, without such specific directionsrespecting the source from which my argumentsare to be derived. I know not how I can betterfulfil the object thus proposed, than by attemptingto shew that the extinct species of Animalsand Vegetables which have, in former Periods,occupied our Planet, afford in their fossil remains,the same evidences of contrivance anddesign that have been shewn by Kay, Durham,and Paley, to pervade the structure of existingGenera and species of organized Beings.From the high preservation in which we findthe remains of animals and vegetables of eachgeological formation, and the exquisite mechanismwhich appears in many fossil fragments oftheir organization, we may collect an infinityof arguments, to show that the creatures fromwhich all these are derived were constructedwith a view to the varying conditions of thesurface of the Earth, and to its gradually increasingcapabilities of sustaining more complexforms of organic life, advancing through successivestages of perfection.*When we speak of different forms of animal life, as possessingvarious degrees of perfection, we do not impute to anycreature the presence of absolute imperfection, we mean only,that animals of more simple structure discharge a lower officein the gradually descending scale of animated beings. All perfectionhas relation to the object proposed to be attained byeach form of organization that occurs in nature, and nothingcan be called imperfect which fully accomplishes the end prossORGANIC REMAINS,Few facts are more remarkable in the historyof the progress of human discovery, than that itshould have been reserved almost entirely forthe researches of the present generation, to arriveat any certain knowledge of the existence ofthe numerous extinct races of animals, whichoccupied the surface of our planet, in ages precedingthe creation of man. The rapid progress,which during the last half century, has beenmade in the physical sciences, enables us nowto enter into the history of Fossil Organic Remains,in a manner which, till within a veryfew years, would have been quite impracticable ;during these years the anatomy of extinct speciesof Quadrupeds has been most extensively investigated: thus a Polype, or an Oyster, are as perfectly adapted t®their functions at the bottom of the sea, as the wings of theEagle are perfect, as organs of rapid passage through the air,and the feet of the stag perfect, in regard to their functionsof effecting swift locomotion upon the land.Unusual deviations from ordinary structure appear monstrositiesonly, until considered with reference to their peculiar use, butare proved to be instruments of perfect contrivance, when weunderstand the nature of the service to which they are applied :thus ; the beak of the Cross Bill (Loxia curvirostra, Linn.) wouldbe an awkward instrument if applied to the ordinary service ofthe beaks of the Passerine Order, to which this bird belongs ;but viewed in relation to its peculiar function of extracting seedsfrom between the indurated scales of Fir cones, it is at once seento be an instrument of perfect adaptation to its intended work.The Perfection of an organized Body is usually considered tobe in proportion to the Variety and compound Nature of itsparts, as the imperfection is usually considered to be in theRatio of its Simplicity.THEIR IMPORTANCE DULY APPRECIATED. 109gated, and the greatest of comparative anatomistshas devoted much of his time and talent toillustrate their organization. Similar inquirieshave been carried on also by a host of otherenlightened and laborious individuals, conductingindependent researches in various countries,since the commencement of the present century ;hence our knowledge of the osteology of a largenumber of extinct genera and species, now restson nearly the same foundation, and is establishedwith scarcely less certainty, than theanatomical details of those creatures that presenttheir living bodies to our examination.We can hardly imagine any stronger proof ofthe Unity of Design and Harmony of Organizationsthat have ever pervaded all animatednature, than we find in the fact established byCuvier, that from the character of a single limb,and even of a single tooth or bone, the form andproportions of the other bones, and condition ofthe entire Animal may be inferred. This lawprevails, no less universally, throughout theexisting kingdoms of animated nature, than inthose various races of extinct creatures that havepreceded the present tenants of our planet ;hence not only the framework of the fossilskeleton of an extinct animal, but also the characterof the muscles, by which each bone wasmoved, the external form and figure of the body,the food, and habits, and haunts, and mode oflife of creatures that ceased to exist before the110 ORGANIC REMAINS,creation of the human race, can with a highdegree of probability be ascertained.Concurrent with this rapid extension of ourknowledge of the comparative anatomy of extinctfamilies of the ancient inhabitants of the earth,has been the attention paid to fossil Conchology ;a subject of vast importance in investigating therecords of the changes that have occurred uponthe surface of our globe.Still more recently, the study of botanists hasbeen directed to the History of fossil vegetables ;and although, from the late hour at which thissubject has been taken up, our knowledge offossil plants is much in arrear of the progressmade in Anatomy and Conchology, we havealready a mass of most important evidence,showing the occurrence of a series of changes invegetable life, coextensive and contemporaneouswith those that have pervaded both the higherand lower orders of the animal kingdom.The study of Organic Remains indeed, formsthe peculiar feature and basis of modern Geology,and is the main cause of the progress thisscience has made, since the commencement ofthe present century. We find certain familiesof Organic Remains pervading strata of everyage, under nearly the same generic forms whichthey present among existing organizations. 1 *e. g. The Nautilus, Echinus, Terebratula, and various formsof Corals; and among Plants, the Ferns, Lycopodiaeese, andPalms.STUDY OF THEM INDISPENSABLE. IllOther families, both of animals and vegetables,are limited to particular formations, there beingcertain points where entire groups ceased toexist, and were replaced by others of a differentcharacter. The changes of genera and speciesare still more frequent ; hence, it has been wellobserved, that to attempt an investigation ofthe structure and revolutions of the earth, withoutapplying minute attention to the evidencesafforded by organic remains, would be no lessabsurd than to undertake to write the historyof any ancient people, without reference to thedocuments afforded by their medals and inscriptions,their monuments, and the ruins of theircities and temples. The study of Zoology andBotany has therefore become as indispensableto the progress of Geology, as a knowledge ofMineralogy. Indeed the mineral character ofthe inorganic matter of which the Earth's strataare composed, presents so similar a succession ofbeds of sandstone, clay, and limestone, repeatedirregularly, not only in different, but even inthe same formations,* that similarity of mineralcomposition is but an uncertain proof of contemporaneousorigin, while the surest test ofThe same formation which in England constitutes the argillaceousdeposits of the London Clay, presents at Paris the sandand freestone of the Calcaire Grossier; whilst the resemblanceof their Organic remains, proves the period of their depositionto have been the same, notwithstanding the difference in thecharacter of their mineral ingredients.112 ORGANIC REMAINS.identity of time is afforded by the correspondenceof the organic remains : in fact withoutthese, the proofs of the lapse of such long periodsas Geology shews to have been occupied in theformation of the strata of the Earth, would havebeen comparatively few and indecisive.The secrets of Nature, that are revealed to us,by the history of fossil Organic Remains, formperhaps the most striking results at which wearrive from the study of Geology. It mustappear almost incredible to those who have notminutely attended to natural phenomena, thatthe microscopic examination of a mass of rudeand lifeless limestone should often disclose thecurious fact, that large proportions of its substancehave once formed parts of living bodies.It is surprising to consider that the walls of ourhouses are sometimes composed of little elsethan comminuted shells, that were once thedomicile of other animals, at the bottom ofancient seas and lakes.It is marvellous that mankind should havegone on for so many centuries in ignorance ofthe fact, which is now so fully demonstrated,that no small part of the present surface ofthe earth is derived from the remains of animals,that constituted the population of ancientseas. Many extensive plains and massivemountains form, as it were, the great charnel-housesof preceding generations, in which thepetrified exuviae of extinct races of animals andSUCCESSIVE STAGES OF DEPOSITION. 1 13vegetables are piled into stupendous monumentsof the operations of life and death, during almostimmeasurable periods of past time. " At thesight of a spectacle," says Cuvier,* " so imposing,so terrible as that of the wreck of animallife, forming almost the entire soil on which wetread, it is difficult to restrain the imaginationfrom hazarding some conjectures as to the causesby which such great effects have been produced."The deeper we descend into the strata of theEarth, the higher do we ascend into the archaeologicalhistory of past ages of creation. Wefind successive stages marked by varying formsof animal and vegetable life, and these generallydiffer more and more widely from existingspecies, as we go further downwards into thereceptacles of the wreck of more ancient creations.When we discover a constant and regularassemblage of organic Remains, commencingwith one series of strata, and ending with another,which contains a different assemblage, we haveherein the surest grounds whereon to establishthose Divisions which are called geologicalformations, and we find many such Divisionssucceeding one another, when we investigate themineral deposits on the surface of the Earth,Cuvier rapport sur le progress des sciences naturelles, p. 179.G. I114 DISCOVERY CHF LINKS IN CREATION.The study of these Remains presents to theZoologist a large amount of extinct species andgenera, bearing important relations to existingforms of animals and vegetables, and often supplyinglinks that had hitherto appeared deficient,in the great chain whereby all animated beingsare held together in a series of near and gradualconnexions.This discovery, amid the relics of past creations,of links that seemed wanting in the presentsystem of organic nature, affords to naturalTheology an important argument, in provingthe unity and universal agency of a commongreat first cause ; since every individual in suchan uniform and closely connected series, is thusshewn to be an integral part of one grandoriginal design.The non-discovery of such links indeed, wouldform but a negative and feeble argument againstthe common origin of organic beings, widelyseparated from one another ; because, for aughtwe know, the existence of intervals may haveformed part of the original design of a commoncreator ; and because such apparent voids mayperhaps exist only in our own imperfect knowledge;but the presence of such links throughoutall past and present modifications of being,shews an unity of design which proves the unityof the intelligence in which it originated.It is indeed true that animals and vegetablesPROGRESS OF ANIMAL LIFE. 1 15of the lower classes prevailed chiefly at the commencementof organic life, but they did notprevail exclusively ; we find in rocks of the transitionformation, not only remains of radiatedand articulated animals and mollusks, such asCorals, Trilobites, and Nautili ; but we see thevertebrata also represented by the Class of Fishes.Reptiles have been found in some of the earlieststrata of the secondary formations.* In the footstepson the New Red sandstone, we have probablythe first traces of Birds and Marsupialia.(See PI. 26\ and 26.) The bones of Birds occurin the Wealden formation of Tilgate forest, andthose of Marsupialia in the Oolite at Stonesfield.(See PI. 2. Figs. A. B.) In the midway regionsof the secondary strata, are the earliest remainsyet discovered of Cetacea-t I n the tertiary formations,we find both Birds, Cetacea, and terrestrialMammalia, some referable to existing genera,and all to existing orders. See PI. 1 , fig. 73 — 101 .Thus it appears, that the more perfect formsof animals become gradually more abundant, aswe advance from the older into the newer seriesof depositions : whilst the more simple orders,though often changed in genus and species, andE. g. In the Magnesian Conglomerate of Durham Downnear Bristol, and in the bituminous marl slate, (Kupferschiefer)of Mansfeld in the Harts.t There is, in the Oxford Museum, an ulna from the GreatOolite of Stone near Woodstock, Oxon, which was examinedby Cuvier, and pronounced to be cetaceous ; and also a portionof a very large rib, apparently of a whale, from the same locality.116 PROOFS OF LONG LAPSE OF TIME.sometimes losing whole families, which are replacedby new ones, have pervaded the entirerange of fossiliferous formations.The most prolific source of organic remainshas been the accumulation of the shelly coveringsof animals which occupied the bottom of the seaduring a long series of consecutive generations.A large proportion of the entire substance ofmany strata is composed of myriads of theseshells reduced to a comminuted state by thelong continued movements of water. In otherstrata, the presence of countless multitudes ofunbroken corallines, and of fragile shells, havingtheir most delicate spines, still attached and undisturbed,shows that the animals which formedthem, lived and died upon or near the spotwhere these remains are found.Strata thus loaded with the exuviae of innumerablegenerations of organic beings, affordstrong proof of the lapse of long periods of time,wherein the animals from which they have beenderived lived and multiplied and died, at thebottom of seas which once occupied the site ofour present continents and islands. Repeatedchanges in species, both of animals and vegetables,in succeeding members of different formations,give further evidence, not only of thelapse of time, but also of important changes inthe physical condition and climate of the ancientearth.Besides these more obvious remains of Tes-microscopicCHAMBERED SHELLS. 117tacea and of larger animals, minute examinationdiscloses occasionally prodigious accumulationsof microscopic shells that surprise us no less bytheir abundance than their extreme minuteness ;the mode in which they are sometimes crowdedtogether, may be estimated from the fact thatSoldan collected from less than an ounce and ahalf of stone found in the hills of Caspian, inTuscany, 10,454 microscopic chambered shells.The rest of the stone was composed of fragmentsof shells, of minute spines of Echini, and of asparry calcareous matter.Of several species of these shells, four or fivehundred weigh but a single grain ; of onespecies he calculates that a thousand individualswould scarcely weigh one grain. (Saggio Orit-tografico, 1780, pag. 103, Tab. III. fig. 22, H. 1.)He further states that some idea of their diminutivesize may be formed from the circumstancethat immense numbers of them passthrough a paper in which holes have beenpricked with a needle of the smallest size.Our mental, like our visual faculties, beginrapidly to fail us when we attempt to comprehendthe infinity of littleness towards which wearethus conducted, on approaching the smallerextremes of creation.Similar accumulations of microscopic shellshave been observed also in various sedimentarydeposits of freshwater formation. A striking118 MICROSCOPIC SHELLS OF Cyprus*example of this kind is found in the abundantdiffusion of the remains of a microscopic crustaceousanimal of the genus Cypris. Animalsof this genus are enclosed within two flat valves,like those of a bivalve shell, and now inhabitthe waters of lakes and marshes. Certain claybeds of the Wealden formation below the chalk,are so abundantly charged with microscopicshells of the Cypris JFaba, that the surfacesof many laminae into which this clay is easilydivided, are often entirely covered with them aswith small seeds. The same shells occur also inthe Hastings sand and sandstone, in the Sussexmarble, and in the Purbeck limestone, all ofwhich were deposited during the same geologicalepoch in an ancient lake or estuary, whereinstrata of this formation have been accumulatedto the thickness of nearly 1000 feet. (See Dr.Fitton's Geol. sketch of Hastings, 1833, p. 68.)We have similar evidence of the long durationof time, in another series of Lacustrine formations,more recent than the chalk, viz. in thegreat freshwater deposits of the tertiary periodin central France; here the district of Auvergnepresents an area of twenty miles in width, andeighty miles in length, within which strata ofgravel, sand, clay, and limestone have beenaccumulated by the operations of fresh water, tothe thickness of at least seven hundred feet.Mr. Lyell, in his Principles of Geology, 3rd ed.vol. iv. p. 98, states that the foliated character ofFOSSIL Indite. 1 19many of the marly beds of this formation is dueto the presence of countless myriads of similarexuviae of the Cypris which give rise to divisionsin the marl as thin as paper. Taking this factin conjunction with the habit of these animals tomoult and change their skin annually, togetherwith their shell, he justly observes that a moreconvincing proof of the tranquillity of the waters,and of the slow and gradual process by whichthe lake was filled up with fine mud cannot bedesired.Another proof of the length of time that musthave elapsed during the deposition of thesetertiary freshwater formations in Auvergne, isafforded near Claremont by the occurrence ofbeds of limestone several feet in thickness,almost wholly made up of the Indusiae, orCaddis-like coverings, resembling the cases thatenclose the larvae of our common May-fly.Mr. Lyell states that a single individual ofthese Indusiae is often surrounded by no lessthan a hundred minute shells of a small spiralunivalve, (Paladin), fixed to the outside of thistubular case of a larva of the genus Phryganea.See Lyell's Principles of Geology, 3rd edit. vol.iv. p. 100. It is difficult to conceive how stratalike these, extended over large tracts of country,and laid one above another, with beds of marland clay between them, should have containedthe coverings of such multitudes of aquaticanimals, by any other process than that of120 DEPOSITS IN ESTUARIES.gradual accumulation during a long series ofyears.In the case of deposits formed in estuaries, theadmixture and alternation of the remains of fluviatileand lacustrine shells with marine Exuviae,indicate conditions analogous to those underwhich we observe the inhabitants both of thesea and rivers existing together in brackishwater near the Deltas of the Nile,* and othergreat rivers. Thus, we find a stratum of oystershells, that indicate the presence either of salt orbrackish water, interposed between limestonestrata filled with freshwater shells among thePurbeck formations ; so also in the sands andclays of the Wealden formation of Tilgate forest,we have freshwater and lacustrine shells intermixedwith remains of large terrestrial reptiles,e. g. Megalosaurus, Iguanodon, and Hyleeo-taurus ; with these we find also the bones ofthe marine reptiles Plesiosaurus, and from thisadmixture we infer that the former were driftedfrom the land into an estuary which the Plesiosaurusalso having entered from the sea, left itsbones in this common receptacle of the animaland mineral exuviae of some not far distantlandsAnother condition of organic remains is thatSee Madden's Travels in Egypt, vol. ii. p. 171-175.t For the detailed history of the organic remains of theWealden formation, see Mr. Mantelll's highly instructive andaccurate volumes on the geology of Sussex.DEPOSITS NEAR SEA SHORES. 1*21of which a well known example occurs in theoolitic slate of Stonesfield, near Oxford. Atthis place a single bed of calcareous and sandyslate not six feet thick, contains an admixture ofterrestrial animals and plants with shells thatare decidedly marine ; the bones of Didelphys,Megalosaurus, and Pterodactyle are so mixedwith Ammonites, Nautili, and Belemnites, andmany other species of marine shells, that therecan be little doubt that this formation was depositedat the bottom of a sea not far distant fromsome ancient shore. We may account for thepresence of remains of terrestrial animals insuch a situation by supposing their carcases tohave been floated from land at no great distancefrom their place of submarine interment.A similar explanation may be given of themixture of the bones of large terrestrial mammaliawith marine shells, in the Miocene Tertiaryformations of Touraine, and in the Crag ofNorfolk.Cases of Animals destroyed suddenly.The cases hitherto examined, are examples ofthe processes of slow and gradual accumulationsin which are preserved the remains of marine,lacustrine, and terrestrial animals that perishedduring extended periods of time, by naturaldeath. It remains to state that other causesseem to have operated occasionally, and atdistant intervals, to produce a rapid accumu-*122 ANIMALS DESTROYED SUDDENLY.nation of certain strata, accompanied by thesudden destruction, not only of testacea, but alsoof the higher classes of the then existing inhabitantsof the seas. We have analogous instancesof sudden destruction operating locally at thepresent time, in the case of fishes that perish froman excessive admixture of mud with the water ofthe sea, during extraordinary tempests ; and alsofrom the sudden imparting of heat, and noxiousgases, to water in immediate contact with thesite of submarine volcanoes. A sudden irruptionof salt water into lakes or estuaries, previouslyoccupied by fresh water, or the suddenoccupation of a portion of the sea, by animmense body of freshwater from a burstinglake, or unusual land flood, is often fatal to largenumbers of the inhabitants of the waters thusrespectively interchanged.*The greater number of fossil fishes present noappearance of having perished by mechanicalviolence ; they seem rather to have been destroyedby some noxious qualities imparted tothe waters in which they moved ; either bysudden change of temperature,! or an admit -See account of the effects of an irruption of the sea into thefreshwater of the lake of Lowestoft, on the coast of Suffolk.Edinburgh Philosophical Journal, No. 25, p. 372.f M. Agassiz has observed that a sudden depression to theamount of 15° of the temperature of the water in the river Glad,which falls into the lake of Zurich, caused the immediate deathoi' thousands of Barbel.FISHES OF MONTE Bohea AND NAPLES. 123ture of carbonic acid, or sulphuretted hydrogengas, or of bituminous or earthy matter in theform of mud.The circumstances under which the fossilfishes are found at Motte Bolca seem to indicatethat they perished suddenly on arriving at apart of the then existing seas, which was renderednoxious by the volcanic agency, of whichthe adjacent basaltic rocks afford abundant evidence.The skeletons of these fish lie parallelto the laminae of the strata of the calcareousslate ; they are always entire, and so closelypacked on one another, that many individualsare often contained in a single block. Thethousands of specimens which are dispersedover the cabinets of Europe, have nearly allbeen taken from one quarry. All these fishesmust have died suddenly on this fatal spot, andhave been speedily buried in the calcareoussediment then in the course of deposition. Fromthe fact that certain individuals have even preservedtraces of colour upon their skin, we arecertain that they were entombed before decompositionof their soft parts had taken place.*The celebrated fish (Blochius longirostris) from this quarry,described as petrified in the act of swallowing another fish (Ithi-olitologia Veronese, Tab. XII.) has been ascertained by M.Agassiz to be a deception, arising from the accidental juxtapositionof two fishes. The size of the head of the smaller fishsupposed to be swallowed, is such as never could have enteredthe diminutive stomach of the putative glutton; moreover it doesnot enter within the margin of its jaws.124 ANIMALS SPEEDILY BURIED.The fishes of Torre orlando, in the Bay ofNaples, near Castelamare, seem also to haveperished suddenly. M. Agassiz finds that thecountless individuals which occur there in Jurassiclimestone, all belong to a single speciesof the genus Tetrao olepis. An entire shoalseems to have been destroyed at once, at a placewhere the waters were either contaminated withsome noxious impregnation, or overcharged withheat.*In the same manner also, we may imaginedeposits from muddy water, mixed perhaps withnoxious gases, to have formed by their sedimentsa succession of thick beds of marl and clay,such as those of the Lias formation ; and at thesame time to have destroyed, not only the and lower orders of animals inhabiting thebottom, but also the higher orders of marinecreatures within the regions thus invaded. Evidenceof the fact of vast numbers of fishes andsyrians having met with sudden death andimmediate burial, is also afforded by the stateof entire preservation in which the bodies ofhundreds of them are often found in the Lias.The proximity of this rock to the Vesuvian chain of* volcaniceruptions, offers a cause sufficient to have imparted eitherof these destructive powers to the waters of a limited spacein the bay of Naples, at a period preceding those intense volcanicactions which prevailed in this district during the depositionof the Tertiary strata, and which are still going on there.FISHES IN THE Harts. 125It sometimes happens that scarcely a singlebone, or scale, has been removed from the placeit occupied during life ; this condition could notpossibly have been retained, had the uncoveredbodies of these animals been left, even for a fewhours, exposed to putrefaction, and to theattacks of fishes and other smaller animals atthe bottom of the sea.*Another celebrated deposit of fossil fishes isthat of the cupriferous slate surrounding theHartz. Many of the fishes of this slate at Mans-felt,Eiseleben, &c. have a distorted attitude,which has often been assigned to writhing in theagonies of death. The true origin of this condition,is the unequal contraction of the muscularfibres, which causes fish and other animals tobecome stiff, during a short interval betweendeath and the flaccid state preceding decomposition.As these fossil fishes maintain the altitudeof the rigid stage immediately succeedingdeath, it follows that they were buried beforeputrefaction had commenced, and apparently inthe same bituminous mud, the influx of whichhad caused their destruction. The disseminationof Copper and Bitumen through the slateAlthough it appears from the preservation of these animals,that certain parts of the Lias were deposited rapidly, there arealso proofs of the lapse of much time during the deposition ofother parts of this formation. See Notes in future Chapters onCoprolites and fossil Loligo.120 ORGANIC REMAINS PRESERVEDthat contains so many perfect fishes around theHartz, seems to offer two other causes, either ofwhich may have produced their sudden death.*From what has been said respecting the generalhistory of fossil organic Remains, it appearsthat not only the relics of aquatic, but also thoseof terrestrial animals and plants, are foundalmost exclusively in strata that have been accumulatedby the action of water. This circumstanceis readily explained, when we considerthat the bones of all dead creatures that may beleft uncovered upon dry land, are in a few yearsentirely destroyed by various animals, and thedecomposing influence of the atmosphere. Ifwe except the few bones that may have beencollected in caves, or buried under land slips,or the products of volcanic Eruptions, or in sanddrifted by the winds it is only in strata formedUnder the turbulent conditions of our planet, whilst stratificationwas in progress, the activity of volcanic agents, thenfrequent and intense, was probably attended also with atmosphericdisturbances affecting both the air and water, andproducing the same fatality among the then existing Tribes offishes, that is now observed to result from sudden and violentchanges in the electric condition of the atmosphere. M. Agassizhas observed that rapid changes in the degree of atmosphericpressure upon the water, affect the air within the swimmingbladders of fishes, sometimes causing them to be distended to afatal degree, and even to burst. Multitudes of dead fishes, thathave thus perished during tempests, are often seen floating on thesurface, and cast on the shores of the lakes of Switzerland.t Captain Lyon states, that in the deserts of Africa, thebodies of camels are often desiccated by the heat and drynessBY THE AGENCY OF WATER. 127by water that any remains of land animals canhave been preserved.We continually see the carcases of such animalsdrifted by rivers in their seasons of flood,into lakes, estuaries, and seas ; and although itmay at first seem strange to find terrestrialremains, imbedded in strata formed at the bottomof the water, the difficulty vanishes on recollectionthat the materials of stratified rocks arederived in great part from the Detritus of moreof the atmosphere, and become the nucleus of a sand hill ;which the wind accumulates around them. Beneath this sandthey remain interred like the stumps of palm trees, and thebuildings of ancient Egypt.In a recent paper on the geology of the Bermudas (Proceedingsof Geol. Soc. Lond. Ap. 9, 1834), Lieutenant Nelsondescribes these islands as composed of calcareous sand andlimestone, derived from comminuted shells and corals; he considersgreat part of the materials of these strata to have beendrifted up from the shore by the action of the wind. Thesurface in many parts is composed of loose sand, disposed inall the irregular forms of drifted snow, and presents a surfacecovered with undulations like those produced by the ripple ofwater upon sand on the sea shore. Recent shells occur both inthe loose sand and solid limestone, and also roots of the Palmettonow growing in the island. The N. W. coast of Cornwallaffords examples of similar invasions of many thousand acresof land by Deluges of sand drifted from the sea shore, at the villagesof Bute, and Perrin Zabulo ; the latter village has beentwice destroyed, and buried under sand, drifted inland duringextraordinary tempests, at distant intervals of time. See Trans,of Geol. Soc. of Cornwall, vol. ii. p. 140. and vol. iii. p. 12.See also De la Beche's Geological Manual, 3rd edit. p. 84, andJameson's Translation of Cuvier's Theory of the Earth, 5th ed.Note G.128 IMPORTANCE OF ORGANIC REMAINS.ancient lands. As the forces of rains, torrents,and inundations have conveyed this detritus intolakes, estuaries, and seas, it is probable thatmany carcases of terrestrial and amphibiousanimals, should also have been drifted to greatdistances by currents which swept such enormousquantities of abraded matter from the lands ; andaccordingly we find, that strata of aqueous formationhave become the common repository notonly of the Remains of aquatic, but also ofterrestrial animals and vegetables.The study of these Remains will form ourmost interesting and instructive subject of inquiry,since it is in them that we shall find thegreat master key whereby we may unlock thesecret history of the earth. They are documentswhich contain the evidences of revolutions andcatastrophes, long antecedent to the creation ofthe human race ; they open the book of nature,and swell the volumes of science, with theRecords of many successive series of animaland vegetable generations, of which the Creationand Extinction would have been equally unknownto us, but for recent discoveries in thescience of Geology.1 '29Chapter XIII.Aggregate of Animal Enjoyment increased, andthat of Pain diminished, by the existence ofCarnivorous Races.Before we proceed to consider the evidencesof design, discoverable in the structure of theextinct carnivorous races, which inhabited ourplanet during former periods of its history ; wemay briefly examine the nature of that universaldispensation, whereby a system of perpetual destruction,followed by continual renovation, hasat all times tended to increase the aggregate ofanimal enjoyment, over the entire surface of theterraqueous globe.Some of the most important provisions whichwill be presented to us in the anatomy of theseancient animals, are found in the organs withwhich they were furnished for the purpose ofcapturing and killing their prey ; and as contrivancesexhibited in instruments formed expresslyfor destruction, may at first sight, seeminconsistent with the dispensations of a creationfounded in benevolence, and tending toproduce the greatest amount of enjoyment tog.k130 CARNIVOROUS RACESthe greatest number of individuals; it maybeproper to premise a few words upon this subject,before we enter on the history of that largeportion of the animals of a former world, whoseoffice was to effect the destruction of life.The law of universal mortality being theestablished condition, on which it has pleasedthe Creator to give being to every creature uponearth, it is a dispensation of kindness to makethe end of life to each individual as easy aspossible. The most easy death is, proverbially,that which is the least expected ; and though, formoral reasons peculiar to our own species, wedeprecate the sudden termination of our mortallife ; yet, in the case of every inferior animal,such a termination of existence is obviously themost desirable. The pains of sickness, and decrepitudeof age, are the usual precursors ofdeath, resulting from gradual decay : these, inthe human race alone, are susceptible of alleviationfrom internal sources of hope and consolation; and give exercise to some of the highestcharities, and most tender sympathies of humanity.But, throughout the whole creation ofinferior animals, no such sympathies exist ; thereis no affection or regard for the feeble and aged ;no alleviating care to relieve the sick ; and theextension of life through lingering stages ofdecay and of old age, would to each individualbe a scene of protracted misery. Under such aBENEFICIAL TO THE HERBIVOROUS. 131system, the natural world would present a massof daily suffering, bearing a large proportion tothe total amount of animal enjoyment. By theexisting dispensations of sudden destruction andrapid succession, the feeble and disabled arespeedily relieved from suffering, and the worldis at all times crowded with myriads of sentientand happy beings ; and though to many individualstheir allotted share of life be often short,it is usually a period of uninterrupted gratification; whilst the momentary pain of sudden andunexpected death is an evil infinitely small, incomparison with the enjoyments of which it isthe termination.The inhabitants of the earth have ever beendivided into two great classes, the one herbivorous,the other carnivorous ; and though the existenceof the latter may, at first sight, seemcalculated to increase the amount of animalpain ; yet, when considered in its full extent,it will be found materially to diminish it.To the mind which looks not to general resultsin the economy of Nature, the earth may seemto present a scene of perpetual warfare, and incessantcarnage : but the more enlarged view,while it regards individuals in their conjointrelations to the general benefit of their ownspecies, and that of other species with whichthey are associated in the great family of Nature,resolves each apparent case of individual132 CARNIVOROUS RACESevil, into an example of subserviency to universalgood.Under the existing system, not only is theaggregate amount of animal enjoyment muchincreased, by adding to the stock of life all theraces which are carnivorous, but these are alsohighly beneficial even to the herbivorous races,that are subject to their dominion.Besides the desirable relief of speedy deathon the approach of debility or age, the carnivoraconfer a further benefit on the specieswhich form their prey, as they control theirexcessive increase, by the destruction of manyindividuals in youth and health. Without thissalutary check, each species would soon multiplyto an extent, exceeding in a fatal degreetheir supply of food, and the whole class ofherbivora would ever be so nearly on the vergeof starvation, that multitudes would daily beconsigned to lingering and painful death byfamine. All these evils are superseded by theestablishment of a controlling Power in thecarnivora ; by their agency the numbers ofeach species are maintained in due proportionto one another — the sick, the lame, the aged,and the supernumeraries, are consigned tospeedy death ; and while each suffering individualis soon relieved from pain, it contributesits enfeebled carcase to the support of itscarnivorous benefactor, and leaves more roomBENEFICIAL TO THE HERBIVOROUS. 133for the comfortable existence of the healthysurvivors of its own species.The same " police of Nature," which is thusbeneficial to the great family of the inhabitantsof the land, is established with equal advantageamong the tenants of the sea. Of these also,there is one large division that lives on vegetables,and supplies the basis of food to theother division that is carnivorous. Here againwe see, that in the absence of carnivora, theuncontrolled herbivora would multiply indefinitely,until the lack of food brought them alsoto the verge of starvation ; and the sea wouldbe crowded with creatures under the enduranceof universal pain from hunger, while death byfamine would be the termination of ill fed andmiserable lives.The appointment of death by the agency ofcarnivora, as the ordinary termination of animalexistence, appears therefore in its main resultsto be a dispensation of benevolence ; it deductsmuch from the aggregate amount of the painof universal death ; it abridges, and almostannihilates, throughout the brute creation, themisery of disease, and accidental injuries, andlingering decay; and imposes such salutaryrestraint upon excessive increase of numbers,that the supply of food maintains perpetuallya due ratio to the demand. The result is,that the surface of the land and depths of the134 CARNIVOROUS RACESwaters are ever crowded with myriads of animatedbeings, the pleasures of whose life areco extensive with its duration ; and which,throughout the little day of existence that isallotted to them, fulfil with joy the functionsfor which they were created. Life to each individualis a scene of continued feasting, in aregion of plenty ; and when unexpected deatharrests its course, it repays with small interestthe large debt, which it has contracted to thecommon fund of animal nutrition, from whencethe materials of its body have been derived.Thus the great drama of universal life is perpetuallysustained ; and though the individualactors undergo continual change, the same partsare ever filled by another and another generation; renewing the face of the. earth, and thebosom of the deep, with endless successions oflife and happiness.Chapter XIV.Proofs of Design in the Structure of FossilVertebrated Animals.SECTION I.FOSSIL MAMMALIA.— DINOTHERIUM.Enough has, I trust, been stated in the precedingchapter, to show the paramount importanceof appealing to organic remains, in illustration ofthat branch of physic-theology with which weareat present occupied.The structure of the greater number, even ofthe earliest fossil Mammalia, differs in so fewessential points from that of the living representativesof their respective Orders, that I forbearto enter on details which would indeed aboundwith evidences of creative design, but wouldoffer little that is not equally discoverable in theanatomy of existing species. I shall, therefore,limit my observations to two extinct genera,which are perhaps the most remarkable of allfossil Mammalia, for size and unexampled peculiaritiesof anatomical construction ; the first ofthese, the Dinotherium, having been the largestof terrestrial Mammalia ; and the second, theMegatherium, presenting greater deviations from136 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.ordinary animal forms, than occur in any otherspecies, either of recent or fossil quadrupeds.It has been already stated, in our account ofthe Mammalia of the Miocene period of thetertiary series, that the most abundant remainsof the Dinotherium are found at Epplesheim, inthe province of Hesse Darmstadt, and are described,in a work now in process of publication,by Professor Kaup. Fragments of the samegenus are mentioned by Cuvier, as occurring inseveral parts of France, and in Bavaria andAustria.The form of the molar teeth of the Dinothe-rum (PL 2, C. Fig. 3), so nearly resembles thatof the Tapirs, that Cuvier at first referred themto a gigantic species of this genus. ProfessorKaup has since placed this animal in the newgenus Dinotherium, holding an intermediateplace between the Tapir and the Mastodon, andsupplying another important extinct link in thegreat family of Pachydermata. The largestspecies of this genus, D. Giganteum, is calculated,both by Cuvier and Kaup, to haveattained the extraordinary length of eighteenfeet. The most remarkable bone of the bodyyet found is the shoulder-blade, the form ofwhich more nearly resembles that of a Molethan of any other animal, and seems to indicatea peculiar adaptation of the fore leg to thepurposes of digging, an indication which isDINOTHERIUM. 137corroborated by the remarkable structure of thelower jaw.The lower jaws of two species of Dinothe-rum, figured in Plate 2. C. Figs. 1. 2. exhibitpeculiarities in the disposition of the tusks, suchas are found in no other living or fossil animal.The form of the molar teeth, PL 2. C. Fig. 3,approaches, as we have stated, most nearly tothat of the molar teeth in Tapirs ; but a remarkabledeviation from the character of Tapirs, aswell as of every other quadruped, consists in thepresence of two enormous tusks, placed at theanterior extremity of the lower jaw, and curveddownwards, like the tusks in the upper jaw ofthe Walrus. (PI. 2. C. 1. 2.)I shall confine my present remarks to thispeculiarity in the position of the tusks, and endeavourto show how far these organs illustratethe habits of the extinct animals in which theyare found. It is mechanically impossible thata lower jaw, nearly four feet long, loadedwith such heavy tusks at its extremity, couldhave been otherwise than cumbrous and inconvenientto a quadruped living on dry land. Nosuch disadvantage would have attended thisstructure in a large animal destined to live inwater; and the aquatic habits of the family ofTapirs, to which the Dinotherium was mostnearly allied, render it probable that, like them,it was an inhabitant of fresh-water lakes and138 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.rivers. To an animal of such habits, the weightof the tusks sustained in water would have beenno source of inconvenience ; and, if we supposethem to have been employed, as instruments forraking and grubbing up by the roots largeaquatic vegetables from the bottom, they would,under such service, combine the mechanicalpowers of the pick axe with those of the horse-harrowof modern husbandry. The weight ofthe head, placed above these downward tusks,would add to their efficiency for the service heresupposed, as the power of the harrow is increasedby being loaded with weights.The tusks of the Dinotherium may also havebeen applied with mechanical advantage to hookon the head of the animal to the bank, with thenostrils sustained above the water, so as tobreathe securely during sleep, whilst the bodyremained floating, at perfect ease, beneaththe surface : the animal might thus repose,moored to the margin of a lake or river,without the slightest muscular exertion, theweight of the head and body tending to fix andkeep the tusks fast anchored in the substance ofthe bank ; as the weight of the body of a sleepingbird keeps the claws clasped firmly aroundits perch. These tusks might have been furtherused, like those in the upper jaw of the Walrus,to assist in dragging the body out of thewater ; and also as formidable instruments ofdefence.MEGATHERIUM. 139The structure of the scapula, already noticed,seems to show that the fore leg was adapted toco-operate with the tusks and teeth, in diggingand separating large vegetables from the bottom.The great length attributed to the body, wouldhave been no way inconvenient to an animalliving in the water, but attended with much mechanicaldisadvantage to so weighty a quadrupedupon land. In all these characters of a gigantic,herbivorous, aquatic quadruped, we recognizeadaptations to the lacustrine condition of theearth, during that portion of the tertiary periods,to which the existence of these seemingly anomalouscreatures appears to have been limited.SECTION II.MEGATHERIUM.As it will be quite impossible, in the presentTreatise, to give particular descriptions of thestructure, even of a few of the fossil Mammalia,which have been, as it were, restored again tolife by the genius and industry of Cuvier; I shallendeavour to illustrate, by the details of a singlespecies, the method of analytical investigation,that has been applied by that great philosopherto the anatomy both of fossil and recent animals.The result of his researches, as recorded in theOssemens Fossiles, has been to show that all140 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.fossil quadrupeds, however differing in generic,or specific details, are uniformly constructed onthe same general plan, and systematic basis oforganization as living species ; and that throughoutthe various adaptations of a common type topeculiar functions, under different conditions ofthe earth, there prevails such universal conformityof design, that we cannot rise from theperusal of these inestimable volumes, without astrong conviction of the agency of one vast andmighty Intelligence, ever directing the entire fabric,both of past and present systems of creation.Nothing can exceed the accuracy of thesevere and logical demonstrations, that fill thesevolumes with proofs of wise design, in the constantrelation of the parts of animals to oneanother, and to the general functions of thewhole body. Nothing can surpass the perfectionof his reasoning, in pointing out the beautifulcontrivances, which are provided in almost endlessvariety, to fit every living creature to itsown peculiar state and mode of life. His illustrationof the curious conditions, and concurrentcompensations that are found in the living Elephants,apply equally to the extinct fossil speciesof the same genus ; and similar exemplificationsmay be extended from the living to the extinctspecies of other genera, e. g. Rhinoceros, Hippopotamus,Horse, Ox, Deer, Tiger, Hyaena, Wolf,&c. that are usually associated with the Elephantin a fossil state.MEGATHERIUM. 141The animal I shall select for my present purposeis that most extraordinary fossil creature, theMegatherium, (see PI. 5), an animal, in some partsof its organization, nearly allied to the Sloth, and,like the Sloth, presenting an apparent monstrosityof external form, accompanied by many strangepeculiarities of internal structure, which havehitherto been but little understood.The Sloths have afforded a remarkable exceptionto the conclusions which naturalists haveusually drawn, from their study of the organicstructure and mechanism of other animals. Theadaptation of each part of the body of the Elephant,to produce extraordinary strength, and ofevery member of the Deer and Antelope to giveagility and speed, are too obvious to have escapedthe attention of any scientific observer ; but, ithas been the constant practice of naturalists, tofollow Buffon in misrepresenting the Sloths, asthe most imperfectly constructed among all themembers of the animal kingdom, as creaturesincapable of enjoyment, and formed only formisery.The Sloth does, indeed, afford the greatestdeviations from the ordinary structure of livingquadrupeds; and these have been erroneouslyconsidered as imperfections in its organization,without any compensating advantage. I haveelsewhere * attempted to show that these anonTransactions, Vol. XVII. Part 1.142 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.malus conditions are so far from being defects,or sources of inconvenience in the Sloth, thatthey afford striking illustrations of the variedcontrivances, whereby the structure of everycreature is harmoniously adapted to the state inwhich it was destined to live. The peculiaritiesof the Sloth, that render its movements so awkwardon the earth, are fitted with much advantageto its destined office of living entirely upontrees, and feeding upon their leaves : so also, ifwe consider the Megatherium with a view to itsprovince of digging and feeding upon roots, weshall, in this habit, discover the explanation ofits unusual structure, and apparently incongruousproportions; and find, in every organ, a relationof obvious convenience, and of adaptation to theoffice it had to discharge.*It will be my present object to enter into sucha minute investigation of some of the more remarkableparts of this animal, viewing them witha constant reference to a peculiar mode of life, asmay lead to the recognition of a system of wellThe remains of the Megatherium have been found chiefly inthe southern regions of America, and most abundantly in Paraguay; it appears also to have extended on the north of theequator as far as the United States. "We have, for some time,possessed detailed descriptions of this animal by Cuvier, Oss.Foss. vol. 5. and a series of large engravings, by Pander andDalton, taken from a nearly perfect skeleton, sent in 1789 fromBuenos Ayres to Madrid. Dr. Mitchell and Mr. Cowper havedescribed, in the Annals of the Lyceum of Nat. Hist, of NewYork, May, 1824, some teeth and bones found in the marshes ofMEGATHERIUM. 143connected contrivances, in the mechanism of acreature apparently the most monstrous, andseeming to present the most ill-assorted proportions,that occur throughout the entire range ofthe animal kingdom.We have here before us a gigantic quadruped,(see PL 5, Fig. 1), which at first sight appearsnot only ill-proportioned as a whole, but whosemembers also seem incongruous, and clumsy, ifconsidered with a view to the functions and correspondinglimbs of ordinary quadrupeds : let usonly examine them with the aid of that clue,which is our best and essential guide in everyinvestigation of the mechanism of the animalframe ; let us first infer from the total compositionand capabilities of the machinery, what wasthe general nature of the work it was destined toperform ; and from the character of the most importantparts, namely, the feet and teeth, makeourselves acquainted with the food these organswere adapted to procure and masticate ; and weshall find every other member of the body act-theIsle of Skiddaway, on the coast of Georgia, which correspondwith the skeleton at Madrid. Cuvier, Vol. V. part 2, p. 519. —In the year 1832, many parts of another skeleton were broughtto England by Woodbine Parish, esq. from the bed of the riverSalado, near Buenos Ayres : these are placed in the museum ofthe Royal College of Surgeons in London, and will be describedin the Trans. Geol. Soc. Lond. Vol. III. N. S. Part 3, by my friendMr. Cleft, a gentleman from whose great anatomical knowledge,I have derived most important aid, in my investigation of thisanimal.144 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.ing in harmonious subordination to this chiefpurpose in the animal economy.In the case of ordinary animals, the passagefrom one form to another is so gradual, and thefunctions of one species receive such ample andobvious illustrations from those of the speciesadjacent to it, that we are rarely at a loss, to seethefinal cause of almost every arrangement thatis presented to the anatomist. This is more especiallythe case with respect to the skeleton,which forms the foundation of all the other mechanismswithin the body, and is of the highestimportance in the history of fossil animals, ofwhich we rarely find any other remains besidesthe bones, and teeth, and the scaly or osseous integuments.I select the Megatherium, becauseit affords an example of most extraordinarydeviations, and of egregious apparent monstrosity; viz. the case of a gigantic animal exceedingthe largest Rhinoceros in bulk, and to whichthe nearest approximations that occur in theliving world, are found in the not less anomalousgenera of Sloth, Armadillo, and Chlamy-chorus; the former adapted to the peculiarhabit of residing upon trees ; the two latterconstructed with unusual adaptations to thehabit of burrowing in search of their food andshelter in sand ; and all limited in their geographicaldistribution, nearly to the same regionsof America that were once the residenceof the Megatherium.MEGATHERIUM. 145I shall not here enter on the unsettled questionsas to the precise age of the deposits inwhich the Megatherium is found, or the causesby which it has been extirpated ; my object is toshow that the apparent incongruities of all itsparts, are in reality systems of wise and wellcontrived adaptation to a peculiar mode of life.I proceed therefore to consider, in the order inwhich they are described by Cuvier, the mostimportant organs of the Megatherium, beginningwith the head, and from thence advancing to thetrunk and extremities.Head.The bones of the head (Pi. 5, Fig. 1. a.) mostnearly resemble those of a Sloth. The long andbroad bone, (b,) descending the cheek from thezygomatic arch, connects it more nearly withthe Ai than with any other animal : this extraordinarybone must have been auxiliary to thepower of muscles, acting with more than usualadvantage, in giving motion to the lower jaw (d).The anterior part of the muzzle (c) is sostrong and substantial, and so perforated withholes for the passage of nerves and vessels,that we may be sure it supported some organ ofconsiderable size : a long trunk was needless toan animal possessing so long a neck ; the organwas probably a snout, something like that ofg. L146 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.the Tapir, sufficiently elongated to gather uprootsfrom the ground. The septum of the nostrilsalso being strong and bony, gives furtherindication of the presence of a powerful organappended to the nose ; such an apparatus wouldhave afforded compensation for the absence ofincisor teeth and tusks. Having no incisors,the Megatherium could not have lived on grass.The structure of the molar teeth (PL 5, Fig. 6 —11, and PI. 6, No. 1), shows that it was not carnivorous.The composition of a single molar tooth resemblesthat of one, of the many tentacles, that areunited in the compound molar of the Elephant ;and affords an admirable exemplification of themethod employed by Nature, whereby threesubstances, of unequal density, viz. ivory, enamel,and crusta petrosa, or ccementum, areunited in the construction of the teeth of graminivorousanimals. The teeth are about seveninches long, and nearly of a prismatic form (PI.5, Fig. 7. 8). The grinding surfaces (PI. 5. Fig. 9.a. b. c. and PL 6, Z. a. b. c.) exhibit a peculiarand beautiful contrivance for maintainingtwo cutting wedge-shaped salient edges, in goodworking condition during the whole existence ofthe tooth ; being, as I before stated, a modificationof the contrivance employed in the molarsof the Elephant, and other herbivora. TheMEGATHERIUM. 147same principle is applied by tool-makers for thepurpose of maintaining a sharp edge in axes,scythes, bill-hooks, &c. An axe, or bill-hook, isnot made entirely of steel, but of one thin plateof steel, inserted between two plates of softeriron, and so enclosed that the steel projects beyondthe iron, along the entire line of the cuttingedge of the instrument. A double advantageresults from this contrivance; first, the instrumentis less liable to fracture than if it wereentirely made of the more brittle material ofsteel ; and secondly, the cutting edge is moreeasily kept sharp by grinding down a portion ofexterior soft iron, than if the entire mass were ofhard steel. By a similar contrivance, two cuttingedges are produced on the crown of themolar teeth of the Megatherium. (See PL (>,W. X. Y. Z. and PI. 5, Figs. 6— 10.) ** The outside of the tooth, like that of an axe, is made of acomparatively soft material, viz. the crusta petrosa, (a a), inclosinga plate of enamel, (b b), which is the hardest substance, orsteel of the tooth. This enamel passes twice across the grindingsurface, (z), and forms the cutting edges of two parallel wedges,Y. b. b. : a longitudinal section of these wedges is seen, PI. 6.v. w. x. y. Within the enamel, (b b), is a central mass ofivory, (c), which, like the external crust, (a) is softer than theenamel. A tooth, thus constructed of materials of unequal density,would have its softer parts, (a c), worn down more readilythan the harder plates of enamel, (b b).We find a further nicety of mechanical contrivance, for producingand maintaining two transverse wedges upon the surface148 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.PI. 6, W. X. represents the manner in whicheach lower tooth was opposed to the tooth aboveit, so that the hard enamel of the one shouldcome in contact only with the softer materials ofthe other ; viz. the edges of the plates of enamel,(b) rubbing upon the ivory, (c) ; and the enamel,(b'), upon the crusta petrosa, (a), of the two teethopposite to it. Hence the act of mastication formedand perpetually maintained a series of wedges,locking into each other like the alternate ridgeson the rollers of a crushing-mill ; and the mouthof the Megatherium became an engine of prodigiouspower, in which thirty-two such wedgesformed the grinding surfaces of sixteen molarteeth ; each from seven to nine inches long,and having the greater part of this length fixedfirmly in a socket of great depth.As the surfaces of these teeth must have wornaway with much rapidity, a provision, unusual inmolar teeth, and similar to that in the incisor teethof each tooth, in the relative adjustment of the thickness, of thelateral and transverse portions of the plate of enamel, which isinterposed between the external crust, (a), and the central ivory,(c). Had this enamel been of uniform thickness all round thecentral ivory, the tooth would have worn down equally to a horizontalsurface. In the crown of the tooth, PI. 6. Z. the plate ofenamel is seen to be thin on the two sides of the tooth, whilst thetransverse portions of the same plate, (b. b.) are comparativelythick and strong. Hence the weaker lateral portions of thinenamel wear away more rapidly, than the thicker and strongertransverse portions, (b b), and do not prevent the excavation ofthe furrow across the surface of the ivory, c.MEGATHERIUM. 149of the Beaver and other Rodentia,* supplied theloss that was continually going on at the crown,by the constant addition of new matter at theroot, which for this purpose remained hollow,and filled with pulp during the whole life of theanimal, tIt is scarcely possible to find any apparatus inthe mechanism of dentition, which constitutes amore powerful engine for masticating roots, thanwas formed by these teeth of the Megatherium ;accompanied also by a property, which is theperfection of all machinery, namely, that ofmaintaining itself perpetually in perfect order,by the act of performing its work.Lower Jaw.The lower jaw (PL 5, 1. d.) is very large andweighty in proportion to the rest of the head; theobject of this size being to afford deep socketsThe incisors of the Beaver, and other Rodentia, and tusks of*the Hog and Hippopotamus, which require only an external cuttingedge, and not a grinding surface, are constructed on thesame principle as the cutting edge of a chisel or an adze; viz. aplate of hard enamel is applied to the outer surface only, of theivory of these teeth, in the same manner as the outer cuttingedge of the chisel and adze is faced with a plate of steel, weldedagainst an inner plate of softer iron. A tooth thus constructedmaintains its cutting edge of enamel continually sharp, by theact of working against the similarly constructed extremity of thetooth opposed to ittPI. 5, Fig. 11, represents the section of the cavity containingthis pulp.150 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.for the continual growth and firm fixture of thelong and vertical molar teeth ; the extraordinaryand strong process (b) descending from the zygomaticarch in the Megatherium, as well as inthe Sloths, seems intended to support the unusualweight of the lower jaw consequent uponthe peculiar form of the molar teeth.Hones of the Trunk.The vertebrae of the neck, though strong, aresmall in comparison with those towards theopposite extremity of the body ; being dulyproportioned to the size of a head, comparativelylight, and without tusks. The dorsal portionof the vertebral column is of moderate size, butthere is an enlargement of the vertebrae of theloins, corresponding with the extraordinary bulkof the pelvis and hind legs ; the summits of thespinous processes, (e,) are flattened like those inthe Armadillo, as if by the pressure of a cuirass.The sacral bone, (PI. 5, Fig. 2, a), is united tothe pelvis, (p), in a manner peculiar to itself,and calculated to produce extraordinary strength ;its processes indicate the existence of verypowerful muscles for the movement of the tail.The tail was long, and composed of vertebrae ofenormous magnitude, (PI. 6, Fig. 2), the body ofthe largest being seven inches in diameter, andMEGATHERIUM. 151the horizontal distance between the extremitiesof the two transverse processes, being twentyinches. If to this we add the thickness of themuscles and tendons, and of the shelly integument,the diameter of the tail, at its largest end,must have been at least two feet ; and its circumference,supposing it to be nearly circularlike the tail of the Armadillo, about six feet.These vast dimensions are not larger in proportionto the adjacent parts of the body, thanthose of the tail of the Armadillo, and as thisanimal applies its tail, to aid in supporting theweight of its body and armour, it is probablethat the Megatherium made a similar use ofthe same organ.* To the caudal vertebrae wereattached also large inferior spines, or additionalChevron bones, which must have added to thestrength of the tail, in assisting to support thebody. The tail also probably served for aformidable instrument of defence, as in thePangolins and Crocodiles. In 1822, Sellow sawportions of armour that had covered a tail, foundnear Monte Video.The ribs are more substantial, and muchthicker, and shorter, than those of the ElephantThe tail of the Elephant is remarkably light and slender,with a tuft of coarse hair at its extremity, to brush off flies ; thatof the Hippopotamus is a few inches only in length, and flattenedvertically, to act as a small redder in swimming.152 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.or Rhinoceros ; and the upper convex surfaces ofsome of them exhibit a rugous and flattenedcondition of that part, on which the weight ofa bony cuirass would most immediately haverested.Anterior Extremity.The scapula or shoulder blade, (PI. 5, Fig. 1, f,)resembles that of no other family except theSloths, and exhibits in the Acromion (g,) contrivancesfor strength, peculiar to itself andthem, in its mode of articulation with the collarbone(h) ; it exhibits also unusual provisionsfor the support of the most powerful muscles forthe movement of the arm.The clavicle or collar bone (h) is strong, andcurved nearly as in the human subject; thepresence of this bone in the Megatherium, whilstit is wanting in the Elephant, Rhinoceros, andall the large ruminating animals, shews that thefore leg discharged some other office, than thatof an organ of locomotion. This clavicle wouldgive a steady and fixt position to the socket, orglenoid cavity of the scapula, admitting of rotatorymotion in the fore leg, analogous to that ofthe human arm. There is in these circumstancesa triple accommodation to the form and habitsof the Megatherium ; 1°. a free rotatory powerof the arm was auxiliary to its office, as anMEGATHERIUM. 153instrument to be employed continually in diggingfood out of the ground ; 2°. this act of perpetualdigging in search of stationary objects like roots,required but little locomotive power ; 3°. the comparativelysmall support afforded to the weightof the body by the fore leg, was compensatedby the extraordinary and colossal strength ofthe haunches and hind legs. In the Elephant,the great weight of the head and tusks requireshortness of neck, and unusual enlargement andstrength in the fore legs; hence, the anteriorparts of this animal are much stronger and largerthan its hinder parts. In the case of the Megatherium,the relative proportions are reversed ;the head is comparatively small, the neck islong, and the anterior part of the body butslightly loaded in comparison with its abdominaland posterior regions. In the shoulder bladeand collar bone there is great provision to givestrength and motion to the fore legs ; but thismotion is not progressive, nor is the strengthcalculated merely to support the weight of thebody. The humerus, (k) articulates with thescapula by a round head, admitting of freemotion in various directions, and is small at itsupper and middle part, but at its lower endattains extraordinary breadth, in consequenceof an enormous expansion of the crests, whichrise from the condyles, to give origin tomuscles for the movement of the fore foot and1 54 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.toes.* The ulna (1) is extremely broad andpowerful at its upper extremity, affording largespace for the origin of muscles, concerned in themovements of the foot. The radius (m) revolvesfreely on the ulna, as in the Sloths and Ant-eaters,both of which make much use of thefore leg, though for different purposes ; it has acavity at its upper end, which turns upon aspherical portion of the lower part of the humerus,and a large apophysis (n), projecting fromits longitudinal crest, indicates great power inthe muscles that gave rotatory motion.The entire fore-foot must have been about ayard in length, and more than twelve incheswide ; forming a most efficient instrument formoving the earth, from that depth within whichsucculent roots are usually most abundant. Thisgreat length of the fore-foot, when resting uponthe ground, though unfavourable to progressivemotion, must have enabled one fore-leg, whenacting in conjunction with the two hind legs andtail, to support the entire weight of the body ;leaving the other fore-leg at liberty to be employedexclusively in the operation of digging-food.|There is a similar expansion of the lower part of theHumerus in the Ant-eater, which employs its fore feet in diggingup the solid hills of the Ternate Ants.+ At PI. 5, beneath Fig. 1, are represented the fore-foot of anArmadillo (Dasypus Peba), and the fore-foot of the Chlamy-chorus, each adapted, like that of the Megatherium, to form anMEGATHERIUM. 155The toes of the fore-foot are terminated bylarge and powerful claws of great length ; thebones, supporting these claws, are composedpartly of an axis, or pointed core, (o,) whichfilled the internal cavity of the horny claw ; andpartly of a bony sheath, that formed a strongcase to receive and support its base. Theseclaws were set obliquely to the ground, like thedigging claws of the Mole, a position whichmade them instruments of greater power for thepurpose of excavation.Posterior Extremities.The pelvis of the Megatherium (PI. 5, Fig.2. p.) is of vast solidity and expanse ; and theenormous bones of the ilium (r) are set nearly atright angles to the spine of the back, and attheir outer margin, or crest, are more than fivefeet asunder, very much exceeding the diameteracross the haunches of the largest Elephant : thecrest of the ilium, (s,) is much flattened, as if bythe pressure of the armour. This enormous sizeof the pelvis would be disproportionate and inconvenientto an animal of ordinary stature andinstrument of peculiar power for the purpose of digging ; andeach presenting an extraordinary enlargement and elongation ofthe extreme bones of the toes, for the support of long and massiveclaws. At PI. 5, Figs. 18, 19, the anterior parts of theseanimals are represented, and show how large a proportion theclaws bear to the other parts of the body.156" FOSSIL MAMMALIA.functions ; but was probably attended with muchadvantage to the Megatherium, in relation to itshabit of standing great part of its time on threelegs, whilst the fourth was occupied in digging.The pelvis being thus, unusually wide andheavy, presents a further deviation from otheranimals, as to the place and direction of theacetabulum, or socket which articulates with thehead of the thigh bone (u). This cavity, inother animals, is usually set more or lessobliquely outwards, and by this obliquity facilitatesthe movement of the hind leg ; but inthe Megatherium it is set perpendicularly downwards,over the head of the femur, and is alsonearer than usual to the spine ; deriving fromthis position increase of strength for supportingvertical pressure, but attended with a diminishedcapability of rapid motion.*From the enormous width of the pelvis, itThere is also a further peculiarity for the increase of strengthin the manner in which that part, which, in most other animals,is an open space, called the ischiatic notch (PI. 5, Fig. 2 c), isnearly closed with solid bone by the union of the spines of theischia with the elongated transverse processes of the sacral vertebrae,(a).Further evidence of the enormous size and power in the musclesof the thigh and leg is afforded by the magnitude of thecavity in the sacrum, (PI. 5. d,) for the passage of the spinal marrow: this cavity being about four inches in diameter, the spinalmarrow must have been a foot in circumference. The extraordinarymagnitude also of the nerves which proceeded from it tosupply the leg, is indicated by the prodigious size of the sacralforamina.MEGATHERIUM. 157follows also that the abdominal cavity was extremelylarge, and the viscera voluminous, andadapted to the digestion of vegetable food.The form and proportions of the thigh bone, (v)are not less extraordinary than those of thepelvis, being nearly three times the thicknessof the femur of the largest Elephant. Itsbreadth is nearly half its entire length, and itshead is united to the body of the bone by aneck of unusual shortness and strength, twenty-twoinches in circumference. Its length is twofeet four inches, and its circumference at thesmallest part two feet two inches; and at thelargest part, three feet two inches. Its body isalso flattened ; and by means of this flatness,expanded outwards to a degree of which Naturepresents no other example. These peculiaritiesin the femur appear to be subservient to adouble purpose : first, to give extraordinarystrength by the shortness and solidity of all itsproportions ; and secondly, to afford compensation,by its flatness outwards ; for the debilitywhich would otherwise have followed from theinward position of the sockets, (t,) by which thefemur, (u,) articulates with the pelvis.The two bones of the leg (x, y,) are also extremelyshort, and on a scale of solidity andstrength, commensurate with that of the femurthat rests upon them. This strength is muchincreased by their being united at both extremities; an union which is said by Cuvier to1<58 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.occur in no other animals except the Armadilloand Chlamyphorus ; both of which are continuallyoccupied in digging for their food.The articulation of the leg with the hind footis admirably contrived for supporting the enormouspressure of downward weight ; the astragalus(z), or great bone of the instep, being nineinches broad, and nine inches high, is in dueproportion to the lower extremity of the tibia, orleg bone, with which it articulates ; and restsupon a heel bone, of the extraordinary length ofseventeen inches, with a circumference of twenty-eightinches. This enormous bone, pressing onthe ground, gives a firm bearing and solid supportto the continuous accumulation of weight,which we have been tracing down from thepelvis through the thigh and leg : in fact theheel bone occupies nearly one-half of the entirelength of the hind foot ; the bones of the toesare all short, excepting the extreme joint, whichforms an enormous claw-bone ; larger thanthe largest of those in the fore-foot, measuringthirteen inches in circumference, and havingwithin its sheath a core, ten inches long, for thesupport of the horny claw with which it wasinvested. The chief use of this large claw wasprobably to keep the hind foot fixed steadilyupon the ground.*It is probable that the large thick claw, PI. 5 5', was placedon the second toe of the hind foot. Its size approaches nearlyto that of the first toe of this foot, and both of these differ .159Feet and legs thus heavily constructed, musthave been very inefficient organs of rapid locomotion,and may consequently seem imperfect,if considered in relation to the ordinary functionsof other quadrupeds; but, viewed as instrumentsadapted for supporting an almost stationarycreature, of unusual weight, they claimour admiration equally with every other piece ofanimal mechanism, when its end and uses areunderstood. The perfection of any instrumentcan only be appreciated by looking to the workit is intended to perform. The hammer andanvil of an anchorite, though massive, areneither clumsy nor imperfect; but bear the sameproportionate relation to the work in which theyare employed, as the light and fine tools of thewatchmaker bear to the more delicate wheels ofhis chronometer.Bony Armour.Another remarkable character of the Megatherium,in which it approaches most nearly tothe Armadillo, and Chlamyphorus, consists, inits hide having probably been covered with abony coat of armour ; varying from three-fourthsof an inch, to an inch and half in thickness, andreally in form and proportions, from the three more elongated andflatter claw bones of the fore foot, the oblique form of which ispeculiarly adapted for digging.100 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.resembling the armour which covers these livinginhabitants, of the same warm and sandy regionsof South America. Fragments of this armourare represented at PI. 5, Figs. 12, 1.3.*A covering of such enormous weight, wouldhave been consistent with the general structureof the Megatherium ; its columnar hind legsand colossal tail, were calculated to give it duesupport ; and the strength of the loins and ribs,being very much greater than in the Elephant,seems to have been necessary for carrying soponderous a cuirass as that which we supposeto have covered the body.|The resemblance between some parts of this fossil armour,and of the armour of an Armadillo, (Dasypus Peba) is extendedeven to the detail of the patterns of the tuberculated compartmentsinto which they are divided, see PI. 5, Figs. 12, 14. Theincrease of size in the entire shield is in both cases provided forbycausing the centre of every plate to form a centre of growth,around which the margin receives continual additions, as theincreasing bulk of the body requires an increase in the dimensionsof the bony case, by which it is invested. Figs. 15, 16,17, represent portions of the armour of the head, body, and tailpieceof the Chlamyphorus. Figs. 18, 19, represent the mannerin which the armour is disposed over the head and anterior partof the body of the Chlamyphorus, and Dasypus Peba. Thebody of the Megatherium, when covered with its correspondingcoat of armour, must in some degree have resembled a tiltedwaggon.f In the Transactions of the Academy of Berlin, 1830, ProfessorWeirs has published an account of some Bones of theMegatherium, discovered near Monte Video, accompanied byseveral fragments of bony armour. Much of this armour heMEGATHERIUM. 161It remains to consider, of what use this cuirasscould have been to the gigantic animal on whichit probably was placed. As the locomotiveorgans of the Megatherium indicate very slowpower of progression, the weight of a cuirasswould have afforded little impediment to suchtardy movements; its use was probably defensive,not only against the tusks and claws ofbeasts of prey, but also, against the myriads ofinsects, that usually swarm in such climates asthose wherein its bones are found ; and to whichan animal that obtained its food by diggingbeneath a broiling sun, would be in a peculiarrefers without doubt to the Megatherium ; other portions of it,and also many bones from the same district, he assigns to otheranimals. A similar admixture of bones and armour, derivedfrom more than one species of animal, bearing a bony cuirass,is found in the collection made at several and distant points ofthe country above Buenos Ayres, by Mr. Parish. Although noarmour was found with the fragments of the large skeleton,in the bed of the Salado, the rough broad flattened surface of apart of the crest of the ileum of this skeleton, (see PI. 5, Fig. 2.r, s,) and the broad condition of the summit of the spinous processesof many vertebrae, and also of the superior convex portionof certain ribs on which the armour would rest, afford evidence ofpressure, similar to that we find on the analogous parts of theskeleton of the Armadillo, from which we might have inferredthat the Megatherium also was covered with heavy armour, evenhad no such armour been discovered near bones of this animal inother parts of the same level district of Paraguay. In all theseflattened bones the effects of pressure are confined to those partsof the skeleton, on which the armour would rest, and are suchas occur in a remarkable degree in the Armadillo.G. M162 FOSSIL MAMMALIAdegree exposed. We may also conjecture it tohave had a further use in the protection affordedby it to the back, and upper parts of the body ;not only against the sun and rain, but againstthe accumulations of sand and dust, that mightotherwise have produced irritation and disease.*Conclusion.We have now examined in detail the skeletonof an extinct quadruped of enormous magnitude ;every bone of which presents peculiarities, thatat first sight appear imperfectly contrived, butwhich become intelligible when viewed in theirTo animals that dig only occasionally, like Badgers, Foxes,and Rabbits, to form a habitation beneath the ground, but seektheir food upon the surface, a defence of this kind would notonly have been unnecessary but inconvenient.The Armadillo and Chlamyphorus are the only known animalsthat have a coat of armour composed of thick plates of bone,like that of the Megatherium. As this peculiar covering is confinedto these quadrupeds, we can hardly imagine its use to besolely for protection against other beasts and insects ; but as theArmadillo obtains its food by digging in the same dry and sandyplains, which were once inhabited by the Megatherium, andthe Chlamyphorus lives almost entirely in burrows beneath thesurface of the same sandy regions ; they both probably receivefrom their cuirass the same protection to the upper parts of theirbodies from sand and dust, which we suppose to have beenafforded by its cuirass to the Megatherium. The Pangolins arecovered with a different kind of armour, composed of hornymoveable scales, in which there is no bony matter.MEGATHERIUM. 103relations to one another, and to the functions ofthe animal in which they occur.The size of the Megatherium exceeds that ofthe existing Edentata, to which it is most nearlyallied, in a greater degree than any other fossilanimal exceeds its nearest living congeners.With the head and shoulders of a Sloth, it combinedin its legs and feet, an admixture of thecharacters of the Ant-eater, the Armadillo, andthe Chlamyphorus; it probably also still furtherresembled the Armadillo and Chlamyphorus, inbeing cased with a bony coat of armour. Itshaunches were more than five feet wide, and itsbody twelve feet long and eight feet high ; itsfeet were a yard in length, and terminated bymost gigantic claws ; its tail was probably cladin armour, and much larger than the tail ofany other beast, among extinct or living terrestrialMammalia. Thus heavily constructed,and ponderously accoutred, it could neither run,nor leap, nor climb, nor burrow under theground, and in all its movements must havebeen necessarily slow ; but what need of rapidlocomotion to an animal, whose occupation ofdigging roots for food was almost stationary?and what need of speed for flight from foes, toa creature whose giant carcase was encased inan impenetrable cuirass, and who by a singlepat of his paw, or lash of his tail, could in aninstant have demolished the Couguar or the16*4 FOSSIL MAMMALIA.Crocodile? Secure within the panoply of hisbony armour, where was the enemy that woulddare encounter this Leviathan of the Pampas?or, in what more powerful creature can we findthe cause that has effected the extirpation ofhis race?His entire frame was an apparatus of colossalmechanism, adapted exactly to the work it had todo; strong and ponderous, in proportion as thiswork was heavy, and calculated to be the vehicleof life and enjoyment to a gigantic race of quadrupeds; which, though they have ceased to becounted among the living inhabitants of ourplanet, have, in their fossil bones, left behindthem imperishable monuments of the consummateskill with which they were constructed.Each limb, and fragment of a limb, formingco-ordinate parts of a well adjusted and perfectwhole ; and through all their deviations fromthe form and proportion of the limbs of otherquadrupeds, affording fresh proofs of the infinitelyvaried, and inexhaustible contrivances ofCreative Wisdom.FOSSIL Syrians. 165SECTION III.FOSSIL Syrians.In those distant ages that elapsed during theformation of strata of the secondary series, solarge a field was occupied by reptiles, referableto the order of Saurians, that it becomes an importantpart of our enquiry to examine the historyand organization of these curious relics ofancient creations, which are known to us only inafossil state. A task like this may appearquite hopeless to persons unaccustomed to theinvestigation of subjects of such remote antiquity; yet Geology, as now pursued, with theaid of comparative anatomy, supplies abundantevidence of the structure and functions of theseextinct families of reptiles ; and not only enablesus to infer from the restoration of their skeletons,what may have been the external form of theirbodies ; but instructs us also as to their economyand habits, the nature of their food, and even oftheir organs of digestion. It further shows theirrelations to the then existing condition of theworld, and to the other forms of organic lifewith which they were associated.The remains of these reptiles bear a muchgreater resemblance to one another, than to those166 FOSSIL Syrians.of any animals we discover in deposits precedingor succeeding the secondary series.*The species of fossil Saurians are so numerous,that we can only select a few of the mostremarkable among them, for the purpose ofexemplifying the prevailing conditions of animallife, at the periods when the dominant class ofanimated beings were reptiles ; attaining, inmany cases, a magnitude unknown among theliving orders of that class, and which seems tohave been peculiar to those middle ages of geologicalchronology, that were intermediate betweenthe transition and tertiary formations.During these ages of reptiles, neither the carnivorousnor lacustrine Mammalia of the tertiaryperiods had begun to appear ; but the most formidableoccupants, both of land and water, wereCrocodiles, and Lizards ; of various forms, andoften of gigantic stature, fitted to endure theturbulence, and continual convulsions of theunquiet surface of our infant world.When we see that so large and important arange has been assigned to reptiles among theThe oldest strata in which any reptiles have yet been foundare those connected with the magnesian-limestone formation.(PI. 1, Sec. 16). The existence of reptiles allied to the Monitorin the cupriferous slate and zechstein of Germany, has long beenknown. In 1834, two species of reptiles, allied to the Iguanaand Monitor, were discovered in the dolomitic conglomerate, onDurham Down, near Bristol.FOSSIL Syrians. 167former population of our planet, we cannot butregard with feelings of new and unusual interest,the comparatively diminutive existing ordersof that most ancient family of quadrupeds, withthe very name of which we usually associate asentiment of disgust. We shall view them withless contempt, when we learn from the records ofgeological history, that there was a time whenreptiles not only constituted the chief tenants,and most powerful possessors of the earth, butextended their dominion also over the waters ofthe seas; and that the annals of their historymay be traced back through thousands of years,antecedent to that latest point in the progressivestages of animal creation, when the first parentsof the human race were called into existence.Persons to whom this subject may now bepresented for the first time, will receive, withmuch surprise, perhaps almost with incredulitysuch statements as are here advanced. Itmust be admitted, that they at first seem muchmore like the dreams of fiction and romance,than the sober results of calm and deliberateinvestigation ; but to those who will examine theevidence of facts upon which our conclusionsrest, there can remain no more reasonable doubtof the former existence of these strange andcurious creatures, in the times and places weassign to them ; than is felt by the antiquary,who, finding the catacombs of Egypt stored168 MARINE Syrians.with the mummies of Men, and Apes, and Crocodiles,concludes them to be the remains ofmammalia and reptiles, that have formed partof an ancient population on the banks of theNile.SECTION IV.ICHTHYOSAURUS.Nearly at the head of the surprising discoveries,which have been made relating to thefamily of Saurians, we may rank the remainsof many extraordinary species, which inhabitedthe sea ; and which present almost incrediblecombinations of form, and structure ; adaptingthem for modes of life, that do not occur amongliving reptiles. These remains are most abundantthroughout the lias and oolite formationsof the secondary series.* In these deposits weThe chief repository in which these animals have been foundis the lias, at Lyme Regis ; but they abound also along the wholeextent of this formation throughout England, e. g. from thecoast of Dorset, through Somerset and Leicestershire, to thecoast of Yorkshire : they are found also in the lias of Germanyand France. The range of the genus Ichthyosaurus seems to havebegun with the Muschelkalk, and to have extended through thewhole of the oolitic period into the cretaceous formation. Themost recent stratum in which any remains of this genus have yetbeen found is the chalk marl at Dover, where they have beendiscovered by Mr. Mantelll : I have found them in the gault,near Benson. Oxon.ICHTHYOSAURUS. 169find not only animals allied to Crocodiles, andnearly approaching to the Gavial of the Ganges ;but also still more numerous gigantic Lizards,that inhabited the then existing seas and estuaries.Some of the most remarkable of these reptileshave been arranged under the genus Ichthyosaurus,(or Fish Lizard), in consequence of thepartial resemblance of their vertebrae to thoseof fishes. (See Plate 1, Fig. 51, and Plates7, 8, 9.) If we examine these creatures witha view to their capabilities of locomotion, andthe means of offence and defence, whichtheir extraordinary structure afforded to them ;we shall find combinations of form and mechanicalcontrivances, which are now dispersedthrough various classes and orders of existinganimals, but are no longer united in the samegenus. Thus, in the same individual, the snoutof a Porpoise is combined with the teeth of aCrocodile, the head of a Lizard with the vertebraeof a Fish, and the sternum of an Ornithorhynchuswith the paddles of a Whale. The general outlineof an Ichthyosaurus must have most nearlyresembled the modern Porpoise, and Grampus.It had four broad feet, or paddles, (PI. 7), andterminated behind in a long and powerful tail.Some of the largest of these reptiles must haveexceeded thirty feet in length.There are seven or eight known species ofthe genus Ichthyosaurus, all agreeing with one170 MARINE Syrians.another in the general principles of their construction,and the possession of those peculiarorgans, in which I shall endeavour to point outthe presence of mechanism and contrivance,adapted to their habits and state of life. Asit will be foreign to our purpose to enter ondetails respecting species, I shall content myselfwith referring to the figures of the four mostcommon forms (Plates 7, 8, 9.)*Head.The head, which in all animals forms the mostimportant and characteristic part, (see PL 10,PI. 7, is a large and nearly perfect specimen of the IchthyosaurusPlatyodon, from the lias at Lyme Regis, being one ofthe splendid series of Saurians, purchased in 1834 of Mr.Hawkins by the British Museum. Portions of the paddles, andmany lost fragments, are restored from the corresponding partswhich are preserved ; a few vertebrae, and the extremity ofthe tail are also restored conjecturally. Beautiful and accuratelithographed figures of this specimen, and of the greater part ofthis collection, are published in Mr. Hawkins's Memoirs ofIchthyosauri and Plesiosauri, London, 1834. PL 8. Fig. 1 , is asmall specimen of the Ichthyosaurus Communis, from the liasat Lyme-Regis, belonging to the Geol. Soc. of London. PL 8,Fig. 2, a small Ichthyosaurus Intermediate, from the lias at LymeRegis belonging to Sir Ashley Cooper. PL 9, Fig. 1, an IchthyosaurusTenuirostris, from the lias of Street, near Glastonbury, inthe collection of Rev. D. Williams. Fig. 2 is the continuationof the tail, and Fig. 3, the reverse of the head. The teeth inthis species are small, and in due proportion to the slendercharacter of the snout.ICHTHYOSAURUS. 171Figs. 1, 2), at once shows that the Ichthyosauriwere Reptiles, partaking partly of the charactersof the modern Crocodiles, but more allied toLizards. They approach nearest to Crocodilesin the form and arrangement of their teeth.The position of the nostril is not, as in Crocodiles,near the point of the snout ; it is set, asin Lizards, near the anterior angle of the orbit ofthe eye. The most extraordinary feature of thehead is the enormous magnitude of the eye,very much exceeding that of any living animal.*The expansion of the jaws must have beenprodigious; their length in the larger species,(Ichthyosaurus Platyodon), sometimes exceedingsix feet ; the voracity of the animal was doubtlessin proportion to its powers of destruction .The neck was short, as in fishes.Teeth.The teeth of the Ichthyosaurus (PI. 11, b, c,)are conical, and much like those of the Crocodiles,but considerably more numerous, amountingin some cases to a hundred and eighty ; theyvary in each species ; they are not enclosed indeep and separate sockets, as the teeth of Crotonthe collection of Mr. Johnson at Bristol is a skull ofIchthyosaurus Platyodon, in which the longer diameter of theorbital cavity measures fourteen inches.172 MARINE Syrians.tiles, but are ranged in one long continuousfurrow, (PL 1 1 , b, c), of the maxillary bone, inwhich the rudiments of a separation into distinctalveoli may be traced in slight ridges extendingbetween the teeth, along the sides andbottom of the furrow. The contrivance bywhich the new tooth replaces the old one, isvery nearly the same in the Ichthyosauri as inthe Crocodiles (PI. 11, a, b, c) ; in both, theyoung tooth begins its growth at the base ofthe old tooth, where, by pressure on one side,it causes first a partial absorption of the base,and finally a total removal of the body of theolder tooth, which it is destined to replace.*As the predaceous habits of the Ichthyosauriexposed them, like modern Crocodiles, to frequentloss of their teeth, an abundant provisionhas in each case been made for their continualrenewal.In PL 11, Fig. a, shews the manner in which the oldertooth in the Crocodile becomes absorbed, by pressure of a youngertooth rising within the cavity of its hollow base. Fig. c, representsa transverse section of the left side of the lower jaw of anIchthyosaurus, shewing two teeth in their natural place, withinthe furrow of the jaw; the younger tooth, by lateral pressure,has caused absorption of the inside portion of the base of theolder tooth. Fig. b, represents a transverse section of the entiresnout of an Ichthyosaurus, in which the lower jaw exhibits onboth sides, a small tooth (a), which has caused partial absorptionof the base of the larger tooth, (c). In the upper jaw, thebases of two large teeth (d, d,) are seen in their respectivefurrows.ICHTHYOSAURUS. 173Eyes.The enormous magnitude of the eye of theIchthyosaurus (PL 10, Fig 1, 2), is among themost remarkable peculiarities in the structureof this animal. From the quantity of light admittedin consequence of its prodigious size, itmust have possessed very great powers of vision;we have also evidence that it had both microscopicand telescopic properties. We find onthe front of the orbital cavity in which thiseye was lodged, a circular series of petrified thinbony plates, ranged around a central aperture,where once was placed the pupil ; the form andthickness of each of these plates very much resemblesthat of the scales of an artichoke (PL10, Fig. 3). This compound circle of bonyplates, does not occur in fishes ; but is found inthe eyes of many birds,* as well as of Turtles,The bony sclerotic of the Ichthyosaurus approaches to theform of the bony circle in the eye of the Golden Eagle (PI. 10,Fig. 5) ; one of its uses in each case being to vary the sphere ofdistinct vision, in order to descry their prey at long or short distances.These bony plates also assist to maintain the prominentposition of the front of the eye, which is so remarkable in birds.In Owls, whose nocturnal habits render distant vision impossible,Mr. Barrel observes, that the bony circle (PI. 10, Fig. 4), isconcave, and elongated forwards, so that the front of the eyeis placed at the end of a long tube, and thus projects beyondthe loose and downy feathers of the head; he adds; " Theextent of vision enjoyed by the Falcons is probably deniedto the Owls, but their more spherical lens and correspondingcornea give them an intensity better suited to the opacityof the medium in which they are required to exercise this174 MARINE Syrians.Tortoises, and Lizards ; and in a less degree inCrocodiles. (PL 10, Figs. 4. 5. 6.)In living animals these bony plates are fixedin the exterior or sclerotic coat of the eye, andvary its scope of action, by altering the convexityof the cornea : by their retraction theypress forward the front of the eye and convertitinto a microscope ; in resuming their position,when the eye is at rest, they convert it into atelescope. The soft parts of the eyes of the Ich-thyosauri have of course entirely perished; butthe preservation of this curiously constructed hoopof bony plates, shews that the enormous eye, ofwhich they formed the front, was an optical instrumentof varied and prodigious power, enablingthe Ichthyosaurus to descry its prey at great orlittle distances, in the obscurity of night, and inthe depths of the sea ; it also tends to associatethe animal, in which it existed, with the familyof Lizards, and exclude it from that of fishes.*power. They may be compared to a person near-sighted, whosees objects with superior magnitude and brilliancy when withinthe prescribed limits of his natural powers of vision, from theincreased angle these objects subtend." Barrel on the Anatomyof Birds of Prey, Zool. Journal, v. 3, p. 188.There are analogous contrivances for the purpose of resistingpressure, and maintaining the form of the eye in fishes, by thepartial or total ossification of the exterior capsule ; but in fishes,this ossification is usually simple, though carried to a differentextent in different species ; and the bone is never divided transverselyinto many plates, as in Lizards and Birds; these capsulesof the eye are often preserved in the heads of fossil fishes : theyabound in the London clay ; and occasionally occur in chalk.ICHTHYOSAURUS. 175A further advantage resulting from this curiousapparatus of bony plates, was to give strengthto the surface of so large an eye-ball, enablingit the better to resist the pressure of deep water,to which it must often have been exposed ; itwould also have protected this important organfrom injury by the waves of the sea, to which aneye, sometimes larger than a man's head, mustfrequently have been subject, when the nose wasbrought to the surface, for the necessary purposeof breathing air : the position of the nostrils,close to the anterior angle of the eye, renderedit impossible for the Ichthyosaurus to breathewithout raising its eye to the surface of thewater.Jaws.The Jaws of the Ichthyosauri, like those ofCrocodiles and Lizards, which are all more orless elongated into projecting beaks, are composedof many thin plates, so arranged as tocombine strength with elasticity and lightness,in a greater degree than could have been effectedby single bones, like those in the jaws ofMammalia. It is obvious that an under jaw soslender, and so much elongated as that of aCrocodile or Ichthyosaurus, and employed inseizing and retaining the large and powerfulanimals which formed their prey, would havebeen comparatively weak and liable to fracture170 MARINE Syrians.if composed of a single bone. Each side of thelower jaw was therefore made up of six separatepieces, set together in a manner that will bebest understood by reference to the Figures inPL 11.*This contrivance in the lower jaw, to combinethe greatest elasticity and strength with thesmallest weight of materials, is similar to thatadopted in binding together several parallelplates of elastic wood, or steel, to make a crossbow; and also in setting together thin plates ofsteel in the springs of carriages. As in thecarriage spring, or compound bow, so alsoin the compound jaw of the Ichthyosaurus,the plates are most numerous and strong, atthe parts where the greatest strength is requiredto be exerted ; and are thinner, and fewer,towards the extremities, where the service tobe performed is less severe. Those who haveThese figures are selected from various plates by Mr. Cony-beareand Mr. De la Beche. Fig. 1 is a restoration of the entire headof an Ichthyosaurus, in which each component bone is designatedby the letters appropriated by Cuvier to the equivalent bones inthe head of the Crocodile. In the lower jaw, u, marks the dentalbone; v, the angular bone ; x, quadrangular or coronoid ; y, articularbone ; z, complementary ; fy, opercular. Fig. 2, is partof an under jaw of an Ichthyosaurus, shewing the manner inwhich the flat bones, v, x, u, are applied to each other, towardsthe posterior part of the jaw. Figs. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, shew themanner in which these bones overlap, and lock into each other,at the transverse sections, indicated by the lines immediatelyabove them in Fig. 2. Fig. 8, shews the composition of thebones in the lower jaw, as seen from beneath.ICHTHYOSAURUS. 177witnessed the shock given to the head of aCrocodile, by the act of snapping together itsthin long jaws, must have seen how liable tofracture the lower jaw would be, were it composedof one bone only on each side : a similarinconvenience would have attended the samesimplicity of structure in the jaw of the Ichthyosaurus.In each case, therefore, the splicingand bracing together of six thin flat bones ofunequal length, and of varying thickness, on bothsides of the lower jaw, affords compensation forthe weakness and risk of fracture, that wouldotherwise have attended the elongation of thesnout.Mr. Conybeare points out a further beautifulcontrivance in the lower jaw of the Ichthyosaurus,analogous to the cross bracing lately introducedin naval architecture, (see PI. 11, Fig. 2.)*Vertebra.The vertebral column in the Ichthyosaurus wascomposed of more than one hundred joints ; andThe coronoid bone, (x) is interposed between the dental, (a),and opercular (&), its fibres have a slanting direction, whilstthose of the two latter bones are disposed horizontally ; thus,the strength of the part is greatly increased by a regular diagonalbracing, without the least addition of weight or bulk ;a similar structure may be noticed in the overlapping bones ofthe heads of fish, and in a less degree, in those of Turtles. —Geol. Trans. Lond. Vol. V. p. 565, and Vol. I. N. S. p. 112.G. N178 MARINE Syrians.although united to a head nearly resemblingthat of a Lizard, assumed, in the leading principlesof its construction, the character of thevertebras of fishes. As this animal was constructedfor rapid motion through the sea, themechanism of hollow vertebrae, which gives facilityof movement in water to fishes, wasbetter calculated for its functions than thesolid vertebras of Lizards and Crocodiles.*(See Plate 12, a. and b.) This hollow conicalform would be inapplicable to the vertebraeof land quadrupeds, whose back, beingnearly at right angles to the legs, requires asuccession of broad and nearly flat surfaces,which press with considerable weight againstThe sections of the vertebrae of a fish (A c. c.) present twohollow cones, united at their apex in the centre of each vertebra,in the form of an hour-glass ; but the base of each cone,(bab.) instead of terminating in a broad flat surface, like the baseof the hour-glass, is bounded by a thin edge, like the edge of awine glass, and by this alone touches the corresponding edge ofthe adjacent vertebra. Between these hollow vertebrae, a softand flexible intervertebral substance, in the form of a doublesolid cone (e. e.) is so placed that each hollow cone of bone playson the cone of elastic substance contained within it, with amotion in every direction ; thus forming a kind of universal joint,and giving to the entire column great strength, and power ofrapid flexion in the water. But as the inflections in the perpendiculardirection are less necessary than in the lateral, they arelimited by the overlapping, or contiguity of the spines.This mode of articulation gives mechanical advantage to animalslike fishes, whose chief organ of progressive motion is thetail; and the weight of whose bodies being always suspended inwater, creates little or no pressure on the edges, by which alonethe vertebrae touch each other.ICHTHYOSAURUS. 179each other. It is quite certain, therefore, thatsuch large and bulky creatures as the Ich-thyosauri, having their vertebrae constructedafter the manner of fishes, had they beenfurnished with legs instead of paddles, couldnot have moved on land without injury totheir backs.*Ribs.The ribs were slender, and most of thembifurcated at the top : they were also continuousalong the whole vertebral column, fromthe head to the pelvis, (see Plates 7, 8, 9) ;and in this respect agree with the structure ofmodern Lizards. A considerable number ofthem were united in front across the chest :their mode of articulation may be seen in PL 14.Sir E. Home has further remarked a peculiarity of the spinalcanal, which exists in no other animals ; the annular part (PI.12, D a. and E a.) being neither consolidated with the body ofthe vertebra, as in quadrupeds ; nor connected by a suture, as inCrocodiles ; but remaining always distinct, and articulating by apeculiar joint, resembling a compressed oval ball and socket joint,(D g. and E g.). And Mr. Conybeare adds, that this mode ofarticulation co-operates with the cup-shaped form of the intervertebraljoints, in giving flexibility to the vertebral column, andassisting its vibratory motions ; for, had these parts been consolidated,as in quadrupeds, their articulating processes must havelocked the whole column together, so as to render such a motionof its parts impossible ; but by means of this joint every partyields to that motion. The tubercle by which the transverseapophysis of the head of the rib articulates with the vertebra, isseen at d.180 MARINE Syrians.The ribs of the right side were united to thoseof the left, by intermediate bones, analogous tothe cartilaginous intermediate and sternal portionsof the ribs in Crocodiles ; and to the boneswhich, in the Plesiosaurus, form what Mr. Co-yearehas called the sterno-costal arcs. (SeePL 17.) This structure was probably subservientto the purpose of introducing to theirbodies an unusual quantity of air ; the animalby this means being enabled to remain longbeneath the water, without rising to the surfacefor the purpose of breathing.*The sterno-costal ribs probably formed part of a condensingapparatus, which gave these animals the power of compressingthe air within its lungs, before they descended beneath the water.In the Loncl. and Edin. Phil. Mag. Oct. 1833, Mr. Faraday hasnoticed a method of preparing the organs of respiration inman,so as considerably to extend the time of holding the breathin an impure atmosphere ; or under water, as practised by pearl-fishers;and illustrated by experiments of Sir Graves C. Houghton.If a person inspires deeply, and ceasing with his lungs full of air,holds his breath as long as he is able, the time during which hecan remain without breathing will be double, or more than double,that which he could do if he held his breath without such deepinspiration. When Mr. Brunei, jun. and Mr. Gravity descendedin a diving-bell to examine the hole where the Thames hadbroken into the tunnel at Rotherhithe, at the depth of aboutthirty feet of water, Mr. Brunei, having inspired deeply the compressedair within the diving-bell, descended into the water belowthe bell ; and found that he could remain twice as long underwater,going into it from the diving-bell at that depth, as hecould under ordinary circumstances.Mr. Gravity has also informed me that he is able to dive, andremain three minutes under water, after inflating his lungs withICHTHYOSAURUS. 181Sternum.To a marine animal that breathed air, it wasessential to possess an apparatus whereby itsascent and descent in the water may havebeen easily accomplished ; accordingly we findsuch an apparatus, constructed with prodigiousstrength, in the anterior paddles of the Ichthyosaurus; and in the no less extraordinary combinationof bones that formed the sternal arch,or that part of the chest, on which these paddlesrested. PI. 12, Fig. 1.It is a curious fact, that the bones composingthe sternal arch are combined nearly in thesame manner as in the Ornithorhynchus * ofNew Holland ; which seeks its food at the bottomof lakes and rivers, and is obliged, like thethe largest possible quantity of common air, by a succession ofstrong and rapid inspirations, and immediately compressing thelungs thus filled with air, by muscular exertion, and contractionof the chest, before he plunges into the water. By this compressionof the lungs, the specific gravity of the body is also increased,and the descent is consequently much facilitated.All these advantages were probably united in the mode of respirationof the Ichthyosaurus, and also in the Plesiosaurus.In this anomalous animal the Ornithorhynchus or Platypus,we have a quadruped clothed with fur, having a bill like a duck,with four webbed feet, suckling its young, and most probably ovo-viviparous : the male is furnished with spurs. — See Mr. R. Owen'sPapers on the Ornithorhynchus Paradoxes, in the Phil. Trans.London, 1832, Part II. and 1834, Part II. See also Mr. Owen'sPaper on the same subject in Trans. Zool. Soc. Lond. Part III.1835, in which he points out many approximations in the generativeand other systems of this animal to the organization ofreptiles.182 MARINE Syrians.Ichthyosaurus, to be continually rising to thesurface to breathe air.*Here then we have a race of animals thatbecame extinct at the termination of the secondaryseries of geological formations, presenting,in their structure, a series of contrivances, thesame in principle, with those employed at thepresent day to effect a similar purpose in oneof the most curiously constructed aquatic quadrupedsof New Holland. tPaddles.In the form of its extremities, the Ichthyosaurusdeviates from the Lizards, and approachesthe Whales. A large animal, moving rapidlythrough the sea, and breathing air, must haveIn both these animals there is superadded to the ordinarytype of bones in quadrupeds, an enlargement of the coracoidbone (c), and a peculiar form of sternum, resembling the furculaof birds. In PL 12, Fig. 1, a. represents the peculiarsternum or furcula ; b. b. the clavicles ; c. c. the coracoidbones ; d. d. the scapulae ; e. e. the humeri ; f. g. the radiusand ulna. At Fig 2, the same letters are attached to the correspondingbones of the Ornithorhynchus.The united power of all these bones imparts to the chest andpaddles peculiar strength for an unusual purpose ; not so muchto effect progressive motion (which, in the Ichthyosaurus, wasproduced with much greater facility and power by the tail), as toascend and descend vertically in quest of air and food.f The Echidna, or spiny Ant-eater, of New Holland, is theonly known land quadruped that has a similar furcula and clavicles.As this animal feeds on Ants, and takes refuge in deepburrows, this structure may be subsidiary to its great power ofdigging. A cartilaginous rudiment of a furcula occurs also in theDasypus ; and seems subservient to the same purpose.ICHTHYOSAURUS. 183required great modification of the fore-leg andfoot of the Lizard, to fit it for such cetaceoushabits. The extremities were to be convertedinto fins instead of feet, and as such we shallfind them to combine even a still greater unionof elasticity with strength, than is presented bythe fin or paddle of the Whale. Plate 12, Fig.1, shows the short and strong bones of the arme),and those of the fore arm (f, g) ; and beyondthese the series of polygonal bones thatmade up the phalanges of the fingers. Thesepolygonal bones vary in number in differentspecies, in some exceeding one hundred ; theydiffer also in form from the phalanges bothof Lizards and Whales ; and derive, from theirincrease of number, and change of dimensions,an increase of elasticity and power. Thearm and hand thus converted into an elasticoar or paddle, when covered with skin, musthave much resembled externally the undividedpaddle of a Porpoise or Whale. The positionalso of the paddles on the anterior part of thebody was nearly the same ; to these were superaddedposterior extremities, or hind fins, whichare wanting in the cetacea, and which possiblymake compensation for the absence of their flathorizontal tail : these hind paddles in the Ichthyosaurusare nearly by one half smaller thanthe anterior paddles.*In the Ornithorhynchus, also, the membranous expansion, orweb of the hind feet, is very much less than that on the fore foot.184 MARINE Syrians.Mr. Conybeare remarks, with his usual acumen,that " the reasons of this variation fromthe proportions of the posterior extremities ofquadrupeds in general, are the same which leadto a similar diminution of the analogous parts inSeals, and their total disappearance in the ceta-cea, namely, the necessity of placing the centreof the organs of motion, when acting laterally,before the centre of gravity. For the samereason, the wings of birds are placed in the forepartof their body, and the centre of the movingforces given to ships by their sails, and tosteam-boats by their paddles, is similarly placed.The great organ of motion in fishes, the tail, isindeed posteriorly placed, but this by its mode ofaction generates a vis a tergo, which impels theanimal straight forwards, and does not thereforeoperate under the same conditions with organslaterally applied." G. T. V. 5, p. 579.I shall conclude this detailed review of thepeculiarities of one of the most curious, as wellas the most ancient, among the many generaof extinct reptiles presented to us by Geology,with a few remarks on the final causes of thosedeviations from the normal structure of its propertype, the Lizard ; under which the Ichthyosauruscombines in itself the additional charactersof the fish, the Whale, and Ornithorhynchus.As the form of vertebrae by which it is associatedwith the class of fishes, seems to have beenICHTHYOSAURUS. 185introduced for the purpose of giving rapid motionin the water to a Lizard inhabiting the elementof fishes ; so the further adoption of astructure in the legs, resembling the paddles ofa Whale, was superadded in order to convertthese extremities into powerful fins. The stillfurther addition of a furcula and clavicles, likethose of the Ornithorhynchus, offers a third andnot less striking example of selection of contrivances,to enable animals of one class to live inthe element of another class.If the laws of co-existence are less rigidlymaintained in the Ichthyosaurus, than in otherextinct creatures which we discover amid thewreck of former creations, still these deviationsare so far from being fortuitous, or evidencingimperfection ; that they present examples ofperfect appointment and judicious choice, pervadingand regulating even the most apparentlyanomalous aberrations.Having the vertebrae of a fish, as instrumentsof rapid progression ; and the paddles ofa Whale, and sternum of an Ornithorhynchus,as instruments of elevation and depression ; thereptile Ichthyosaurus united in itself a combinationof mechanical contrivances, which arenow distributed among three distinct classes ofthe animal kingdom. If, for the purpose ofproducing vertical movements in the water, thesternum of the living Ornithorhynchus assumes186 MARINE Syrians.forms and combinations that occur but in oneother genus of Mammalia, they are the samethat co-existed in the sternum of the Ichthyosaurusof the ancient world ; and thus, atpoints of time, separated from each other by theintervention of incalculable ages, we find anidentity of objects effected by instruments sosimilar, as to leave no doubt of the unity of thedesign in which they all originated.It was a necessary and peculiar function in theeconomy of the fish-like Lizard of the ancientseas, to ascend continually to the surface of thewater in order to breathe air, and to descendagain in search of food ; it is a no less peculiarfunction in the Duck-billed Ornithorhynchus ofour own days, to perform a series of similar movementsin the lakes and rivers of New Holland.The introduction to these animals, of suchaberrations from the type of their respectiveorders, to accommodate deviations from the usualhabits of these orders, exhibits an union of com-pensive contrivances, so similar in their relations,so identical in their objects, and so perfectin the adaptation of each subordinate part, tothe harmony and perfection of the whole ; thatwe cannot but recognise throughout them all,the workings of one and the same eternal principleof Wisdom and Intelligence, presiding fromfirst to last over the total fabric of Creation.INTESTINAL STRUCTURE. 187SECTION V.INTESTINAL STRUCTURE OF ICHTHYOSAURUSAND OF FOSSIL FISHES.From the teeth and organs of locomotion, wecome next to consider those of digestion in theIchthyosaurus. If there be any point in thestructure of extinct fossil animals, as to which itshould have seemed hopeless to discover anykind of evidence, it is the form and arrangementof the intestinal organs ; since these soft parts,though of prime importance in the animaleconomy, yet being suspended freely within thecavity of the body, and unconnected with theskeleton, would leave no traces whatever uponthe fossil bones.It is impossible to have seen the large apparatusof teeth, and strength of jaws, which wehave been examining in the Ichthyosauri, withoutconcluding that animals furnished with suchpowerful instruments of destruction, must haveused them freely in restraining the excessivepopulation of the ancient seas. This inferencehas been fully confirmed by the recent discoverywithin their skeletons, of the half digestedremains of fishes and reptiles, which they haddevoured, (see PI. 13, 14,), and by the further188 INTESTINAL STRUCTURE OF ICHTHYOSAURUS.discovery of Coprolites, (see PL 15,) i. e. of foetalremains in a state of petrifaction, dispersedthrough the same strata in which these skeletonsare buried. The state of preservation of thesevery curious petrified bodies is often so perfect,as to indicate not only the food of the animalsfrom which they were derived, but also thedimensions, form, and structure of their stomach,and intestinal canal.*On the shore at Lyme Regis, these Coprolitesare so abundant, that they lie in some parts ofthe lias like potatoes scattered in the ground ; stillThe following description of these Coprolites, is given inmy memoir on this subject, published in the Transactions ofthe Geological Society of London, 1829, (vol. iii. n. s. part i.p. 224. with three plates.)In variety of size and external form, the Coprolites resembleoblong pebbles or kidney-potatoes. They, for the most part,vary from two to four inches in length, and from one totwo inches in diameter. Some few are much larger, and beara due proportion to the gigantic calibre of the largest Ichthyo-sauri ; others are small, and bear a similar ratio to the moreinfantine individuals of the same species, and to small fishes :some are flat and amorphous, as if the substance had beenvoided in a semi fluid state; others are flattened by pressure ofthe shale. Their usual colour is ash-grey, sometimes interspersedwith black, and sometimes wholly black. Their substanceis of a compact earthy texture, resembling induratedclay, and having a conchoidal and glossy fracture. The structureof the Coprolites at Lyme Regis is in most cases tortuous,but the number of coils is very unequal ; the most commonnumber is three : the greatest I have seen is six : these variationsmay depend on the various species of animals from whichthey are derived ; I find-analogous variations in the tortuousintestines of modern Skates, Sharks, and Dog-fish. SomeCompromises. 189more common are they in the lias of the Estuaryof the Severn, where they are similarly disposedin strata of many miles in extent, and mixed soabundantly with teeth and rolled fragments ofthe bones of reptiles and fishes, as to show thatthis region, having been the bottom of an ancientsea, was for a long period the receptacle of thebones and foetal remains of its inhabitants.The occurrence of Coprolites is not howeverpeculiar to the places just mentioned, they arefound in greater or less abundance throughout thelias of England ; they occur also in strata, of allCoprolites, especially the small ones, show no traces at all ofcontortion.The sections of these foetal balls, (see PL 15, Figs. 4, and 6,)show their interior to be arranged in a folded plate, wrappedspirally round from the centre outwards, like the whorls of aturbinated shell ; their exterior also retains the corrugations andminute impressions, which, in their plastic state, they may havereceived from the intestines of the living animals. (See PL 15,Figs. 3, and 10 to 14.) Dispersed irregularly and abundantlythroughout these petrified feces, are the scales, and occasionallythe teeth and bones of fishes, that seem to have passed undigestedthrough the bodies of the Saurians; just as the enamel ofteeth and sometimes fragments of bone, are found undigestedboth in the recent and fossil album secum of hyenas. Thesescales are the hard bright scales of the Dapedium polite, andother fishes which abound in the lias, and which thus appear tohave formed no small portion of the food of the Saurians. Thebones are chiefly vertebrae of fishes and of small Ichthyosauri ;the latter are less frequent than the bones of fishes, but still aresufficiently numerous, to show that these monsters of the ancientdeep, like many of their successors in our modern oceans, mayhave devoured the small and weaker individuals of their ownspecies."190 INTESTINAL STRUCTURE OF ICHTHYOSAURUS.ages that contain the remains of carnivorous reptiles,and have been recognized in many anddistant regions both of Europe and America.*The certainty of the origin of these Coprolitesis established, by their frequent presence in theabdominal region of fossil skeletons of Ichthyo-sauri found in the lias of Lyme Regis. One ofthe most remarkable of these is represented inPL 13; the coprolitic matter loaded with fishscales, within the ribs of these and similar specimens,is identical in appearance and chemicalcomposition with the insulated compromises thatoccur in the same strata with the skeletons.'}'Professor Jeeger has recently discovered many Coprolitesin the alum slate of Gaildorf in Wittenberg ; a formationwhich he considers to be in the lower region of that part of thenew red sandstone formation which in Germany is called Keuper;and which contains the remains of two species of Saurians.In the United States Dr. Delay has also discovered Compromisesin the Green-sand formation of Monmouth, in New Jersey,see PI. 15, Fig. 13.f This specimen has been presented by Viscount Cole to theGeological Collection of the University of Oxford. It affordsdecisive proof that the substances in question cannot be referredto adventitious matter, placed accidentally in contact with thefossil body, inasmuch as the large coprolitic mass is enclosedbetween the back bone and the right and left series of the ribs, ofwhich the greater number remain nearly in their natural position.The quantity of this coprolite is prodigious, when compared withthe size of the animal in which it occurs ; and if we were notacquainted with the powers of the digestive organs of reptiles andfishes, and their capacity of gorging the larger animals that formtheir prey ; the great space within these fossil skeletons of Ich-thyosauri, which is occasionally filled with coprolitic matter,would appear inexplicable.Compromises. 191The preservation of such fcecal matter, and itsconversion to the state of stone, result from theimperishable nature of the phosphate of lime, ofwhich both bones, and the products of digestedbones are equally composed.The skeleton of another Ichthyosaurus in theOxford Museum, from the lias at Lyme Regis,(PI. 14) shews a large mass of fish scales, chieflyreferable to the Pholidophorus hiatus,* intermixtwith coprolite throughout the entireregion of the ribs ; this mass is overlaid by manyribs, and although, in some degree perhaps,extended by pressure, it shows that the lengthAccording to Professor Agassiz, the scales of Pholidophorushiatus, a species very frequent among the fossils of the lias, aremore abundant than those of any other fish in the Coprolites foundin that formation at Lyme Regis; and shew that this species wasthe principal food of these reptiles. In Coprolites from the coalformation, near Edinburgh, he has also recognised the scalesof Palseoniscus, and of other fishes that are often found entirein strata that accompany the coal of that neighbourhood.Scales of the Zeus Lewisiensis, a fish discovered by Mr. Man-tell,in the chalk, occur in Coprolites derived from voraciousfishes during the deposition of this formation.A Coprolite from the lias, (PI. 15, Fig. 3), remarkable for itsspiral convolutions, and vascular impressions, affords a strikingexample of the minute accuracy with which investigations arenow conducted by naturalists, and of the kind of evidence whichcomparative anatomy contributes in aid of geological enquiry.On one side of this Coprolite, there is a small scale, (Fig. 3, a,)which I could only refer to some unknown fish, of the numerousspecies that occur in the lias. The instant I shewed it to M.Agassiz, he not only pronounced its species to be the Pholido-chorus hiatus ; but at once declared the precise place whichthis scale had occupied upon the body of the fish, A minute192 INTESTINAL STRUCTURE OF ICHTHYOSAURUS.of the stomach was nearly co-extensive with thetrunk.Among living voracious reptiles we have examplesof stomachs equally capacious; we knowthat whole human bodies have been found withinthe stomachs of large Crocodiles ; we know also,from the form of their teeth, that the Ichthyo-sauri, like the Crocodiles, must have gorged theirprey entire ; and when we find, imbedded inCoprolites derived from the larger Ichthyosauri,bones of smaller Ichthyosauri, of such dimensions,(see PL 15, Fig. 18. And Geol. Trans.2, S. vol. iii, PL 29, Figs. 2, 3, 4, 5,) that theindividuals from which they were derived, musthave measured several feet in length ; we inferthat the stomach of these animals formed a pouch,or sac, of prodigious size, extending throughnearly the entire cavity of the body, and ofcapacity duly proportioned to the jaws andteeth with which it co-operated.tube upon its inner surface, (PI. 15, Fig. 3',) scarcely visiblewithout a microscope, shewed it to have been one of thosewhich form the lateral line of perforated scales, that pass fromthe head towards the tail, one on each side of every fish; andconvey a tube for the transmission of lubricating mucus fromglands in the head, to the extremity of the body. The placeof the scale in this line, had been on the left side, not farfrom the head. Fig. 3" is the upper surface of a similar scale,shewing at e the termination of the mucous duct.Compromises. 193Spiral Disposition of Small Intestines.As the more solid parts of animals alone, areusually susceptible of petrifaction, we cannotdemonstrate by direct evidence the form and sizeof the small intestines of the Ichthyosauri, butthe contents of these viscera are preserved insuch perfection in a fossil state, as to affordcircumstantial evidence that the bowels in whichthey were moulded, were formed in a mannerresembling the spiral intestines of some of theswiftest and most voracious of our modernfishes.We shall best understand the structure ofthese intestines by examining the correspondingorgans of Sharks and Dog-fish, animals notless peculiarly rapacious among the inhabitantsof our modern seas, than the Ichthyosauri werein those early periods to which our considerationsare carried back. We find in the intestinesof these fishes, (see PL 15, Figs. 1, and 2,) andalso in those of Rays, an arrangement resemblingthat of the interior of an Archimedes screw,admirably adapted to increase the extent ofinternal surface for the absorption of nutrimentfrom the food, during its passage through a tubecontaining within it a continuous spiral fold,coiled in such a manner, as to afford the greatestG. O194 INTESTINAL STRUCTURE OF ICHTHYOSAURUS.possible extent of surface in the smallest space.A similar contrivance is shown by the Coprolitesto have existed in the Ichthyosaurus. See PI.15, Figs. 3, 4, 6.*Impressions of the Mucous Membrane onCoprolites.Besides the spiral structure and consequentshortness of the small intestine, we have additionalevidence to shew even the form of theminute vessels and folds of the mucous mem-thesecone-shaped bodies are made up of a flat and continuousplate of digested bone, coiled round itself whilst it wasyet in a plastic state. The form is nearly that which would beassumed by a piece of riband, forced continually forward intoa cylindrical tube, through a long aperture in its side. In thiscase, the riband moving onwards, would form a succession ofinvoluted cones, coiling one round the other, and after a certainnumber of turns within the cylinder, (the apex moving continuallydownwards,) these cones would emerge from the end of thetube in a form resembling that of the Coprolites, PI. 15, Figs.3, 5, 7, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. In the same manner, a lamina ofcoprolitic matter would be coiled up spirally into a series ofsuccessive cones, in the act of passing from a small spiral vesselinto the adjacent large intestine. Coprolites thus formed fell intosoft mud, whilst it was accumulating at the bottom of the sea, andtogether with this mud, (which has subsequently been induratedinto shale and stone,) they have undergone so complete a processof petrifaction, that in hardness, and beauty of the polish ofwhich they are susceptible, they rival the qualities of ornamentalmarble.Fig. 6, shews a longitudinal section through the axis ofCompromises. 19?)brave, by which it was lined. This evidenceconsists in a series of vascular impressions andcorrugations on the surface of the Coprolite,which it could only have received during itspassage through the windings of this flat tube.*Specimens thus marked are engraved at PI. 15,Figs. 3, 5, 7, 10, 12, 13, 14.If we attempt to discover a final cause forthese curious provisions in the bowels of theextinct reptile inhabitants of the seas of aformer world, we shall find it to be the samethat explains the existence of a similar structurea coprolite, from the inferior chalk, in which this involuteconical form is well denned. Fig. 4, is the transverse sectionof another Coprolite from the lias, shewing the manner in whichthe plate coils round itself, till it terminates externally in abroken edge, (at b). In all the figures the letter b, marks thetransverse section of this plate, where it is broken off near thetermination of its outer coil ; the sections at b, shew also thesize and form of the flattened passage through the interior of thescrew.A lamina of tenacious plastic substance pressed continuallyforwards from the interior of such a screw, into the cavity ofthe large intestine, would coil up spirally within it, until itattained the largest size admitted by its diameter ; from this coilsuccessive portions would be broken off abruptly, (at b,) anddescending into the cloaca would be thence discharged into thesea.These impressions cannot have been derived from the membraneof the inferior large intestine, because they are continuedalong those surfaces of the inner coils of the Coprolite, whichbecame permanently covered by its outer coils, in the act ofpassing from the spiral tube into this large intestine.196 INTESTINAL STRUCTURE OF ICHTHYOSAURUS.in the modern voracious tribes of Sharks andDog-fish.*As the peculiar voracity of all these animalsrequired the stomach to be both large and long,there would remain but little space for thesmaller viscera ; these are therefore reduced, aswe have seen, nearly to the state of a flattenedtube, coiled like a corkscrew around itself;their bulk is thus materially diminished, whilstthe amount of absorbing surface remains almostthe same, as if they had been circular. Had alarge expansion of intestines been superaddedto the enormous stomach and lungs of theIchthyosaurus, the consequent enlargement ofthe body would have diminished the power ofprogressive motion, to the great detriment of anPaley, in his chapter on mechanical compensations in thestructure of animals, mentions a contrivance similar to thatwhich we attribute to the Ichthyosaurus, as existing in a species ofShark, (the Alopecias, Squalls Vulpes, or Sea Fox). " In thisanimal, he says, the intestine is straight from one end to the other :but, in this straight, and consequently short intestine, is a winding,cork-screw, spiral passage, through which the food, not withoutseveral circumvolutions, and in fact by a long route, is conductedto its exit. Here the shortness of the gut is compensated bythe obliquity of the perforation."Dr. Fitton has called my attention to a passage in LordKing's Life of Locke, 4°. p. 166, 167, from which it appearsthat the importance of a spiral disposition within the intestinalcanal, which he observed in many preparations in the collectionof anatomy at Leyden, was duly appreciated by that profoundphilosopher.Compromises. 197animal which depended on its speed for thecapture of its prey.The above facts which we have elicited fromthe coprolitic remains of the Ichthyosauri, afforda new and curious contribution to our knowledgeboth of the anatomy and habits of the extinct inhabitantsof our planet. We have found evidencewhich enables us to point out the existence ofbeneficial arrangements and compensations, evenin those perishable, yet important parts whichformed their organs of digestion. We have ascertainedthe nature of their food, and the form andstructure of their intestinal canal ; and have tracedthe digestive organs through three distinct stagesof descent, from a large and long stomach,through the spiral coils of a compressed ileum,to their termination in a cloaca ; from which theCoprolites descended into the mud of the nascentlias. In this lias they have been interred duringcountless ages, until summoned from its deeprecesses by the labours of the Geologist, to giveevidence of events that passed at the bottomof the ancient seas, in ages long preceding theexistence of man.108 INTESTINAL STRUCTUREIntestinal Structure of Fossil Fishes.Discoveries have recently been made of Co-politederived from fossil fishes. Mr. Mantelllhas found them within the body of the Macro-pompMantellii, from the chalk of Lewes, placedin contact with the long stomach of this voraciousfish : the coats of its stomach are also wellpreserved.* Miss Aiming also has discoveredthem within the bodies of several species offossil fish, from the lias at Lyme Regis.Dr. Hibbert has shown that the strata offresh-water limestone, in the lower region ofthe coal formation, at Burdie House, near Edinburgh,are abundantly interspersed with Compromises,derived from fishes of that early era ; andSir Philip Egerton has found similar foetalremains, mixed with scales of the Megalich-this, and fresh-water shells, in the coal formationof Newcastle-undergone. In 1832,Mr. W. C. Trevelyan recognized Coprolites inSee Mantelll's Geo], of Sussex, PI. 38. I learn from Mr.Mantelll, that the form of the Coprolites within the Macropomamost nearly resemble those engraved, PI. 15, Figs. 8, 9, of thepresent work : he also conjectures that the more tortuous kinds,(PI. 15, Figs. 5, 7), long known by the name of Julia, and supposedto be fossil fir cones, may have been derived from fishesof the Shark family, (Ptychodus) whose large palatal teeth (PI.27. f) abound in the same localities of the chalk formation withthem, at Sterling and Ramsey.OF FOSSIL FISHES. 199the centre of nodules of clay ironstone, thatabound in a low cliff composed of shale, belongingto the coal formation at Newhaven,near Leith. I visited the spot, with this gentlemanand Lord Greenock, in September,1834, and found these nodules strewed sothickly upon the shore, that a few minutessufficed to collect more specimens than I couldcarry ; many of these contained a fossil fish, orfragment of a plant, but the greater number hadfor their nucleus, a Coprolite, exhibiting aninternal spiral structure ; they were probablyderived from voracious fishes, whose bones arefound in the same stratum. These nodulestake a beautiful polish, and have been appliedby the lapidaries of Edinburgh to maketables, letter presses, and ladies' ornaments,under the name of Beetle stones, from theirsupposed insect origin. Lord Greenock has discovered,between the laminae of a block of coal,from the neighbourhood of Edinburgh, a massof petrified intestines distended with Coprolite,and surrounded with the scales of a fish, whichProfessor Agassiz refers to the Megalichthys.This distinguished naturalist has recently ascertainedthat the fossil worm-like bodies, soabundant in the lithographic slate of ,and described by Count Minster in thePetrefacten of Goldfuss, under the name ofLumbricaria, are either the petrified intestines200 INTESTINAL STRUCTURE OF FOSSIL FISHES,of fishes, or the contents of their intestines, stillretaining the form of the tortuous tube inwhich they were lodged. To these remarkablefossils he has given the name of Colonies. (PL15' is copied from one of a series that are engravedin Goldfuss. Petrefacten, PL 66.) Hehas also found similar tortuous petrifactionwithin the abdominal cavity of fossil fishes, belongingto several species of the genus Thrissopsand Leptolepis, occupying the ordinary positionof the intestines between the ribs.* (See Agas-sisPoissons Fossiles, liv. 2, Appendix, p. 15.)As these Colonies are most frequently found insulated inthe lithographic limestone, M. Agassiz has ingeniously explainedthis fact by observing the process of decomposition of deadfishes in the lakes of Switzerland. The dead fish floats onthe surface, with its belly upwards, until the abdomen is sodistended with putrid gas, that it bursts : through the aperturethus formed the bowels come forth into the water, still adheringtogether in their natural state of convolution. This intestinalmass is soon torn from the body by the movement of thewaves ; the fish then sinks, and the bowels continue a longtimefloating on the water : if cast on shore, they remainmany days upon the sand before they are completely decomposed.The small bowels only are thus detached from the body,the stomach and other viscera remain within it.We owe this illustration of the nature of these fossil bodies,whose origin has hitherto been inexplicable, to the author of amost important work on fossil fishes, now under publicationat Neuchatel. His qualifications for so great and difficult atask are abundantly guaranteed by the fact, that Cuvier, onseeing the progress he had made, at once placed at the disposalof Professor Agassiz the materials he had himself collectedtowards a similar work.Colonies. 201It is probable that to many persons inexperiencedin anatomy, any kind of information on asubject so remote, and apparently so inaccessible,as the intestinal structure of an extinct reptile orafossil fish, may at first appear devoid of thesmallest possible importance ; but it assumes acharacter of high value, in the investigation ofthe proofs of creative wisdom and design, thatare unfolded by the researches of Geology ; andsupplies a new link to that important chain,which connects the lost races that formerly inhabitedour planet, with species that are actuallyliving and moving around ourselves.* The systematicrecurrence, in animals of such distanteras, of the same contrivances, similarly disposedto effect similar purposes, with analogousadaptations to peculiar conditions of existence,shews that they all originated in the same Intelligence.When we see the body of an Ichthyosaurus,still containing the food it had eaten just beforeits death, and its ribs still surrounding theremains of fishes, that were swallowed ten tholetemps qui repand de la dignity sur tout ce qui echappe ason pouvoir destruction, fait voir ici un exemple singulier de soninfluence : ces substances si viles dans leur origine, extant ren-duesa la lumiere acres tant de siecles, deviennent d'une grandeimportance puis quelle servent a remplir un nouveau chapitredans histoire naturelle du globe. — Bulletin Soc. Imp. de Moscow,No. VI. 1833, p. 23.20*2 MARINE Syrians.sand, or more than ten times ten thousand yearsago, all these vast intervals seem annihilated,time altogether disappears, and we are almostbrought into as immediate contact with eventsof immeasurably distant periods, as with theaffairs of yesterday.SECTION VI.PLESIOSAURUS.*We come next to consider a genus of extinctanimals, nearly allied in structure to the Ichthyosaurus,and co-extensive with it through themiddle ages of our terrestrial history. The discoveryof this genus forms one of the most importantadditions that Geology has made to comparativeanatomy. It is of the Plesiosaurus, thatCuvier asserts the structure to have been themost heteroclite, and its characters altogetherthe most monstrous, that have been yet foundamid the ruins of a former world. -\ To the headof a Lizard, it united the teeth of a Crocodile ;a neck of enormous length, resembling the bodyof a Serpent : a trunk and tail having the proportionsof an ordinary quadruped, the ribs of aSee PI. 16, 17, 18, 19.f Cet habitant de ancien monde peut-etre la plus heterocliteet celui de tous qui paroit le plus merited le nom de monstre. —Oss. Foss. V. Pt. 2, p. 476.PLESIOSAURUS. 203Camelion, and the paddles of a Whale. Suchare the strange combinations of form and structurein the Plesiosaurus a genus, the remainsof which, after interment for thousands of yearsamidst the wreck of millions of extinct inhabitantsof the ancient earth, are at length recalledto light by the researches of the Geologist, andsubmitted to our examination, in nearly as perfecta state as the bones of species that are nowexisting upon the earth.The Plesiosauri appear to have lived in shallowseas and estuaries, and to have breathed airlike the Ichthyosauri, and our modern Cetacea.We are already acquainted with five or six species,some of which attained a prodigious sizeand length ; but our present observations willbe chiefly limited to that which is the bestknown, and perhaps the most remarkable ofthem all, viz. the P. Dolichodeirus.*The first specimens of this animal were discovered in the liasof Lyme Regis, about the year 1823, and formed the foundationof that admirable paper (Geol. Trans. Lond. vol. 5, Pt. 2.) in whichMr. Conybeare and M. De la Beche established and named thisgenus. Other examples have since been recognised in the sameformations in different parts of England, Ireland, France, andGermany, and in formations of various ages, from the muscleskalk upwards to the chalk. The first specimen discovered in astate approaching to perfection, was that in the collection of theDuke of Buckingham, (figured in the Geol. Trans. Lond. N. S.Vol. 1, Pt. 2, PI. 48). Another specimen, nearly entire, in thecollection of the British Museum, eleven feet in length, is figuredin our second volume, (PI. 16) ; and at PJ. 17, a still more per-204 MARINE Syrians.Head*The head of the P. Dolichodeirus exhibits acombination of the characters of the Ichthyosaurus,the Crocodile, and the Lizard, but mostnearly approaches to the latter. It agrees withthe Ichthyosaurus in the smallness of its nostrils,and also in their position near the anterior angleof the eye ; it resembles the Crocodile, in havingthe teeth lodged in distinct alveoli ; but differsfrom both, in the form and shortness of its head,many characters of which approach closely tothe Iguana. ffeet fossil skeleton, also in the British Museum, discovered by Mr.Hawkins, in the lias at Street, near Glastonbury. At PI. 16 is alsocopied Mr. Conybeare's restoration of this animal, from dislocatedfragments, before any entire skeletons were found. The nearapproach of this restoration to the character of the perfect skeletons,affords a striking example of the sure grounds on whichcomparative anatomy enables us to reconstruct the bodies of fossilanimals, from a careful combination of insulated parts. Thesoundness of the reasoning of Cuvier, on the fossil quadrupedsof Montmartre, was established by the subsequent discovery ofskeletons, such as he had conjecturally restored from insulatedbones. Mr. Conybeare's restoration of the Plesiosaurus ,(PL 16,) was not less fully confirmed by the specimensabove mentioned.See PL 16, 17, 18.■f Mr. Conybeare, in the Geol. Trans, second series, vol. 1,part 1, PL 19, has published figures of the superior and lateralview of a nearly perfect head of this animal. Our figure, PL 18,Fig. 2, represents the head of the specimen in the British .205Neck.The most anomalous of all the characters ofP. Dolichodeirus is the extraordinary extensionof the neck, to a length almost equalling that ofthe body and tail together, and surpassing in thenumber of its vertebrae (about thirty-three) thatof the most long-necked bird, the Swan : it thusdeviates in the greatest degree from the almostseem, of which the entire figure, on a smaller scale, is given inPI. 16. The head is in a supine position; the upper jaw is distorted,and shows several of the separate alveoli that containedthe teeth, and also the posterior portion of the palate. Theunder jaw is but little disturbed.A figure of another lower jaw is given at PI. 18, Fig. 1, takenfrom a specimen also in the British Museum, found by Mr. Hawkins,at Street.PI. 19, Fig. 3, represents the extremity of the dental bone ofanother lower jaw, in the same collection, retaining several teethin the anterior sockets, and also exhibiting a series of new teeth,rising within an interior range of small cavities. This arrangementfor the formation of new teeth, in cells within the bonymass that contains the older teeth, from which they shoot irregularlyforwards through the substance of the bone, forms animportant point of resemblance whereby the Plesiosaurus assumes,in the renovation of its teeth, the character of Lizards,combined with the position of the perfect teeth in distinct alveoli,after the manner of Crocodiles.The number of teeth in the lower jaw was fifty-four, which, ifmet by a corresponding series in the upper jaw, must have madethe total number to exceed one hundred. The anterior part ofthe extremity of the jaw enlarges itself like the bowl of a spoon,to allow space for the reception of the six first teeth on each side,which are the largest of all.206 MARINE Syrians.universal law, which limits the cervical vertebraeof quadrupeds to a very small number. Evenin the Camelopard, the Camel, and Lama, theirnumber is uniformly seven. In the short neckof the Cetacea the type of this number is maintained.In Birds it varies from nine to twenty-three; and in living Reptiles from three to eight.*We shall presently find in the habits of thePlesiosaurus a probable cause for this extraordinarydeviation from the normal character ofthe Lizards.To compensate for the weakness that would have attendedthis great elongation of the neck, the Plesiosaurus had anaddition of a series of hatchet-shaped processes, on each sideof the lower part of the cervical vertebrae. (PI. 17, and PI. 19,1, 2.) Rudiments and modifications of these processes exist inbirds, and in long-necked quadrupeds. In the Crocodiles theyassume a form, most nearly approaching that which they bear inthe Plesiosaurus.The bodies of the vertebrae also more nearly resemble thoseof certain fossil Crocodiles, than of Ichthyosauri or Lizards ;they agree further with the Crocodile, in having the annular partattached to the body by sutures ; so that we have in the neck ofthe P. Dolichodeirus a principle of construction resembling thatof the vertebrae of Crocodiles ; combined with an elongation verymuch exceeding that of the longest neck in birds, and such asoccurs in no other known animal of the extinct or living creations.The length of the neck in P. Dolichodeirus is nearly five timesthat of the head ; that of the trunk four times the length of thehead, and of the tail three times ; the head itself being one-thirteenthpart of the whole body. — See Geol. Trans. Lond. Vol. 5,p. 559, and Vol. I. N. S. p. 103, et seq.PLESIOSAURUS. 207Sack and Tail.The vertebrae of the back were not disposed inhollow cones, like those of fishes, but presentedto each other nearly flat surfaces, giving to thecolumn a stability, like that which exists in theback of terrestrial quadrupeds. The articulatingprocesses, also, were locked into one anotherin such manner as to give strength, rather thanthat peculiar kind of flexibility, which admittedof the same quick progressive motion in theIchthyosauri that we find in fishes : but as rapidmotion was incompatible with the structure ofthe other parts of the Plesiosaurus, the combinationof strength, rather than of speed withflexibility, was more important.The tail, being comparatively short, could nothave been used like the tail of fishes, as aninstrument of rapid impulsion in a forward direction; but was probably employed more as arudder, to steer the animal when swimming onthe surface, or to elevate or depress it in ascendingand descending through the water. Thesame consequence as to slowness of motionwould follow from the elongation of the neck,to so great a distance in front of the anteriorpaddles. The total number of vertebrae in theentire column was about ninety. From all thesecircumstances we may infer that this animal,although of considerable size, had to seek its food,208 MARINE Syrians.as well as its safety, chiefly by means of artificeand concealment.Ribs*The ribs are composed of two parts, one vertebraland one ventral ; the ventral portions ofone side, (PL 18, 3, b,) uniting with those onthe opposite side by an intermediate transversebone, (a, c,) so that each pair of ribs encircledthe body with a complete belt, made up of fiveparts, f Cuvier observes that the similarity ofthis structure to that of the ribs of Chameleonand two species of Iguana, (Lacerta Marmorata,Lin. and Annius, Cuvier,) seems to shew thatthe lungs of the Plesiosaurus Dolichodeirus,(as in these three subgenera of living Saurians,)were very large ; and possibly that the colourof its skin also was changeable, by the variedintensity of its inspirations.! Oss. Foss. Vol. Y.Pt. 2. p. 280.See PL 16, 17, 18.f The ventral portion of each rib, (PL 17, and PL 18, 3,b,) appears to have been composed of three slender bones fittedto one another by oblique grooves, allowing of great expansivemovement during the inflation of the lungs: the manner inwhich these triple bones were folded over one another, is bestseen in a single series between a, and b, the upper ends of theventral portions of the ribs (b) have been separated by pressure,from the lower ends of the vertebral portions, (d.)% We have no means to verify this ingenious conjecture, thatthe Plesiosaurus may have been a kind of sub-marine Cameleon,PLESIOSAURUS. 209This hypothesis of Cuvier is but conjectural,respecting the power of the Plesiosaurus tochange the colour of its skin ; and to the unexperiencedin comparative anatomy, it mayseem equally conjectural, to deduce any otherconclusions respecting such perishable organsas the lungs, from the discovery of peculiar contrivances,and unusual apparatus in the ribs ;yet we argue on similar grounds, when from theform and capabilities of these fossil ribs, we inferthat they were connected, as in the cameleon,with vast and unusual powers of expansion andcontraction in the lungs ; and when, on findingthe ribs and wood-work of a worn-out bellows,near the ruins of a blacksmith's forge, we concludethat these more enduring parts of thepossessing the power of altering 1 the colour of its skin ; it musthowever be admitted that such a power would have been ofmuch advantage to this animal, in defending it by concealmentfrom its most formidable enemy the Ichthyosaurus, with which,its diminutive head and long slender neck, must have renderedit a very unequal combatant, and from whose attacks its slowlocomotive powers must have made escape by flight impossible ;the enlarged condition of the lungs, would also have been ofgreat advantage in diminishing the frequency of its ascents tothe surface, to inspire air ; an operation that must have beenattended with constant danger, in a sea thickly swarming withIchthyosauri. Dr. Stark has recently observed that certain fishes,especially minnows, have a tendency to assume the colour of thevessel in which they are kept. (Proceedings Zool. Soc. Loud.July, 1833.) As in animals of this class there are no lungs,this change of colour must arise from other cause than that towhich it has been attributed in the Cameleon.G. P210 MARINE SAURIA.NS.frame of this instrument, have been connectedwith a proportionable expansion of leather.The compound character of the ribs, probablyalso gave to the Plesiosaurus the same powerof compressing air within its lungs, and in thatstate taking it to the bottom, which we haveconsidered as resulting from the structure ofthe steno-costal apparatus of the Ichthyosauri.Extremities*As the Plesiosaurus breathed air, and wastherefore obliged to rise often to the surface forinspiration, this necessity was met by an apparatusin the chest and pelvis, and in the bonesof the arms and legs, enabling it to ascend anddescend in the water after the manner of theIchthyosauri and Cetacea ; accordingly the legswere converted into paddles, longer and morepowerful than those of the Ichthyosaurus, thuscompensating for the comparatively small assistancewhich it could have derived from its tailsComparing these extremities with those ofother vertebrated animals, we trace a regularSee PI. 16, 17, 19.f The number of joints representing the phalanges of thefingers and toes exceeds that in the Lizards and Birds, and alsoin all Mammalia, excepting the Whales, some of which present asimilar increase of number to accommodate them to the correspondingoffice of a paddle. The mode of connection betweenthe joints was (like that in the Whales,) by synchondrosis.The phalanges of the Plesiosaurus present a link, between thePLESIOSAURUS. 211series of links and gradations, from the correspondingparts of the highest mammalia, to theirleast perfect form in the fins of fishes. In thefore paddle of the Plesiosaurus, we have all theessential parts of the fore leg of a quadruped,and even of a human arm ; first the scapula,next the humerus, then the radius and ulna,succeeded by the bones of the carpus and metacarpus,and these followed by five fingers, eachcomposed of a continuous series of phalanges.(see PI. 16, 17, 19.) The hind paddle also offersprecisely the same analogies to the leg and footof the Mammalia ; the pelvis and femur aresucceeded by a tibia and fibula, which articulatewith the bones of the tarsus and metatarsus,followed by the numerous phalanges of five longtoes.From the consideration of all its characters,Mr. Conybeare has drawn the following inferenceswith respect to the habits of the PlesiosaurusDolichodeirus, " That it was aquatic isevident, from the form of its paddles ; that itwas marine is almost equally so, from the remainswith which it is universally associated ;still more numerous and angular joints of the paddle of theIchthyosaurus, and the phalanges of land quadrupeds, which aremore or less cylindrical ; in these sea Lizards they were flattened,for the purpose of giving breadth to the extremities as organs ofswimming. As its paddles give no indication of having carriedeven such imperfect claws, as those of the Turtles and Seals,the Plesiosaurus apparently could have made little or no progressin any other element than water.212 MARINE SAUR1ANS.that it may have occasionally visited the shore,the resemblance of its extremities to those ofthe Turtle may lead us to conjecture ; its motionhowever must have been very awkward on land ;its long neck must have impeded its progressthrough the water ; presenting a striking contrastto the organization which so admirablyfits the Ichthyosaurus to cut through the waves.May it not therefore be concluded (since, inaddition to these circumstances, its respirationmust have required frequent access of air,) thatit swam upon, or near the surface ; archingback its long neck like the swan, and occasionallydarting it down at the fish which happenedto float within its reach. It may perhaps havelurked in shoal water along the coast, concealedamong the sea-weed, and raising its nostrils to alevel with the surface from a considerable depth,may have found a secure retreat from the assaultsof dangerous enemies ; while the lengthand flexibility of its neck may have compensatedfor the want of strength in its jaws, andits incapacity for swift motion through the water,by the suddenness and agility of the attackwhich they enabled it to make on every animalfitted for its prey, which came within its reach,"Geol. Trans, n. s. vol. i. part ii. p. 388.We began our account of the Plesiosauruswith quoting the high authority of Cuvier, forconsidering it as one of the most anomalous andmonstrous productions of the ancient systems ofPLESIOSAURUS. 21.3creation ; we have seen in proceeding throughour examination of its details, that these apparentanomalies consist only in the diversifiedarrangement, and varied proportion, of partsfundamentally the same as those that occur inthe most perfectly formed creatures of the presentworld.Pursuing the analogies of construction, thatconnect the existing inhabitants of the earthwith those extinct genera and species whichpreceded the creation of our race, we find anunbroken chain of affinities pervading the entireseries of organized beings, and connecting allpast and present forms of animal existence byclose and harmonious ties. Even our ownbodies, and some of their most important organs,are brought into close and direct comparisonwith those of reptiles, which, at first sight, appearthe most monstrous productions of creation; and in the very hand and fingers withwhich we write their history, we recognise thetype of the paddles of the Ichthyosaurus andPlesiosaurus.Extending a similar comparison through thefour great classes of vertebral animals, we findin each species a varied adaptation of analogousparts, to the different circumstances andconditions in which it was intended to beplaced. Ascending from the lower orders, wetrace a gradual advancement in structure andoffice, till we arrive at those whose functions214 MARINE Syrians.are the most exalted : thus, the fin of the fishbecomes the paddle of the reptile Plesiosaurusand Ichthyosaurus ; the same organ is convertedinto the wing of the Pterodactyle, thebird and bat ; it becomes the fore-foot, or paw,in quadrupeds that move upon the land, andattains its highest consummation in the armand hand of rational man.I will conclude these observations in thewords and with the feelings of Mr. Conybeare,which must be in unison with those of all whohave had the pleasure to follow him through hismasterly investigations of this curious subject,from which great part of our information respectingthe genus Plesiosaurus has been derived:To the observer actually engaged in tracingthe various links that bind together the chain oforganised beings, and struck at every instant bythe development of the most beautiful analogies,almost every detail of comparative anatomy,however minute, acquires an interest, and evena charm ; since he is continually presented withfresh proof of the great general law, whichScarpa himself, one of its most able investigators,has so elegantly expressed : ' Usque adeonatura, una eadem semper atque multiplex, disparityetiam forms effects pares, admirablequaedam variegated simplicity conciliate.' 'MOSASAURUS. 215SECTION VII.MOSASAURUS, OR GREAT ANIMAL OF MAESTRICHT.The Mosasaurus has been long known by thename of the great animal of Maestricht, occurringnear that city, in the calcareous freestonewhich forms the most recent deposit of thecretaceous formation, and contains Ammonites,Belemnites, Hamites, and many other shellsbelonging to the chalk, mixt with numerousremains of marine animals that are peculiar toitself. A nearly perfect head of this animal wasdiscovered in 1780, and is now in the Museumat Paris. This celebrated head during manyyears baffled all the skill of Naturalists ; someconsidered it to be that of a Whale, others of aCrocodile ; but its true place in the animal kingdomwas first suggested by Adrian Camper, andat length confirmed by Cuvier. By their investigationsit is proved to have been a giganticmarine reptile, most nearly allied to the Monitor.*The geological epoch at which the MosasaurusThe Monitors form a genus of Lizards, frequenting marshesand the banks of rivers in hot climates ; they have receivedthis name from the prevailing, but absurd, notion that they givewarning by a whistling noise, of the approach of Crocodiles andCaymans. One species, the Lacerta nilotica, which devoursthe eggs of Crocodiles, has been sculptured on the monumentsof ancient Egypt.216 MARINE Syrians.first appeared, seems to have been the last ofthe long series, during which the oolitic andcretaceous groupes were in process of formation.In these periods the inhabitants of our planetseem to have been principally marine, andsome of the largest creatures were Saurians ofgigantic stature, many of them living in thesea, and controlling the excessive increase ofthe then existing tribes of fishes.From the lias upwards, to the commencementof the chalk formation, the Ichthyosauri andPlesiosauri were the tyrants of the ocean ; andjust at the point of time when their existenceterminated, during the deposition of the chalk,the new genus Mosasaurus appears to have beenintroduced, to supply for a while their place andoffice,* being itself destined in its turn to giveplace to the Cetacea of the tertiary periods.As no Saurians of the present world are inhabitantsof the sea, and the most powerful livingrepresentatives of this order, viz. the Crocodiles,though living chiefly in water, have recourseto stratagem rather than speed, for the captureof their prey, it may not be unprofitable toexamine the mechanical contrivances, by whicha reptile, most nearly allied to the Monitor, wasso constructed, as to possess the power ofmoving in the sea, with sufficient velocity toRemains of the Mosasaurus have been discovered by Mr.Mantelll in the upper chalk near Lewes, and by Dr. Morton inthe green sand of Virginia.MOSASAURUS. 217overtake and capture such large and powerfulfishes, as from the enormous size of its teethand jaws, we may conclude it was intended todevour.The head and teeth, (PI. 20.) point out thenear relations of this animal to the Monitors;and the proportions maintained throughout all theother parts of the skeleton warrant the conclusion,that this monstrous Monitor of the ancientdeep was five and twenty feet in length, althoughthe longest of its modern congeners does notexceed five feet. The head here representedmeasures four feet in length, that of the largestMonitor does not exceed five inches. The mostskilful Anatomist would be at a loss to devise aseries of modifications, by which a Monitorcould be enlarged to the length and bulk of aGrampus,* and at the same time be fitted tomove with strength and rapidity through thewaters of the sea ; yet in the fossil before us,we shall find the genuine characters of a Monitormaintained throughout the whole skeleton,with such deviations only as tended to fit theanimal for its marine existence.The Mosasaurus had scarcely any characterin common with the Crocodile, but resembledthe Iguanas, in having an apparatus of teethfixed on the pterygoid bone, (PL 20, k.) andplaced in the roof of its mouth, as in manyThe Grampus is from 20 to 25 feet long, and very ferocious,feeding on seals and porpoises as well as on fishes218 MARINE Syrians.serpents and fishes, where they act as barbs toprevent the escape of their prey.*The other parts of the skeleton follow thecharacter indicated by the head. The vertebraeare all concave in front, and convex behind ;being fitted to each other by a ball and socketjoint, admitting easy and universal flexion.From the centre of the back to the extremity ofthe tail, they are destitute of articular apophyses,which are essential to support the back ofanimals that move on land : in this respect, theyagree with the vertebrae of Dolphins, and werecalculated to facilitate the power of swimming ;the vertebrae of the neck allowed to that partalso more flexibility than in the Crocodiles.The tail was flattened on each side, but highand deep in the vertical direction, like the tailof a Crocodile ; forming a straight oar of immensestrength to propel the body by horizontalThe teeth have no true roots and are not hollow, as in theCrocodiles, but when full grown, are entirely solid, and unitedto the sockets by a broad and firm base of bone, formed fromthe ossification of the pulpy matter which had secreted thetooth, and still further attached to the jaw by the ossificationof the capsule that had furnished the enamel. This induratedcapsule, passed like a circular buttress around its base, tendingto make the tooth an instrument of prodigious strength. Theyoung tooth first appeared in a separate cell in the bone of thejaw, (PI. 20, h.) and moved irregularly across its substance,until it pressed against the base of the old tooth ; causing itgradually to become detached, together with its base by a kindof necrosis, and to fall off like the horns of a Deer. Theteeth, in the roof of the mouth, are also constructed on the sameprinciple with those in the jaw, and renewed in like manner.MOSASAURUS. 219movements, analogous to those of sculling.Although the number of caudal vertebras wasnearly the same as in the Monitor, the proportionatelength of the tail was much diminishedby the comparative shortness of the body ofeach vertebra ; the effect of this variation beingto give strength to a shorter tail as an organ forswimming ; and a rapidity of movement, whichwould have been unattainable by the longand slender tail of the Monitor, which assiststhat animal in climbing. There is a furtherprovision to give strength to the tail, by thechevron bones being soldered firmly to the bodyof each vertebra, as in fishes.The total number of vertebrae was one hundredand thirty-three, nearly the same as inthe Monitors, and more than double the numberof those in the Crocodiles. The ribs hada single head, and were round, as in the familyof Lizards. Of the extremities, sufficient fragmentshave been found to prove that the Mosa-taurus, instead of legs, had four large paddles,resembling those of the Plesiosaurus and theWhale : one great use of these was probably toassist in raising the animal to the surface, inorder to breathe, as it apparently had not thehorizontal tail, by means of which the Cetaceaascend for this purpose. All these charactersunite to show that the Mosasaurus was adaptedto live entirely in the water, and that althoughit was of such vast proportions compared with220 MARINE Syrians.the living genera of these families, it formeda link intermediate between the Monitors andthe Iguanas. However strange it may appearto find its dimensions so much exceeding thoseof any existing Lizards, or to find marinegenera in the order of Saurians, in which thereexists at this time no species capable of livingin the sea ; it is scarcely less strange than theanalogous deviations in the Megalosaurus andIguanodon, which afford examples of still greaterexpansion of the type of the Monitor and Iguana,into colossal forms adapted to move upon theland. Throughout all these variations of proportion,we trace the persistence of the same laws,which regulate the formation of living genera,and from the combinations of perfect mechanismthat have, in all times, resulted from their operation,we infer the perfection of the wisdomby which all this mechanism was designed, andthe immensity of the power by which it has everbeen upheld.Cuvier asserts of the Mosasaurus that beforehe had seen a single vertebra, or a bone of anyof its extremities, he was enabled to announcethe character of the entire skeleton, from the examinationof the jaws and teeth alone, and evenfrom a single tooth. The power of doing thisresults from those magnificent laws of co-existence,which form the basis of the science of comparativeanatomy, and which give the highestinterest to its discoveries.PTERODACTYLE. 2'2 1SECTION VIII.PTERODACTYLE.*Among the most remarkable disclosures madeby the researches of Geology, we may rank theflying reptiles, which have been ranged byCuvier under the genus Pterodactyle ; a genuspresenting more singular combinations of form,than we find in any other creatures yet discoveredamid the ruins of the ancient earth. tThe structure of these animals is so exceedinglyanomalous, that the first discovered Ptero-dactyle (PI. 21) was considered by one naturalistto be a bird, by another as a species ofbat, and by a third as a flying reptile.This extraordinary discordance of opinionrespecting a creature whose skeleton was almostentire, arose from the presence of charactersapparently belonging to each of the three classesto which it was referred. The form of its head,and length of neck, resembling that of birds, itswings approaching to the proportion and form ofSee PI. 1, Figs. 42, 43, and Plates 21, 22.t Pterodactyles have hitherto been found chiefly in the quarriesof lithographic limestone of the jura formation at Aichstadtand Solenhofen ; a stone abounding in marine remains, and alsocontaining Libellers, and other insects. They have also beendiscovered in the lias at Lyme Regis, and in the oolitic slate ofStonesfield.222 FLYING Syrians.those of bats, and the body and tail approximatingto those of ordinary Mammalia. Thesecharacters, connected with a small skull, as isusual among reptiles, and a beak furnished withnot less than sixty pointed teeth, presented acombination of apparent anomalies which it wasreserved for the genius of Cuvier to reconcile.In his hands, this apparently monstrous productionof the ancient world, has been converted intoone of the most beautiful examples yet affordedby comparative anatomy, of the harmony thatpervades all nature, in the adaptation of thesame parts of the animal frame, to infinitelyvaried conditions of existence.In the case of the Pterodactyle we have anextinct genus of the Order Saurians, in the classof Reptiles, (a class that now moves only onland or in the water), adapted by a peculiarityof structure to fly in the air. It will be interestingto see how the anterior extremity, which inthe fore leg of the modern Lizard and Crocodilesis an organ of locomotion on land, became convertedinto a membranaceous wing ; and howfar the other parts of the body are modified so asto fit the entire animal machine for the functionsof flight. The details of this enquiry willafford such striking examples of numerical agreementin the component bones of every limb, withthose in the corresponding limbs of livingLizards, and are at the same time so illustrativeof contrivances for the adjustment of the samePTERODACTYLE. 223organ to effect different ends, that I shall selectfor examination a few points, from the long andbeautiful analysis which Cuvier has given of thestructure of this animal.The Pterodactyles are ranked by Cuvieramong the most extraordinary of all the extinctanimals that have come under his consideration ;and such as, if we saw them restored to life,would appear most strange, and most unlike toany thing that exists in the present world. —Ce sont incontestablement de tous les metresdont ce livre nous revels Ancienne existence, lesplus extraordinaires, et ceux qui, si on les voyaitvivant, paroitroient les plus strangers a toute lanature actuelle." (Cuv. Oss. Foss. Vol. V. Pt. 1 1 ,p. 379.)We are already acquainted with eight speciesof this genus, varying from the size of aSnipe to that of a Cormorant.*In external form, these animals somewhatresemble our modern Bats and Vampires :most of them had the nose elongated, like thesnout of a Crocodile, and armed with conicalIn PI. 21, I have given an engraving of the Pterodactyluslongirostris, which was first published by Collins, and formed thebasis on which this genus was established.At PI. 22, O. is engraved the smallest known species, P. Bredfrom Solenhofen, described by Professor Stammering.A figure and description of a third species, P. macronyx, fromthe lias at Lyme Regis, have been published by myself, (Geol.Trans. Lond. second series, Vol. 3, Pt. 1). This species wasabout the size of a Raven, and its wings, when expanded, must224 FLYING Syrians.teeth. Their eyes were of enormous size, apparentlyenabling them to fly by night. Fromtheir wings projected fingers, terminated by longhooks, like the curved claw on the thumb of theBat. These must have formed a powerful paw,wherewith the animal was enabled to creep orclimb, or suspend itself from trees.It is probable also that the Pterodactyles hadthe power of swimming, which is so common inreptiles, and which is now possessed by thePteropus Pselaphon, or Vampire Bat of theisland of Bonin. (See Zool. Mourn. No. 16, p.458.) " Thus, like Milton's fiend, all qualifiedfor all services and all elements, the creaturewas a fit companion for the kindred reptiles thatswarmed in the seas, or crawled on the shores ofa turbulent planet.The Fiend,O'er bog, or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,With head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues his way,And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies."Paradise Lost, Book II. line 947.With flocks of suchlike creatures flying in thehave been about four feet from tip to tip. A fourth species, P.crassirostris, has been described by Professor Goldfuss. In PI.22, N. I have given a reduced copy of his plate of the specimen ;and in PI. 22, A. a copy of his restoration of the entire animal.Count Munster has described another species, P. medius. Cuvierdescribes some bones of a species, P. grandis, four times as largeas P. longirostris, which latter was about the size of a Woodcock.Professor Goldfuss has described a seventh species fromSolenhofen, P. Munster ; and has proposed the name P. Buck-land,for the eighth described species found at Stonesfield.PTERODACTYLE. 22 5air, and shoals of no less monstrous Ichthyo-sauri and Plesiosauri swarming in the ocean,and gigantic Crocodiles, and Tortoises crawlingon the shores of the primaeval lakes and rivers,air, sea, and land must have been strangelytenanted in these early periods of our infantworld." *As the most obvious feature of these fossilreptiles is the presence of organs of flight, itis natural to look for the peculiarities of theBird or Bat, in the structure of their componentbones. All attempts, however, to identify themwith Birds are stopped at once by the fact oftheir having teeth in the beak, resembling thoseof reptiles : the form of a single bone, the osquadratus, enabled Cuvier to pronounce atonce that the creature was a Lizard : but aLizard possessing wings exists not in the presentcreation, and is to be found only among theDragons of romance and heraldry ; | while amoment's comparison of the head and teethGeol. Trans. Lond. N. S. Vol. III. part. 1.f One diminutive living species of Lizard, (the Draco volans,see PI. 22, L.) differs from all other Saurians, in having an appearanceof imperfect wings, produced by a membranous expansionof the skin over the false ribs which project almost horizontallyfrom the back ; the membrane expanded by these false ribs,acts like a parachute to support the animal in leaping from treeto tree, but has no power to beat the air, or become an instrumentof true flight, like the arm or wing of Birds and Bats ; thearm or fore leg of the Draco volans differs not from that ofcommon Lizards.G. Q226 FLYING Syrians.with those of Bats (PL 21, and PL 22, M.) showsthat the fossil animals in question cannot bereferred to that family of flying Mammalia.The vertebrae of the neck are much elongated,and are six or seven only in number, whereasthey vary from nine to twenty-three in birds.*In birds the vertebrae of the back also varyfrom seven to eleven, whilst in the Pterodactylesthere are nearly twenty ; the ribs of the Ptero-dactyles are thin and thread-shaped, like thoseof Lizards, those of birds are flat and broad,with a still broader recurrent apophysis, peculiarto them. In the foot of birds, the metatarsalbones are consolidated into one : in the Ptero-dactyles all the metatarsal bones are distinct ;the bones of the pelvis also differ widely fromthose of a bird, and resemble those of a Lizard ;In one species of Pterodactyle, viz. the P. macronyx,Geol. Trans, n. s. V. iii. pi. 27, page 220, from the lias at LymeRegis, there is an unusual provision for giving support andmovement to a large head at the extremity of a long neck, bythe occurrence of bony tendons running parallel to the cervicalvertebrae, like the tendons that pass along the back of thePigmy Musk (Roscius pygmies,) and of many birds. Thisprovision does not occur in any modern Lizards, whose necks areshort, and require no such aid to support the head. In thecompensation which these tendons afforded for the weaknessarising from the elongation of the neck, we have an example ofthe same mechanism in an extinct order of the most antientreptiles, which is still applied to strengthen other parts of thevertebral column, in a few existing species of mammalia andbirds.PTERODACTYLE. 227all these points of agreement, with the type ofLizards, and of difference from the character ofbirds, leave no doubt as to the place in whichthe Pterodactyles must be ranged, among theLizards, notwithstanding the approximationwhich the possession of wings seems to givethem to Birds or Bats.The number and proportions of the bones inthe fingers and toes in the Pterodactyle, requireto be examined in some detail, as they affordcoincidences with the bones in the correspondingparts of Lizards, from which important conclusionsmay be derived.As an insulated fact, it may seem to be oflittle moment, whether a living Lizard or a fossilPterodactyle, might have four or five joints inits fourth finger, or its fourth toe ; but those whohave patience to examine the minutiae of thisstructure, will find in it an exemplification ofthe general principle, that things apparentlyminute and trifling in themselves, may acquireimportance, when viewed in connexion withothers, which, taken singly, appear equallyinsignificant. Minutiae of this kind, viewed intheir conjoint relations to the parts and proportionsof other animals, may illustrate pointsof high importance in physiology, and therebybecome connected with the still higher considerationsof natural theology. If we examine thefore-foot of the existing Lizards, (PI. 22, b.) we228 FLYING Syrians.find the number of joints regularly increased bythe addition of one, as we proceed from the firstfinger, or thumb, which has two joints, to thethird, in which there are four ; this is preciselythe numerical arrangement which takes place inthe three first fingers of the hand of the Ptero-dactyle ; (PI. 22, c. d. e. n. o. Figs. 30—38.)thus far the three first fingers of the fossilreptile agree in structure with those of the forefootof living Lizards ; but as the hand of thePterodactyle was to be converted into an organof flight, the joints of the fourth, or fifth fingerwere lengthened, to become expansions of amembranous wing.*Thus in the P. Longirostris (PL 21, 39—42.) and P.Brevirostris, (PI. 22, Fig. O, 39—42,) the fourth finger isstated by Cuvier to have four elongated joints, and the fifth orungual joint to be omitted, as its presence is unnecessary.In the P. Crassirostris, according to Goldfuss (PI. 22, Figs, a,■n,) this claw is present upon the fourth finger, (43) which thushas five bones, and the fifth finger is elongated to carry the wing.Throughout all these arrangements in the fore foot, the normalnumbers of the type of Lizards are maintained.If, as appears from the specimen engraved by Goldfuss, ofP. Crassirostris, (PL 22, x, 44, 45,) the fifth finger was elongatedto expand the wing, we should infer from the normalnumber of joints in the fifth finger of Lizards being only three,that this wing finger had but three joints. In the fossil itselfthe two first joints only are preserved, so that his conjecturaladdition of a fourth joint to the fifth finger, in the restoredfigure, (PL 22, a, 47,) seems inconsistent with the analogies,that pervade the structure of this, and of every other species ofPterodactyle, as described by Cuvier.PTERODACTYLE. 229As the bones in the wing of the Pterodactylethus agree in number and proportion with thosein the fore foot of the Lizard, so do they differentirely from the arrangement of the boneswhich form the expansions of the wing of theBat.*The total number of toes in the Pterodactylesis usually four ; the exterior, or little toe, beingdeficient; if we compare the number and proportionof the joints in these four toes withthose of Lizards, (PI. 22, f, g, h, i,) we find theagreement as to number, to be not less perfectthan it is in the ringers ; we have, in each case,two joints in the first, or great toe, three in thesecond, four in the third, and five in the fourth.As to proportion also, the penultimate joint isalways the longest, and the antepenultimate, orlast but two, the shortest ; these relative proportionsare also precisely the same, as in the feetof Lizards The apparent use of this disposableBat, see PI. 22, m, 30, 31, the first finger or thumbalone, is free, and applied to the purpose of suspension andcreeping; the expansions of the wing are formed by the metacarpalbones, (26 — 29,) much elongated and terminated by theminute phalanges of the other four fingers, 32 — 45, thuspresenting an adaptation of the hand of the mammalia to thepurposes of flight, analogous to that which in the fossil world,the Pterodactyle affords with respect to the hand of Lizards.t According to Goldfuss the P. Crassirostris had one moretoe than Cuvier assigns to the other species of Pterodac-tiles; in this respect it is so far from violating the analogies230 FLYING Syrians.tion of the shortest joints in the middle of thetoes of Lizards, is to give greater power offlexion for bending round, and laying fast holdon twigs and branches of trees of various dimensions,or on inequalities of the surface ofthe ground or rocks, in the act of climbing, orrunning.*All these coincidences of number and proportion,can only have originated in a premeditatedadaptation of each part to its peculiaroffice ; they teach us to arrange anextinct animal under an existing family of reptiles; and when we find so many other peculiaritiesof this tribe in almost every bone of theskeleton of the Pterodactyle, with such modifications,and such only as were necessary to fitit for the purposes of flight, we perceive unityof design pervading every part, and adapting tomotion in the air, organs which in other generawe are considering, that it adds another approximation to thecharacter of the living Lizards ; we have seen that it alsodiffers from the other Pterodactyles, in having the fifth, insteadof the fourth finger elongated, to become the expanse of thewing.It is however probable that the fifth toe had only threejoints, for the same reasons that are assigned respecting thenumber of joints in the fifth finger. In the P. Longirostris,Cuvier considers the small bone, (PI. 21, 5, 6,) to be a rudimentaryform of the fifth toe.A similar numerical disposition prevails also in the toes ofbirds, attended by similar advantages.PTERODACTYLE. 231are calculated for progression on the ground, orinthe water.If we compare the foot of the Pterodactylewith that of the Bat, (see PL 22, k,) we shallfind that the Bat, like most other mammalia,has three joints in every toe, excepting the first,which has only two ; still these two, in the Bat,are equal in length to the three bones of theother toes, so that the five claws of its foot rangein one strait line, forming altogether the compoundhook, by which the animal suspends itselfin caves, with its head downwards, during itslong periods of liberation ; the weight of itsbody being, by this contrivance, equally dividedbetween each of the ten toes. The unequallength of the toes of the Pterodactyle must haverendered it almost impossible for its claws torange uniformly in line, like those of the Bat,and as no single claw could have supported foralong time the weight of the whole body, wemay infer that the Pterodactyles did not suspendthemselves after the manner of the Bats. Thesize and form of the foot, and also of the legand thigh, show that they had the power ofstanding firmly on the ground, where, withtheir wings folded, they possibly moved afterthe manner of birds ; they could also perchon trees, and climb on rocks and cliffs, withtheir hind and fore feet conjointly, like Batsand Lizards.232 FLYING SAURIAMS.With regard to their food, it has been conjecturedby Cuvier, that they fed on insects, andfrom the magnitude of their eyes that they mayalso have been noctivagous. The presence oflarge fossil Libelling, or Dragon-flies, andmany other insects, in the same lithographicquarries with the Pterodactyles at Solenhofen,and of the wings of coleopterous insects, mixedwith bones of Pterodactyles, in the oolitic slateof Stonesfield, near Oxford, proves that largeinsects existed at the same time with them, andmay have contributed to their supply of food.We know that many of the smaller Lizards ofexisting species are insectivorous ; some are alsocarnivorous, and others omnivorous, but thehead and teeth of two species of Pterodactyle,are so much larger and stronger than is necessaryfor the capture of insects, that thelarger species of them may possibly have fed onfishes, darting upon them from the air after themanner of Sea Swallows and Solan Geese.The enormous size and strength of the head andteeth of the P. Crassirostris, would not onlyhave enabled it to catch fish, but also to killand devour the few small marsupial mammaliawhich then existed upon the land.The entire range of ancient anatomy, affordsfew more striking examples of the uniformity ofthe laws, which connect the extinct animals ofthe fossil creation with existing organized beings,PTERODACTYLE. 233than those we have been examining in the caseof the Pterodactyle. We find the details ctfparts which, from their minuteness shouldseem insignificant, acquiring great importancein such an investigation as we are now conducting; they shew not less distinctly, than the colossallimbs of the most gigantic quadrupeds, anumerical coincidence, and a concurrence ofproportions, which it seems impossible to referto the effect of accident ; and which pointout unity of purpose, and deliberate design, insome intelligent First Cause, from which theywere all derived. We have seen that whilst allthe laws of existing organization in the order ofLizards, are rigidly maintained in the Pterodac-tiles; still, as Lizards modified to move likebirds and Bats in the air, they received, ineach part of their frame, a perfect adaptation totheir state. We have dwelt more at length onthe minutiae of their mechanism, because theyconvey us back into ages so exceedingly remote,and show that even in those distant eras, thesame care of a common Creator, which we witnessin the mechanism of our own bodies, andthose of the myriads of inferior creatures thatmove around us, was extended to the structure ofcreatures, that at first sight seem made up onlyof monstrosities.234 GIGANTIC TERRESTRIAL Syrians.SECTION IX.MEGALOSAURUS.*The Megalosaurus, as its name implies, was aLizard, of great size, of which, although noskeleton has yet been found entire, so manyperfect bones and teeth have been discoveredin the same quarries, that we are nearly as wellacquainted with the form and dimensions ofits limbs, as if they had been found togetherin a single block of stone.*From the size and proportions of these bones,as compared with existing Lizards, Cuvierconcludes the Megalosaurus to have been anenormous reptile, measuring from forty to fiftyfeet in length, and partaking of the structure ofthe Crocodile and the Monitor.This genus was established by the Author, in a Memoir,published in the Geol. Trans, of London, (Vol. I., N. S. Pt. 2,1824), and was founded upon specimens discovered in theoolitic slate of Stonesfield, near Oxford, the place in whichthese bones have as yet chiefly occurred. Mr. Mantelll hasdiscovered remains of the same animal in the Wealden fresh-waterformation of Tilgate Forest ; and from this circumstance we inferthat it existed during the deposition of the entire series of ooliticstrata. The author, in 1826, saw fragments of a jaw, containingteeth, and of some other bones of Megalosaurus, in the museumat Beacon, from the oolite of that neighbourhood.MEGALOSAURUS. 235As the femur and tibia measure nearly threefeet each, the entire hind leg must have attaineda length of nearly two yards : a metatarsalbone, thirteen inches long, indicates a correspondinglength in the foot.* The bones ofthe thigh and leg are not solid at the centre,as in Crocodiles, and other aquatic quadrupeds,but have large medullary cavities, like thebones of terrestrial animals. We learn fromthis circumstance, added to the character ofthe foot, that the Megalosaurus lived chieflyupon the land.In the internal condition of these fossil bones,we see the same adaptation of the skeleton toits proper element, which now distinguishes thebones of terrestrial, from those of aquatic SaulIn the Ichthyosauri and Plesiosauri,whose paddles were calculated exclusively tomove in water, even the largest bones of thearms and legs were solid throughout. Theirweight would in no way have embarrassed theiraction in the fluid medium they inhabited ; but inthe huge Megalosaurus, and still more giganticIguanodon, which are shown by the character oftheir feet to have been fitted to move on land,the larger bones of the legs were diminishedSee Geol. Trans. 2nd series, Vol. 3, p. 427, PI. 41.f I learn from Mr. Owen that the long bones of land Tortoiseshave a close cancellous internal structure, but not a medullarycavity.236 GIGANTIC TERRESTRIAL Syrians.in weight, by being internally hollow, and havingtheir cavities filled with the light material ofmarrow, while their cylindrical form tended alsoto combine this lightness with strength.*The form of the teeth shews the Megalo-The medullary cavities in the fossil bones of Megalosaurus,from Stonesfield, are usually filled with calcareous spar. In theOxford Museum there is a specimen from the Wealden freshwaterformation at Langton, near Tunbridge Wells, which isperhaps unique amongst organic remains : it presents the curiousfact of a perfect cast of the interior of a large bone, apparentlythe femur of a Megalosaurus, exhibiting the exact formand ramifications of the marrow, whilst the bone itself hasentirely perished. The substance of this cast is fine sand,cemented by oxide of iron, and its form distinctly representsall the minute gesticulations, with which the marrow filled theintercolumniations of the cancelli, near the extremity of thebone. It exhibits also casts of the perforations along theinternal parietes, whereby the vessels entered obliquely fromthe exterior of the bone, to communicate with the marrow.A mould of the exterior of the same bone has been also formedby the sandstone in which it was imbedded : hence, although thebone itself has perished, we have precise representations both ofits external form and internal cavities, and a model of the marrowthat filled this femur, nearly as perfect as could be made bypouring wax into an empty marrow-bone, and corroding awaythe bone with acid. The sand which formed this cast must haveentered the medullary cavity by a fracture across the other extremityof the bone, which was wanting in the specimen.From this natural preparation of ancient anatomy we learnthat the disposition of marrow, and its connection with the reticulatedextremities of the interior of the femur, were the same inthese gigantic Lizards of a former world, as in medullary cavitiesof existing species.MEGALOSAURUS. 237taurus to have been in a high degree carnivorous: it probably fed on smaller reptiles,such as Crocodiles and Tortoises, whose remainsabound in the same strata with its bones.It may also have taken to the water in pursuit ofPlesiosauri and fishes.*The most important part of the Megalosaurusyet found, consists of a fragment of thelower jaw, containing many teeth, (PI. 23,Figs, r — 2). The form of this jaw shows thatthe head was terminated by a straight andnarrow snout, compressed laterally like that ofthe Delphinus Gangeticus.As in all animals, the jaws and teeth formthe most characteristic parts, I shall limit mypresent observations to a few striking circumstancesin the dentition of the Megalosaurus.From these we learn that the animal was areptile, closely allied to some of our modernLizards ; and viewing the teeth as instrumentsfor providing food to a carnivorous creature ofenormous magnitude, they appear to have beenadmirably adapted to the destructive office forwhich they were designed. Their form andMr. Broderip informs me that a living Iguana (I. Tubercular),in the gardens of the Zoological Society of London, in thesummer of ] 834, was observed frequently to enter the water, andswim across a small pond, using its long tail as the instrument ofprogression, and keeping its fore feet motionless,238 GIGANTIC TERRESTRIAL Syrians.mechanism will best be explained by referenceto the figures in PI. 23.*In the structure of these teeth, (PL 23,Figs. 1, 2, 3), we find a combination ofmechanical contrivances analogous to thosewhich are adopted in the construction of theknife, the sabre, and the saw. When first protrudedabove the gum, (PL 23, Figs. 1'. 2.) theapex of each tooth presented a double cuttingedge of serrated enamel. In this stage, itsposition and line of action were nearly vertical,and its form like that of the two-edged pointof a sabre, cutting equally on each side. Asthe tooth advanced in growth, it became curvedThe outer margin of the jaw (PI. 23, Fig. 1'. 2'.) risesnearly an inch above its inner margin, forming a continuous lateralparapet to support the teeth on the exterior side, where thegreatest support was necessary; whilst the inner margin (PI. 23,Fig. 1') throws up a series of triangular plates of bone, forminga zig-zag buttress along the interior of the alveoli. From thecentre of each triangular plate, a bony partition crosses to theouter parapet, thus completing the successive alveoli. The newteeth are seen in the angle between each triangular plate, risingin reserve to supply the loss of the older teeth, as often as progressivegrowth, or accidental fracture, may render such renewalnecessary ; and thus affording an exuberant provision for a rapidsuccession and restoration of these most essential implements.They were formed in distinct cavities, by the side of the old teeth,towards the interior surface of the jaw, and probably expelledthem by the usual process of pressure and absorption ; insinuatingthemselves into the cavities thus left vacant. This contrivancefor the renewal of teeth is strictly analogous to that whichtakes place in the dentition of many species of existing Lizards.MEGALOSAURUS. 239backwards, in the form of a pruning knife,(PI. 23, Figs. 1. 2. 3.), and the edge of serratedenamel was continued downwards to the base ofthe inner and cutting side of the tooth, (Fig. 1,B. D.), whilst, on the outer side, a similaredge descended, but to a short distance from thepoint (Fig. 1, B. to C), and the convex portionof the tooth (A.) became blunt and thick, as theback of a knife is made thick, for the purposeof producing strength. The strength of thetooth was further increased by the expansionof its sides, (as represented in the transversesection, Fig. 4, A. D). Had the serraturecontinued along the whole of the blunt andconvex portion of the tooth, it would, in thisposition, have possessed no useful cutting power;it ceased precisely at the point (C), beyondwhich it could no longer be effective. In atooth thus formed for cutting along its concaveedge, each movement of the jaw combined thepower of the knife and saw ; whilst the apex,in making the first incision, acted like the two-edgedpoint of a sabre. The backward curvatureof the full-grown teeth, enabled them toretain, like barbs, the prey which they hadpenetrated. In these adaptations, we see contrivances,which human ingenuity has alsoadopted, in the preparation of various instrumentsof art.In a former chapter (Ch. XIII.) I endearsGIGANTIC TERRESTRIAL Syrians.poured to show that the establishment of carnivorousraces throughout the animal kingdomtends materially to diminish the aggregateamount of animal suffering. The provision ofteeth and jaws, adapted to effect the work ofdeath most speedily, is highly subsidiary to theaccomplishment of this desirable end. We actourselves on this conviction, under the impulseof pure humanity, when we provide the mostefficient instruments to produce the instantaneous,and most easy death, of the innumerableanimals that are daily slaughtered for the supplyof human food.SECTION X.IGUANODON.*As the reptiles hitherto considered appear fromtheir teeth to have been carnivorous, so we findextinct species of the same great family, thatassumed the character and office of herbivora.For our knowledge of this genus, we are indebtedto the scientific researches of Mr. Man-tell.This indefatigable historian of the Wealdenfresh-water formation, has not only foundSee PI. 1, Fig. 45, and PI. 24; and Mantelll's Geology ofSussex, and of the South-east of England.IGUANODON. HYL/EOSAURUS. 241the remains of the Plesiosaurus, Megalosaurus,Hylaeosaurus,* and several species of Crocodilesand Tortoises in these deposits, of aperiod intermediate between the oolitic andcretaceous series, but has also discovered inTilgate Forest the remains of the Iguanodon,a reptile much more gigantic than the Megalosaurus,and which, from the character of itsteeth, appears to have been herbivorous.! Theteeth of the Iguanodon are so precisely similar,in the principles of their construction, to theteeth of the modern Iguana, as to leave noThe Hylaeosaurus, or Lizard of the Weald, was discoveredin Tilgate Forest, in Sussex, in 1832. This extraordinary Lizardwas probably about twenty-five feet long. Its most peculiar characterconsists in the remains of a series of long, flat, and pointedbones, which seems to have formed an enormous dermal fringe,like the horny spines on the back of the modern Iguana. Thesebones vary in length from five to seventeen inches, and in widthfrom three to seven inches and a half at the base. Togetherwith them were found the remains of large dermal bones, or thickscales, which were probably lodged in the skin.f The Iguanodon has hitherto been found only, with one exception,in the Wealden fresh-water formation of the south ofEngland, (PI. 1, sec. 22.), intermediate between the marineoolitic deposits of the Portland stone and those of the greensandformation in the cretaceous series. The discovery, in1834, (Phil. Mag. July 1834, p. 77), of a large proportionof the skeleton of one of these animals, in strata of thelatter formation, in the quarries of Kentish Rag, near Maidstone,shews that the duration of this animal did not cease withthe completion of the Wealden series. The individual fromwhich this skeleton was derived had probably been drifted to sea,as those which afforded the bones found in the fresh-water depot,R242 GIGANTIC TERRESTRIAL Syrians.doubt of the near connection of this most giganticextinct reptile with the Iguanas of ourown time. When we consider that the largestliving Iguana rarely exceeds five feet in length,whilst the congenerous fossil animal must havebeen nearly twelve times as long, we cannotbut be impressed by the discovery of a resemblance,amounting almost to identity, betweensuch characteristic organs as the teeth, in oneof the most enormous among the extinct reptilesof the fossil world, and those of a genus whoselargest species is comparatively so diminutive.According to Cuvier, the common Iguana inhabitsall the warm regions of America : itlives chiefly upon trees, eating fruits, and seeds,and leaves. The female occasionally visits thewater, for the purpose of laying in the sandits eggs, which are about the size of those of apigeon.*sits subjacent to this marine formation, had been drifted into anestuary. This unique skeleton is now in the museum of Mr.Mantelll, and confirms nearly all his conjectures respectingthe many insulated bones which he had referred to the Iguanodon.In the Appendix to a paper in the Geol. Trans. Lond. (N. S.Vol. III. Pt. 3) on the fossil bones of the Iguanoclon, found inthe Isle of Wight and Isle of Purbeck, I have mentioned thefollowing facts, illustrative of the herbivorous habits of the livingIguana.In the spring of 1829, " Mr. W. J. Broderip saw a livingIguana, about two feet long, in a hothouse at Mr. Miller's nurserygardens, near Bristol. It had refused to eat insects, andIGUANODON. 243As the modern Iguana is found only in thewarmest regions of the present earth, we mayreasonably infer that a similar, if not a stillwarmer climate, prevailed at the time when sohuge a Lizard as the Iguanodon inhabited whatare now the temperate regions of the southerncoasts of England. We know from the fragmentof a femur, in the collection of Mr.Mantelll, that the thigh-bone of this reptilemuch exceeded in bulk that of the largestElephant : this fragment presents a circumferenceof twenty-two inches in its smallest part,and the entire length must have been betweenfour and five feet. Comparing the proportions ofthis monstrous bone with those of the fossil teethwith which it is associated, it appears that theybear to one another nearly the same ratio thatthe femur of the Iguana bears to the similarlyconstructed and peculiar teeth of that animal.*other kinds of animal food, until happening" to be near somekidney-bean plants that were in the house for forcing, it beganto eat of their leaves, and was from that time forth supplied fromthese plants." In 1828, Captain Beecher found, in the island ofIsabella, swarms of Iguanas, that appeared omnivorous ; theyfed voraciously on the eggs of birds, and the intestines of fowlsand insects.From a careful comparison of the bones of the Iguanodonwith those of the Iguana, made by taking an average from theproportions of different bones from eight separate parts of therespective skeletons, Mr. Mantelll has arrived at these dimensionsas being the proportionate measures of the following parts of thisextraordinary reptile :244 GIGANTIC TERRESTRIAL Syrians.It has been stated, in the preceding section,that the large medullary cavities in the femurof the Iguanodon, and the form of the bones ofthe feet, show that this animal, like the Megalosaurus,was constructed to move on land.A further analogy between the extinct fossiland the recent Iguana is offered by the presencein both of a horn of bone upon the nose, (PL 24,Fig. 14). The concurrence of peculiarities soremarkable as the union of this nasal horn witha mode of dentition of which there is no example,except in the Iguanas, affords one ofthe many proofs of the universality of the lawsof co-existence, which prevailed no less constantlythroughout the extinct genera and speciesof the fossil world, than they do among theliving members of the animal kingdom.Feet.Length from snout to the extremity of the tail. . 70Length of tail 52|Circumference of body 14|Mr. Mantelll calculates the femur of the Iguanodon to be twentytimes the size of that of a modern Iguana ; but as animals donot increase in length in the same ratio as in bulk, it does notfollow that the Iguanodon attained the enormous length of onehundred feet, although it approached perhaps nearly to seventyfeet.As the Iguanodon, from its enormous bulk, must have beenunable to mount on trees, it could not have applied its tail to thesame purpose as the Iguana, to assist in climbing ; and the longitudinaldiameter of its caudal vertebrae is much less in proportionthan in the Iguana, and shews the entire tail to have beencomparatively shorter.IGUANODON. 245Teeth.As the teeth are the most characteristic andimportant parts of the animal, I shall endeavourto extract from them evidence of design, bothin their construction and mode of renewal, andalso in their adaptation to the office of consumingvegetables, in a manner peculiar to themselves.They are not lodged in distinct sockets,like the teeth of Crocodiles, but fixed, as inLizards, along the internal face of the dentalbone, to which they adhere by one side of thebony substance of their root. (PI. 24, Fig. 13.)The teeth of most herbivorous quadrupeds,(exclusively of the defensive tusks), are dividedinto two classes of distinct office, viz. incisorsand molars ; the former destined to collect andsever vegetable substances from the ground, orfrom the parent plant ; the latter to grind andmasticate them on their way towards the stomach.The living Iguanas, which are ingreat part herbivorous, afford a striking exceptionto this economy : as their teeth are littlefitted for grinding, they transmit their food veryslightly comminuted into the stomach.Our giant Iguanodon, also, had teeth resemblingthose of the Iguana, and of so herbivorous acharacter, that at first sight they were supposedby Cuvier to be the teeth of a Rhinoceros."240 GIGANTIC TERRESTRIAL Syrians.The examination of these teeth will lead us tothe discovery of remarkable contrivances, adaptingthem to the function of cropping tough vegetablefood, such as the Contraria, and similarplants, which are found buried with the Iguanodon,might have afforded. We know the formand power of iron pincers to gripe and tearnails from their lodgment in wood : a still morepowerful kind of pincers, or nippers, is constructedfor the purpose of cutting wire, whichyields to them nearly as readily as thread to apair of scissors. Our figures (PI. 24, Figs. 6,7, 8, 12) show the place of the cutting edges,and form of curvature, and points of enlargementand contraction, in the teeth of the Iguanodon,to be nearly the same as in the correspondingparts of these powerful metallic tools ; and themechanical advantages of such teeth, as instrumentsfor tearing and cutting, must havebeen similar.*The teeth exhibit also two kinds of provisionsto maintain sharp edges along the cuttingsurface, from their first protrusion, until theywere worn down to the very stump. The firstFig. 2. represents the front of a young tooth; and Figs. 5,6, 7, 8, the front of four other teeth, thrown slightly into profile.In all of these we recognise a near approach to the form of thenipping pincers, with a sharp cutting edge at the upper margin ofthe enamel. The enamel is here expressed by wavy lines, whichrepresent its actual structure : it is placed only in front, like theenamel in front of the incisors of Rodentia.IGUANODON. 247of these is a sharp and serrated edge, extendingon each side downwards, from the point to thebroadest portion of the body of the tooth. (SeeFigs. 1, 2, 6, 8, 12, &c.)The second provision is one of compensationfor the gradual destruction of this serrated edge,by substituting a plate of thin enamel, tomaintain a cutting power in the anterior portionof the tooth, until its entire substance was consumedin service.*Whilst the crown of the tooth was thus graduallydiminishing above, a simultaneous absorptionof the root went on below, caused bythe pressure of a new tooth rising to replace theold one, until by this continual consumption atboth extremities, the middle portion of the oldertooth was reduced to a hollow stump, (Figs. 10,11), which fell from the jaw to make room for aThis perpetual edge resulted from the enamel being placedonly on the front of the tooth, like that on the incisors of Rodentia.As the softer material of the tooth itself must have wornaway more readily than this enamel, and most readily at the partremotest from it, an oblique section of the crown was thus perpetuallymaintained, with a sharp cutting edge in front, like that ofthe nippers. (See Figs. 7. 8. 12.)The younger tooth, (Fig. 1), when first protruded, was lancet-shaped,with a serrated edge, extending on each side downwards,from the point to its broadest portion, as in the living Iguana.(PI. 24./. 13, and Fig. 4.) This serrature ceased at the broadestdiameter of the tooth, i. e. precisely at the line, below which, hadthey been continued, they would have had no effect in cutting.(PI. 24. /. 2. 6. 8. 9. 12.) As these saws were gradually wornaway, the cutting power was transferred to the enamel in front,248 GIGANTIC TERRESTRIAL Syrians.more efficient successor.* In this last stage theform of the tooth had entirely changed, and thecrown had become flat, like the crown of worn-outhuman incisors, and capable of performingimperfect mastication after the cutting powershad diminished. There is, I believe, no otherexample of teeth which possess the same mechanicaladvantages as instruments of cuttingand tearing portions of vegetable matter fromtough and rigid plants. In this curious pieceof animal mechanism, we find a varied adjustmentof all parts and proportions of the tooth,to the exercise of peculiar functions ; attendedby compensations adapted to shifting conditionsof the instrument, during different stages of itsand here we find a provision of another kind to give efficacy andstrength. The front was traversed longitudinally by alternateridges and furrows, (PI. 24, Figs. 2, 5, 6, 7, 8), the ridgesserving as ribs or buttresses to strengthen and prevent theenamel from scaling off, and forming, together with the furrows,an edge slightly wavy, and disposed in a series of minute gorges,or fluted chisels ; hence the tooth became an instrument of greaterpower to cut tough vegetables under the action of the jaw, thanif the enamel had been in a continuous straight line. By thesecontrivances, also it continued effective during every stagethrough which it passed, from the serrated lancet-point of thenew tooth, (Fig. 1), to its final consumption. (Fig. 10, 11.)In PI. 24, Fig. 13, the jaw of a recent Iguana exhibits thecommencement of this process, and a number of young teeth areseen forcing their way upwards, and causing absorption at thebase of the older teeth. Figs. 10, 11, exhibit the effect of similarabsorption upon the residuary stump of the fossil tooth of anIguanodon.1GUANODON. 249consumption. And we must estimate the worksof nature by a different standard from that whichwe apply to the productions of human art, ifwe can view such examples of mechanical contrivance,united with so much economy of expenditure,and with such anticipated adaptationsto varying conditions in their application, withoutfeeling a profound conviction that all thisadjustment has resulted from design and highintelligence.SECTION XI.AMPHIBIOUS Syrians ALLIED TO CROCODILES.The fossil reptiles of the Crocodilean family donot deviate sufficiently from living genera, torequire any description of peculiar and discontinuedcontrivances, like those we have seen inthe Ichthyosaurus, Plesiosaurus, and Pterodac-style ; but their occurrence in a fossil state is ofhigh importance, as it shows that whilst manyforms of vertebrated animals have one after anotherbeen created, and become extinct, duringthe successive geological changes of the surfaceof our globe ; there are others which have AMPHIBIOUS Syrians.lived all these changes and revolutions, and stillretain the leading features under which they firstappeared upon our planet.If we look to the state of the earth, and thecharacter of its population, at the time whenCrocodilean forms were first added to the numberof its inhabitants, we find that the highestclass of living beings were reptiles, and thatthe only other vertebrated animals which thenexisted were fishes ; the carnivorous reptiles atthis early period must therefore have fed chieflyupon them, and if in the existing family ofCrocodiles there be any, that are in a peculiardegree piscivorous, their form is that we shouldexpect to find in those most ancient fossil genera,whose chief supply of food must have been derivedfrom fishes.In the living sub-genera of the Crocodileanfamily, we see the elongated and slender beakof the Gavial of the Ganges, constructed to feedon fishes ; whilst the shorter and stronger snoutof the broad-nosed Crocodiles and Alligatorsgives them the power of seizing and devouringquadrupeds, that come to the banks of riversin hot countries to drink. As there were scarcelyany mammalia* during the secondary periods,whilst the waters were abundantly stored withThe small Opossums in the oolite formation at Stonesfield,near Oxford, are the only land mammalia whose bones havebeen yet discovered in any strata more ancient than the tertiary.Crocodiles. 251fishes, we might, a priori, expect that if anyCrocodilean forms had then existed they wouldmost nearly have resembled the modern Gavial.And we have hitherto found only those generawhich have elongated beaks, in formations anteriorto, and including the chalk ; whilst trueCrocodiles, with a short and broad snout, likethat of the Cayman and the Alligator, appearfor the first time in strata of the tertiary periods,in which the remains of mammalia abound. *During these grand periods of lacustrinemammalia, in which but few of the presentgenera of terrestrial carnivora had been calledinto existence, the important office of controllingthe excessive increase of the aquatic herbivoraappears to have been consigned to the Crocodiles,whose habits fitted them, in a peculiardegree, for such a service. Thus, the past historyof the Crocodilean tribe presents anotherexample of the well regulated workings of aOne of these, found by Mr. Spencer in the London clay ofthe Isle of Sheppy, is engraved, PI. 25', Fig 1. Crocodiles ofthis kind have been found in the chalk of Merton, in theplastic clay of Auteurs, in the London clay, in the gypsum ofMont Martre, and in the lignites of Provence.The modern broad-nosed Crocodiles, though they have thepower to capture mammalia, are not limited to this kind of prey ;they feed largely also on fishes, and occasionally on birds. Thisomnivorous character of the existing Crocodilean family, seemsadapted to the present general diffusion of more varied kinds offood, than existed when the only form of the beak in this familywas fitted, like that of the Gavial, to feed chiefly on Fishes.252 AMPHIBIOUS Syrians.consistent plan in the economy of animatednature, under which each individual, whilstfollowing its own instinct, and pursuing itsown good, is instrumental in promoting thegeneral welfare of the whole family of its contemporaries.Cuvier observes, that the presence of Crocodileananreptiles, which are usually inhabitants offresh water, in various beds, loaded with theremains of other reptiles and shells that aredecidedly marine, and the further fact of theirbeing, in many cases, accompanied by freshwaterTortoises, shows that there must haveexisted dry land, watered by rivers, in the earlyperiods when these strata were deposited, andlong before the formation of the lacustrine tertiarystrata of the neighbourhood of Paris.*The living species of the Crocodile family aretwelve in number, namely, one Gavial, eighttrue Crocodiles, and three Alligators. There arealso many fossil species : no less than six ofthese have been made out by Cuvier, and severalM. Geoffrey St. Hilaire has arranged the fossil Saurianswith long and narrow beaks, like that of the Gavial, under thetwo new genera, Thesaurus and Steneosaurus. In the Thesaurus,(PI. 25', Fig. 2.) the nostrils form almost a verticalsection of the anterior extremity of the beak ; in the Stentor(PI. 25', Fig. 3.) this anterior termination of the nasalcanal had nearly the same arrangement as in the Gavial, openingupwards, and being almost semi-circular on each side. — Recherchessur les grands Sapiens, 1831.Crocodiles. 253others, from the secondary and tertiary formationsin England remain to be described.*It would be foreign to our present purpose, toenter into a minute comparison of the osteologyof living and fossil genera and species of thisfamily. We may simply observe, with respectto their similar manner of dentition, that theyall present the same examples of provision forextraordinary expenditure of teeth, by an unusuallyabundant store of these most essentialorgans, t As Crocodiles increase to no lessthan four hundred times their original bulk,One of the finest specimens of fossil Teleosauri yet discovered,(see PI. 25, Fig. 1), was found in the year 1824, in thealum shale of the lias formation at Saltwick, near Whitby, andis engraved in Young and Bird's Geological Survey of the YorkshireCoast, 2d Ed. 1828 : its entire length is about eighteen feet,the breadth of the head twelve inches, the snout was long andslender, as in the Gavial, the teeth, one hundred and forty innumber, are all small and slender, and placed in nearly a straightline. The heads of two other individuals of the same species,found near Whitby, are represented in the same plate, Figs. 2. 3.Some of the ungual phalanges, which are preserved on the hindfeet of this animal, Fig. 1, show that these extremities were terminatedby long and sharp claws, adapted for motion upon land,from which we may infer that the animal was not exclusivelymarine; from the nature of the shells with which they are associated,in the lias and oolite formations, it is probable that boththe Steneosaurus and Thesaurus frequented shallow seas. Mr.Lyell states that the larger Alligator of the Ganges sometimesdescends beyond the brackish water of the delta into the sea.•f This mode of dentition has been already exemplified inspeaking of the dentition of the Ichthyosaurus, P. 172, andPI. 11. A.'2-54 AMPHIBIOUS Syrians.between the period at which they leave the eggand their full maturity, they are provided witha more frequent succession of teeth than themammalia, in order to maintain a duly proportionedsupply during every period of their life.As the predaceous habits of these animals causetheir teeth, placed in so long a jaw, to be peculiarlyliable to destruction, the same provisionserves also to renew the losses which mustoften be occasioned by accidental fracture.The existence of these remedial forces, thusuniformly adapted to supply anticipated wants,and to repair foreseen injuries, affords an exampleof those supplementary contrivances,which give double strength to the argumentfrom design, in proof of the agency of Intelligence,in the construction and renovation ofthe animal machinery wherein such contrivancesare introduced.The discovery of Crocodilean forms so nearlyallied to the living Gavial, in the same earlystrata that contains the first traces of the Ichthyosaurusand the Plesiosaurus, is a fact whichseems wholly at variance with every theory thatwould derive the race of Crocodiles from Ichthy-osauri and Plesiosauri, by any process of gradualtransmutation or development. The first appearanceof all these three families of reptilesseems to have been nearly simultaneous ; andthey all continued to exist together until the ter-fossilTESTUDINATA. 255mention of the secondary formations ; when theIchthyosauri and Plesiosauri became extinct,and forms of Crocodiles, approaching to theCayman and the Alligator, were for the firsttime introduced.SECTION XII.FOSSIL TORTOISES, OR TESTUDINATA.Among the existing animal population of thewarmer regions of the earth, there is an extensiveorder of reptiles, comprehended by Cuvierunder the name of Caledonians, or Tortoises.These are subdivided into four distinct families ;one inhabiting salt water, two others fresh waterlakes and rivers, and a fourth living entirelyupon the land. One of the most striking charactersof this Order consists in the provisionthat is made for the defence of creatures, whosemovements are usually slow and torpid, by inclosingthe body within a double shield or cuirass,formed by the expansion of the vertebra?,ribs and sternum, into a broad bony case.The small European Tortoise, Testudo Graeca,and the eatable Turtle, Chelonia Midas, arefamiliar examples of this peculiar arrangementboth in terrestrial and aquatic reptiles ; in each256 FOSSIL TESTUDINATA.case the shield affords compensation for thewant of rapidity of motion to animals that haveno ready means of escape by flight or concealmentfrom their enemies. We learn from Geologythat this Order began to exist nearly at thesame time with the Order of Saurians, and hascontinued extensively with them through thesecondary and tertiary formations, unto the presenttime : their fossil remains present also thesame threefold divisions that exist among modernTestudinata, into groups respectively adaptedto live in salt and fresh water, and upon theland.Animals of this Order have yet been foundonly in strata more recent than the carboniferousseries.* The earliest example recorded by Cuvier,(Oss. Foss. Vol. 5, Pt. 2, p. 525), is that of avery large species of Sea Turtle, the shell ofwhich was eight feet long, occurring in the at Luneville. Another marine specieshas been found at Glaris, in slate referable tothe lower cretaceous formation. A third occursin the upper cretaceous freestone at Maestricht.All these are associated with the remains of otheranimals that are marine ; and though they differboth from living Turtles and from one another,they still exhibit such general accordance inThe fragment from the Caithness slate, engraved in the Geol.Trans. Lond. V. iii. PL 16, Fig. 6, as portions of a trionyx, ispronounced by M. Agassiz to be part of a fish.TRIONYX Ems. 257the principles of their construction, with theconditions by which existing Turtles are fittedfor their marine abode, that Cuvier was at onceenabled to pronounce these fossil species to havebeen indubitably inhabitants of the sea.*The genera Trionyx and Emys, present theirfossil species in the Wealden freshwater formationsof the Secondary series ; and still moreabundantly in the Tertiary lacustrine deposits ;all these appear to have lived and died, undercircumstances analogous to those which attendtheir cognate species in the lakes and rivers ofthe present tropics. They have also been foundPlate 25', Fig. 4, represents a Turtle from the slate ofGlaris : it is shewn to have been marine by the unequal elongationof the toes in the anterior paddle ; because, in freshwaterTortoises, all the toes are nearly equal, and of moderate length ;and in land Tortoises, they are also nearly equal, and short ; butinall marine species they are very long, and the central toe ofthe anterior paddle, is by much the longest of all. The accordancewith this latter condition in the specimen before us, is atonce apparent ; and both in this respect and in general structure,it approaches very nearly to living genera. This figure is copiedfrom Vol. 5, Pt. 2, Tab. 14,/. 4, of the Oss. Foss. of Cuvier.M. Agassiz has favoured me with the following details respectingimportant parts which are imperfectly represented in the drawingfrom which Cuvier's engraving was taken. " The ribs showevidently that it is nearly connected with the genera Cheloniaand Sphargis, but referable to no known species ; the fingers ofthe left fore paddle are five in number ; the two exterior are theshortest, and have each three articulations ; and the three internalfingers, of which the middle one is the longest, haveeach four articulations, as in the existing genera, Chelonia andSphargis.G. S258 FOSSIL TESTUDINATA.in marine deposits, where their admixture withthe remains of Crocodilean animals shows thatthey were probably drifted, together with them,into the sea, from land, at no great distance.*In the close approximation of the genericcharacters of these fossil Testudinata, of variousand ancient geological epochs, to those of thepresent day, we have a striking example of theunity of design which has pervaded the constructionof animals, from the most distantperiods in which these forms of organized beingswere also called into existence. As the paddleof the Turtle has at all times been adapted tomove in the waves of the sea, so have the feet ofthe Trionyx and Emys ever been constructedfor a more quiescent life in freshwater, whilstthose of the Tortoise have been no less uniformlyfitted to creep and burrow upon land.The remains of land Tortoises have been morerarely observed in a fossil state. Cuvier mentionsbut two examples, and these in very recentformations at Aix, and in the Isle of France.Scotland has recently afforded evidence of theexistence of more than one species of these ter-thustwo large extinct species of Emys occur, together withmarine shells, in the jura limestone at Soleure. The Emys alsoand Crocodiles, are found in the marine deposits of the Londonclay at Sheppy and Harwich ; and the former is associated withmarine exuviae at Brussels. Very perfect impressions of smallhorny scales of Testudinata, occur in the Oolite slate of Stones-field,near Oxford.LAND TORTOISES. 259restrict reptiles, during the period of the Newred, or Variegated sandstone formation. (SeePL 1, Sec. 17). The nature of this evidenceis almost unique in the history of organicremains.*It is not uncommon to find on the surface ofsandstone, tracks which mark the passage ofsmall Crustacea and other marine animals, whilstSee Dr. Duncan's account of tracks and footmarks of animals,impressed on sandstone in the quarry of Corn Cockle Muir,Dumfries-shire, Trans. Royal Society of Edinburgh, 1828.Dr. Duncan states that the strata which bear these impressionslie on each other like volumes on the shelf of a library, whenall inclining to one side : that the quarry has been worked to thedepth of forty-five feet from the top of the rock ; throughout thewhole of this depth similar impressions have been found, not ona single stratum only, but on many successive strata ; i. e. afterremoving a large slab which contained foot-prints, they foundperhaps the very next stratum at the distance of a few feet, or itmight be less than an inch, exhibiting a similar phenomenon.Hence it follows that the process by which the impressions weremade on the sand, and subsequently buried, was repeated atsuccessive intervals.I learn, by a letter from Dr. Duncan, dated October, 1834,that similar impressions, attended by nearly the same circumstances,have recently been discovered about ten miles south ofCorn Cockle Muir, in the Red sandstone quarries of Crags, twomiles east of the town of Dumfries. The inclination of thestrata of this place is about 45° Sew. like that of almost all thesandstone strata of the neighbourhood. One of these tracksextended from twenty to thirty feet in length : in this place also,as at Corn Cockle Muir, no bones of any kind have yet beendiscovered.Sir William Jardine has informed Dr. Duncan that tracks ofanimals have been found also in other quarries near Corn CockleMuir.260 RIPPLED MARKINGS.this stone was in a state of loose sand at thebottom of the sea. Laminated sandstones arealso often disposed in minute undulations, resemblingthose formed by the ripple of agitatedwater upon sand.*The same causes, which have so commonlypreserved these undulations, would equally preserveany impressions that might happen tohave been made on beds of sand, by the feetof animals ; the only essential condition of suchpreservation being, that they should have becomecovered with a further deposit of earthymatter, before they were obliterated by any succeedingagitations of the water.The nature of the impressions in Dumfries1831, Mr. G. P. Scope, after visiting the quarries ofDumfries, found rippled markings, and abundant foot tracks ofsmall animals on the Forest marble beds north of Bath. Thesewere probably tracks of Crustacea. — See Phil. Mag. May, 1831,p. 376.We find on the surface of slabs both of the calcareous grit,and Stonesfield slate, near Oxford, and on sandstones of theWealden formation, in Sussex and Dorsetshire, perfectly preservedand petrified castings of marine worms, at the upper extremityof holes bored by them in the sand, while it was yet softat the bottom of the water; and within the sandstones, tracesof tubular holes in which the worms resided. The preservationof these tubes and castings shews the very quiet condition of thebottom, and the gentle action of the water, which brought thematerials that covered them over, without disturbing them.Cases of this kind add to the probability of the preservation offootsteps of Tortoises on the Red sandstone, and also afford proofof the alternation of intervals of repose with periods of violence,during the destructive processes by which derivative strata wereformed.FOSSIL FOOTSTEPS. 261shire may be seen by reference to PI. 26. Theytraverse the rock in a direction either up ordown, and not across the surfaces of the strata,which are now inclined at an angle of 38°. Onone slab there are twenty-four continuous impressionsof feet, forming a regular track, withsix distinct repetitions of the mark of each foot,the fore-foot being differently shaped from thehind-foot ; the marks of claws are also verydistinct.*Although these footsteps are thus abundant inthe extensive quarries of Corn Cockle Muir, notrace whatever has been found of any portionof the bones of the animals whose feet they represent.This circumstance may perhaps beexplained by the nature of the siliceous sandstonehaving been unfavourable to the preservationof organic remains. The conditions whichwould admit of the entire obliteration of bones,On comparing some of these impressions with the tracks whichI caused to be made on soft sand, and clay, and upon unbakedpie-crust, by a living Emys and Testudo Graeca, I found thecorrespondence with the latter sufficiently close, allowing fordifference of species, to render it highly probable that the fossilfootsteps were also impressed by the feet of land Tortoises.In the bed of the Spey and Shelley brooks near Century,circular markings occur in the Old Red Sandstone, which arereferred by the natives to the tracks of Horses, and the impressionsof Patten-rings, and a legendary tale has been applied toexplain their history. They are caused by concretions of Marl-stoneand Iron, disposed in spherical cases around a solid coreof sandstone, and intersected by these water courses.262 FOSSIL FOOTSTEPS.would iii no way interfere with the preservationof impressions made by feet, and speedilyfilled up by a succeeding deposit of sand, whichwould assume, with the fidelity of an artificialplaster mould, the precise form of the surfaceto which it was applied.Notwithstanding this absence of bones fromthe rocks which are thus abundantly impressedwith footsteps, the latter alone suffice to assure usboth of the existence and character of the animalsby which they were made. Their form ismuch too short for the feet of Crocodiles, or anyother known Saurians ; and it is to the Testesor Tortoises, that we look, with mostprobability of finding the species to which theirorigin is due.*The Historian or the Antiquary may havetraversed the fields of ancient or of modernThis evidence of footsteps, on which we are here arguing, isone which all mankind appeal to in every condition of society.The thief is identified by the impression which his shoe hasleft near the scene of his depredations. Captain Parry foundthe tracks of human feet upon the banks of the stream in PossessionBay, which appeared so fresh, that he at first imaginedthem to have been recently made by some natives : on examinationthey were distinctly ascertained to be the marks of the shoesof some of his own crew, eleven months before. The frozen conditionof the soil had prevented their obliteration. The Americansavage not only identifies the Elk and Bison by theimpression of their hoofs, but ascertains also the time that haselapsed since each animal had passed. From the Camel's trackupon the sand, the Arab can determine whether it was heavily orlightly laden, or whether it was lame.FOSSIL FOOTSTEPS. 263battles ; and may have pursued the line ofmarch of triumphant Conquerors, whose armiestrampled down the most mighty kingdoms ofthe world. The winds and storms have utterlyobliterated the ephemeral impressions of theircourse. Not a track remains of a single foot,or a single hoof, of all the countless millionsof men and beasts whose progress spread desolationover the earth. But the Reptiles, thatcrawled upon the half-finished surface of ourinfant planet, have left memorials of their passage,enduring and indelible. No history hasrecorded their creation or destruction ; theirvery bones are found no more among thefossil relics of a former world. Centuries, andthousands of years, may have rolled away, betweenthe time in which these footsteps wereimpressed by Tortoises upon the sands of theirnative Scotland, and the hour when they areagain laid bare, and exposed to our curious andadmiring eyes. Yet we behold them, stampedupon the rock, distinct as the track of the passinganimal upon the recent snow ; as if to showthat thousands of years are but as nothingamidst Eternity — and, as it were, in mockeryof the fleeting perishable course of the mightiestPotentates among mankind.*A similar discovery of fossil footsteps has recently beenmade in Saxony, at the village of Hessberg, near Hildburg-hausen, in several quarries of grey quartzose sandstone, alteredFOSSIL FISHES.SECTION XIII.FOSSIL FISHES.The history of Fossil Fishes is the branchof Paleontology which has hitherto receivedleast attention, in consequence of the imperfecteating with beds of red sandstone, nearly of the same age withthat of Dumfries. (See PI. 26'. 26". 26'".)The following account of them is collected from notices byDr. Hohnbaum and Professor Kaup. " The impressions of feetare partly hollow, and partly in relief; all the depressions areupon the upper surfaces of slabs of sandstone, whilst the reliefsare only upon the lower surfaces, covering those which bear thedepressions. These reliefs are natural casts, formed in the subjacentfootsteps as in moulds. On one slab (see PI. 26'), sixfeet long by five feet wide, there occur many footsteps ofmore than one animal, and of various sizes. The larger impressions,which seem to be of the hind foot, are eight incheslong, and five wide. (See PI. 26".) One was twelve incheslong. Near to each large footstep, and at the regular distanceof an inch and a half before it, is a smaller print of afore foot, four inches long and three inches wide. These footstepsfollow one another in pairs, at intervals of fourteen inchesfrom pair to pair, each pair being in the same line. Bothlarge and small steps have the great toes alternately on theright and left side ; each has the print of five toes, and the first,or great toe is bent inwards like a thumb. The fore and hindfoot are nearly similar in form, though they differ so greatly insize.On the same slabs are other tracks, of smaller and differFOSSIL FISHES. 265state of our knowledge of existing Fishes. Theinaccessible recesses of the waters they inhabit,renders the study of their nature and habitsmuch more difficult than that of terrestrialanimals. The arrangement of this large andimportant class of Vertebrata was the last greatwork undertaken by Cuvier, not long before hislamented death, and nearly eight thousand speciesof living Fishes had come under his observation.The full development of their historygently shaped feet, armed with nails. Many of these (PI. 26')resemble the impressions on the sandstone of Dumfries, and areapparently the steps of Tortoises.Professor Kaup has proposed the provisional name of Chirothe-rum for the great unknown animal that formed the larger footsteps,from the distant resemblance, both of the fore and hindfeet, to the impression of a human hand ; and he conjecturesthat they may have been derived from some quadruped allied tothe Marsupialia. The presence of two small fossil mammaliarelated to the Opossum, in the Oolite formation of Stonesfield,and the approximation of this order to the class of Reptiles, whichhas already been alluded to, (page 73, note), are circumstanceswhich give probability to such a conjecture. In the Kangaroo,the first toe of the fore foot is set obliquely to the others, like athumb, and the disproportion between the fore and hind feet isalso very great.A further account of these footsteps has been published by Dr.Sickle, in a letter to Blumenbach, 1834. Our figure (PI. 26'),is copied from a plate that accompanies this letter ; on comparingit with a large slab, covered with similar footmarks, fromthe same quarries, lately placed in the British Museum, (1835)I find that the representations, both of the large and small footsteps,correspond most accurately. The hind foot (PI. 26"), isdrawn from one on this slab. PI. 26'" is drawn from a plaster20*6 FOSSIL FISHES.and numbers, and of the functions they dischargein the economy of nature, he has left tohis able successors.The fact of the formation of so large a portionof the surface of the earth beneath the water,would lead us to expect traces of the formerexistence of Fishes, wherever we have theremains of aquatic Mollusca, Articulate, andRadiata. Although a few remarkable placeshave long been celebrated as the repositories offossil Fishes, even of these there are some,whose geological relations have scarcely yetbeen ascertained, while the nature of theirFishes remains in still greater obscurity.*The task of arranging all this disorder hascast hi the British Museum, taken from another slab found inthe same quarries, and impressed with footsteps of some smallaquatic Reptile.Some fragments of bones were found in the same quarries withthese footsteps, but were destroyed.A thin deposit of Green Marl, which lay upon the inferior bedof sand, at the time when the footsteps were impressed, causes theslabs above and below it to part readily, and exhibit the caststhat were formed by the upper sand, in the prints that theanimals had made on the lower stratum, through the marl, whilesoft, and sufficiently tenacious to retain the form of the footsteps.The most celebrated deposits of fossil Fishes in Europe arethe coal formation of Saarbruck, in Lorraine ; the bituminous slateof Mansfeld, in Thuringia ; the calcareous lithographic slate ofSolenhofen ; the compact blue slate of Glaris ; the limestone ofMonte Bolca, near Verona; the marston of Meninges, in Switzerland; and of Aix, in Provence.Every attempt that has yet been made at a systematic arrange-mostIMPORTANT TO GEOLOGY. 267at length been undertaken by an individual, towhose hands Cuvier at once consigned thematerials he had himself collected for thisimportant work. The able researches of ProfessorAgassiz have already extended the numberof fossil Fishes to two hundred genera, andmore than eight hundred and fifty species.*The results of his enquiry throw a new and mostimportant light on the state of the earth, duringeach of the great periods into which its pasthistory has been divided. The study of fossilIchthyology is therefore of peculiar importanceto the geologist, as it enables him to follow anentire Class of animals, of so high a Division asthe vertebrate, through the whole series of geologicalformations ; and to institute comparisonsbetween their various conditions during successivePeriods of the earth's formation, such asCuvier could carry only to a much more limitedextent in the classes of Reptiles, Birds, andMammifers, for want of adequate materials.ment of these Fishes has been more or less defective, from anendeavour to arrange them under existing genera and families.The imperfection of his own, and of all preceding classificationsof Fishes, is admitted by Cuvier ; and one great proofof this imperfection is that they have led to no general results,either in Natural History, Physiology, or Geology.No existing genus is found among the fossil Fishes of anystratum older than the Chalk formation. In the inferior chalkthere is one living genus, Fistularia ; in the true chalk, five ; andin the Tertiary strata of M. Bolca, thirty-nine living genera, andthirty-eight which are extinct. — Agassiz.268 SYSTEM OF AGASSIZ.The system upon which M. Agassiz has establishedhis classification of recent Fishes is in apeculiar degree applicable to fossil Fishes, beingfounded on the character of the external coverings,or Scales. This character is so sure andconstant, that the preservation, even of a singlescale, will often announce the genus and eventhe species of the animal from which it wasderived; just as certain feathers announce to askilful ornithologist the genus or species of aBird. It follows still further, that as the natureof their outward covering indicates the relationsof all animals to the external world, we derivefrom their scales certain indications of the relationsof Fishes ;* the scales forming a kind ofexternal skeleton, analogous to the crustaceous orThe foundation of this character is laid upon the dermalcovering, the skin being that organ which, more than any otherpart of the body, shews the relations of every animal to the elementin which it moves.The form and conditions of the feathers and down show therelation of Birds to the air in which they fly, or the water in whichthey swim or dive. The varied forms of fur and hair and bristleson the skins of Beasts are adapted to their respective place, andclimate, and occupations upon the land. The scales of Fishesshow a similar adaptation to their varied place and occupationsbeneath the waters.Mr. Purcell informs me that he has observed, both in Africaand South America, that in the order of Serpents a peculiarcharacter of the scales appears to indicate a natural subdivision ;and that in that tribe, to which the Viper, and nearly all thevenomous Snakes belong, an acute ridge, or carina, along eachdorsal scale may be considered as a distinctive mark.CHARACTERS DERIVED FROM SCALES. 269horny coverings of Insects, to the feathers ofBirds, and the fur of Quadrupeds, which showsmore directly than the internal bones, their adaptationto the medium in which they lived.A further advantage arises from the fact thatthe enamelled condition of the scales of mostFishes, which existed during the earlier geologicalepochs, rendered them much less destructiblethan their internal skeleton ; and cases frequentlyoccur where the entire scales and figureof the Fish are perfectly preserved, whilst thebones within these scales have altogether disappeared; the enamel of the scales being lesssoluble than the more calcareous material of thebone.*The following are the new Orders into which M. Agassizdivides the Class of Fishes.First Order, PLACOIDIANS. (PL 27, Figs. 1, 2, Etym.7rAa£, a broad plate) Fishes of this Order are characterizedby having their skin covered irregularly with plates of enamel,often of considerable dimensions, and sometimes reduced tosmall points, like the shagreen on the skins of many Sharks,and the prickly, tooth-like tubercles on the skin of Rays. Itcomprehends all the cartilaginous fishes of Cuvier, excepting theSturgeon.The enamelled prickly tubercles on the skin of Sharks andDog-Fishes are well known, from the use made of them in raspingand polishing wood, and for shagreen.Second Order, Canadians. (PI. 27, 3, 4. Etym.yavoQ, splendour, from the bright surface of their enamel.) Thefamilies of this Order are characterized by angular scales, composedof horny or bony plates, covered with a thick plate ofenamel. The bony Pike (Lepidosteus Osseus, PI. 27% Fig. 1) ;270 FOSSIL FISHES.It must be obvious that another and mostimportant branch of natural history is enlistedin aid of Geology, as soon as the study of thecharacter of fossil Fishes has been established onany footing, which admits of such general applicationas the system now proposed. We introducean additional element into geological calculations; we bring an engine of great power,hitherto unapplied, to bear on the field of ourenquiry, and seem almost to add a new senseto our powers of geological perception. Thegeneral result is, that fossil Fishes approximateand Sturgeons are of this Order. It contains more than sixtygenera, of which fifty are extinct.Third Order, CTENOIDIANS. (PL 27, Figs. 5, 6, Etym.kteiq, a comb.) The Cteno'idians have their scales jagged orpectinated, like the teeth of a comb, on their posterior margin.They are formed of laminae of horn or bone, but have no enamel.The Perch affords a familiar example of scales constructed onthis principle.Fourth Order, CYCLOIDIANS. (PI. 27, Figs. 7, 8. Etym.kvk\oc, a circle.) Families of this Order have their scalessmooth, and simple at their margin, and often ornamented withvarious figures on the upper surface : these scales are composedof laminae of horn or bone, but have no enamel. The Herringand Salmon are examples of Cycloidians.Each of these Orders contains both cartilaginous and bonyFishes : the representatives of each prevailed in different proportionsduring different epochs ; only the two first existed beforethe commencement of the Cretaceous formations; the third andfourth Orders, which contain three-fourths of the eight thousandknown species of living Fishes, appear for the first time in theCretaceous strata, when all the preceding fossil genera of the twofirst Orders had become extinct.CHANGES OF GENERA, AND SPECIES. 271nearest to existing genera and species, in themost recent Tertiary deposits ; and differ fromthem most widely in strata whose antiquity isthe highest ; and that strata of intermediate ageare marked by intermediate changes of ichthyologicalcondition.It appears still further, that all the greatchanges in the character of fossil Fishes takeplace simultaneously with the most importantalterations in the other classes of fossil animals,and in fossil vegetables ; and also in the mineralcondition of the strata.*It is satisfactory to find that these conclusionsare in perfect accordance with those towhich geologists had arrived from other data.The details that lead to them, will be describedby M. Agassiz, in a work of many volumes, andwill form a continuation of the Ossemens Fossilesof Cuvier. From the parts of this workalready published, and from communications bythe author, I select a few examples, illustratingThe genera of Fishes which prevail in strata of the Carboniferousorder are found no more after the deposition of theZechstein, or Magnesian limestone. Those of the Oolitic serieswere introduced after the Zechstein, and ceased suddenly at thecommencement of the Cretaceous formations. The genera of theCretaceous formations are the first that approximate to existinggenera. Those of the lower Tertiary deposits of London, Paris,and Monte Bolca, are still more nearly allied to existing forms ;and the fossil Fishes of Meninges and Aix approximate again yetcloser to living genera, although every one of their species appearsto be extinct.272 CHANGES OF GENERA SUDDEN.the character of some of the most remarkablefamilies of fossil Fishes.It appears that the character of fossil Fishesdoes not change insensibly from one formationto another, as in the case of many Zoophytesand Testacea ; nor do the same genera, or eventhe same families, pervade successive series ofgreat formations ; but their changes take placeabruptly, at certain definite points in the verticalsuccession of the strata, like the suddenchanges that occur in fossil Reptiles and Mammalia.*Not a single species of fossil Fisheshas yet been found that is common to any twogreat geological formations ; or living in ourpresent seas.fOne important geological result has alreadyattended the researches of M. Agassiz, viz.that the age and place of several formationshitherto unexplained by any other character,have been made clear by a knowledge of thefossil Fishes which they contain .JM. Agassiz observes that fossil Fishes in the same formationpresent greater variations of species at distant localities, than wefind in the species of shells and Zoophytes, in corresponding partsof the same formation ; and that this circumstance is readilyexplained by the greater locomotive powers of this higher classof animals.f The nodules of clay stone on the coast of Greenland, containingfishes of a species now living in the adjacent seas,(Malleus Villosus) are probably modern concretions.| Thus the slate of Engi, in the canton of Glaris, in Swit-SAUROID FISHES. '273Sauroid Fishes in the Order Ganoid.The voracious family of Sauroid, or Lizard-likeFishes, first claims our attention, and ishighly important in the physiological considerationof the history of Fishes, as it combines inthe structure both of the bones, and some of thesoft parts, characters which are common to theclass of reptiles. M. Agassiz has already ascer-zealand, has long been one of the most celebrated, and leastunderstood localities of fossil Fishes in Europe, and the mineralcharacter of this slate had till lately caused it to be referred to theearly period of the Transition series. M. Agassiz has found thatamong its numerous fishes, there is not one belonging to asingle genus, that occurs in any formation older than the Cretaceousseries ; but that many of them agree with fossil speciesfound in Bohemia, in the lower Cretaceous formation, or Planerkalk ; hence he infers that the Glaris slate is an altered conditionof an argillaceous deposit, subordinate to the great Cretaceousformations of other parts of Europe, probably of the Gault.Another example of the value of Ichthyology, in illustrationof Geology, occurs in the fact, that as the fossil Fishes of theWealden estuary formation are referable to genera that characterizethe strata of the Oolitic series, the Wealden deposits arehereby connected with the Oolitic period that preceded their commencement,and are separated from the Cretaceous formationsthat followed their termination. A change in the condition ofthe higher orders of the inhabitants of the waters seems to haveaccompanied the changes that occurred in the genera and speciesof inferior animals at the commencement of the Cretaceous formations.A third example occurs, in the fact that M. Agassiz has, byresemblances in the character of their fossil Fishes, identified thehitherto unknown periods of the freshwater deposits of Meninges,and of Aix in Provence, with that of the Molasse of Switzerland.274 SAUROID FISHES.gained seventeen genera of Sauroid Fishes.Their only living representatives are the genusLepidosteus,* or bony Pike (PL 27 a Fig. 1.),and the genus Polypterus (Amass. Poise. Foss.Vol. 2. Tab. C), the former containing fivespecies, and the latter two. Both these generaare found only in fresh waters, the Lepidosteusin the rivers of North America, and the Polyp-termsin the Nile, and the waters of Senegal. |The teeth of the Sauroid Fishes are striatedlongitudinally towards the base, and have ahollow cone within. (See PL 27% 2, 3, 4; andPL 27. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14.) The bones of thepalate also are furnished with a large apparatusof teeth. |Lepidosteus Agassiz — Lepisosteus Lacep&de.f The bones of the skull, in Sauroid Fishes, are united bycloser sutures than those of common Fishes, The vertebrae articulatewith the spinous processes by sutures, like the vertebrae ofSaurians ; the ribs also articulate with the extremities of thespinous processes. The caudal vertebrae have distinct chevronbones, and the general condition of the skeleton is stronger andmore solid than in other Fishes : the air-bladder also is bifid andcellular, approaching to the character of lungs, and in the throatthere is a glottis, as in Sirens and Salamanders, and many Syrians.— See Report of Proceedings of Zool. Soc. London, October,1834.% The object of the extensive apparatus of teeth, over thewhole interior of the mouth of many of the most voraciousFishes, appears not to be for mastication, but to enable them tohold fast, and swallow the slippery bodies of other Fishes thatform their prey. No one who has handled a living Trout or Eelcan fail to appreciate duly the importance of the apparatus inquestion.CHARACTER AND SIZE. 275PL 27, Figs. 11, 12, 13, 14, represent teeth ofthe largest Sauroid Fishes yet discovered, equallingin size the teeth of the largest Crocodiles :they occur in the lower region of the Coal formationnear Edinburgh, and are referred by M.Agassiz to a new genus, Megalicthys. PI. 27,Fig. 9, and PI. 27% Fig. 4, are fragments ofjaws, containing many smaller teeth of the samekind. The external form of all these teeth isnearly conical, and within them is a conicalcavity, like that within the teeth of many Saurians ; their base is fluted, like the base of theteeth of the Ichthyosaurus. Their prodigioussize shows the magnitude which Fishes of thisfamily attained at a period so early as that ofthe Coal formation :* their structure coincidesWe owe the discovery of these very curious teeth, and muchvaluable information on the Geology of the neighbourhood ofEdinburgh, to the zeal and discernment of Dr. Hibbert, in thespring of 1834. The limestone in which these Fishes occur liesnear the bottom of the Coal formation, and is loaded with Compromises,derived apparently from predaceous Fishes. It is abundantlycharged also with ferns, and other plants of the coalformation ; and with the crustaceous remains of Cypris, a genusknown only as an inhabitant of fresh water. These circumstances,and the absence of Corals and Encrinites, and of allspecies of marine shells, render it probable that this deposit wasformed in a freshwater lake, or estuary. It has been recognizedin various and distant places, at the bottom of the carboniferousstrata near Edinburgh.In the Transactions of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Vol.XIII. Dr. Hibbert has published a most interesting description ofthe recent discoveries made in the limestone of Burdie House,276 GEOLOGICAL DISTRIBUTIONentirely with that of the teeth of the living Lepi-closes ossens. (PL 27 a , Figs. 1, 2, 3.)Smaller Sauroid Fishes only have been noticedin the Magnesian limestone, forming aboutone fifth of the total number yet observed inthis formation. Very large bones of this voraciousfamily occur in the lias of Whitby andLyme Regis, and its genera abound throughoutthe Oolite formation"* In the Cretaceous formationsthey become extremely rarest Theyillustrated with engravings, from which the larger teeth in ourplate are copied. (PL 27, Fig. 11, 12, 13, 14). The smallerfigures, PI. 27, Fig. 9, and PL 27% Fig. 4, are drawn fromspecimens belonging to Dr. Hibbert and the Royal Society ofEdinburgh.In this memoir, Dr. Hibbert has also published figures of somecurious large scales, found at Burdie House, with the teeth ofMegalicthys, and referred by M. Agassiz to that Fish. Similarscales have been noticed in various parts of the Edinburgh Coalfield,and also in the Coal formation of Newcastle-on-Tyne.Unique specimens of the heads of two similar Fishes, and partof a body covered with scales, from the Coal field near Leeds,are preserved in the museum of that town.Sir Philip Grey Egerton has recently discovered scales of theMegalicthys, with teeth and bones of some other Fishes, and alsoCoprolites, in the Coal formation of Coverdale, near Newcastle-undermine.These occur in a stratum of shale, containing shellsof three species of Unio, with balls of argillaceous iron ore andplants.The Aspidorhynchus, from the Jurassic limestone of ,(PL 27 a , Fig. 5), represents the general character of thesauroid Fishes.f The Macropoma is the only genus of Sauroid Fishes yetfound in the Chalk of England.OF SAUROID FISHES. 277have not yet been discovered in any of theTertiary strata ; and in the waters of the presentworld are reduced to the two genera, Lepidopteraand Polypterus.Thus we see that this family of Sauroidsholds a very important place in the history offossil Fishes. In the waters of the Transitionperiod, the Sauroids and Sharks constituted thechief voracious forms, destined to fulfil theimportant office of checking excessive increaseof the inferior families. In the Secondarystrata, this office was largely shared by Ichthyo-sauri and other marine Saurian s, until the commencementof the Chalk. The cessation of theseReptiles and of the semi-reptile Sauroid Fishesin the Tertiary formations made room for theintroduction of other predaceous families, approachingmore nearly to those of the presentcreation.*Much light has been thrown on the history of Fishes in theOld red sandstone at the base of the Carboniferous series, by thediscoveries of Professor Sedgwick and Mr. Murchison, in thebituminous schist of Caithness, (Geol. Trans. Lond. n. s. Vol. 3,part 1.); and those of Dr. Trade, in the same schist in Orkney.Dr. Fleming also has made important observations on Fishes inthe old red sandstone of Cheshire. Further discoveries havebeen made by Mr. Murchison of Fishes in the old red sandstoneof Salop and Herefordshire. The general conditions of all theseFishes accord with those in the carboniferous series, but theirspecific details present most interesting peculiarities. Many ofthem will be figured by Mr. Murchison in his splendid Illustrationsof the Geology of the Border Counties of England and Wales.278 FOSSIL FISHES,Fishes in Strata of the Carboniferous Order.I select the genus Amblypterus (PL 27 b .),as an example of Fishes whose duration waslimited to the early periods of geological Formations; and which are marked by characters thatcease after the deposition of the Magnesianlimestone.This genus occurs only in strata of the Carboniferousorder, and presents four species atSaarbriick, in Lorraine ;* it is found also inBrazil. The character of the teeth in Amblyp-terms, and most of the genera of this early epoch,shews the habit of these Fishes to have beento feed on decayed sea-weed, and soft animalsubstances at the bottom of the water : they areall small and numerous, and set close togetherlike a brush. The form of the body, being notcalculated for rapid progression, accords withthis habit.The Fishes at Saarbriick are usually found in balls of clayironstone, which form nodules in strata of bituminous coal shale.Lord Greenock has recently discovered many interesting examplesof this, and other genera of Fishes in the coal formationat Newhaven, and Hardie, near Leith. The shore at Newhavenis strewed with nodules of ironstone, washed out by the action ofthe tide, from shale beds of the coal formation. Many of theseironstones have for their nucleus a fossil Amblypterus, or someother Fish ; and an infinitely greater number contain Coprolites,apparently derived from a voracious species of Pygopterus, thatpreyed upon the smaller Fishes.IN THE CARBONIFEROUS STRATA. 27.9The vertebral column continues into the upperlobe of the tail, which is much longer than thelower lobe, and is thus adapted to sustain thebody in an inclined position, with the head andmouth nearest to the bottom.Among existing cartilaginous Fishes, the vertebralcolumn is prolonged into the caudal finof Sturgeons and Sharks : the former of theseperform the office of scavengers, to clear thewater of impurities, and have no teeth, but feedby means of a soft leather-like mouth, capableof protrusion and contraction, on putrid vegetablesand animal substances at the bottom;hence they have constant occasion to keep theirbodies in the same inclined position as theextinct fossil Fishes, whose feeble brush-liketeeth shew that they also fed on soft substancesin similar situations.*The Sharks employ their tail in anotherpeculiar manner, to turn their body in order tobring the mouth, which is placed downwardsbeneath the head, into contact with their prey.We find an important provision in every animalto give a position of ease and activity to the headduring the operation of feeding. fAt the siege of Silistria, the Sturgeons of the Danube wereobserved to feed voraciously on the putrid bodies of the Turksand Russian soldiers that were cast into that river.f This remarkable elongation of the superior lobe of the tailis found in every bony Fish of strata anterior to and includingthe Magnesian limestone ; but in strata above this limestone the"280 FISHES IN MAGNESIAN LIMESTONE,Fishes of the Magnesian Limestone,or Zechstein.The Fishes of the Zechstein at Mansfeld andEisleben have been long known, and are commonin all collections ; figures of many speciesare given by M. Agassiz. Examples of theFishes of the Magnesian limestone of the northof England, are described and figured by ProfessorSedgwick, in the Geol. Trans, of London,(2d Series, Vol. iii. p. 117, and PL 8, 9, 10). Hestates in this paper (p. 99), that the occurrence ofcertain Corals and Encrinites, and several speciesof Producta, Area, Terebratula, Spirifier, &c.shews that the Magnesian limestone is morenearly allied in its zoological characters to theCarboniferous order, than to the calcareous formationswhich are superior to the New red sandstone.This conclusion accords with that whichM. Agassiz has drawn from the character of itsfossil Fishes.tail is regular and symmetrical. In certain bony Fishes of thesecondary period, the upper lobe of the tail is partly covered withscales, but without vertebrae. The bodies of all these Fishes alsohave an integument of rhomboidal bony scales, covered withenamel.No species of Fish has been found common to the Carboniferousgroup, and to the Zechstein or Magnesian limestone ; butcertain genera occur in both, e. g. the genus Paleeoniscus andPolyphemus.MUSCHEL-KALK, LIAS, AND OOLITE. 281Fishes of the Muschelkalk, Lias, and OoliteFormations.The Fishes of the Muschelkalk are eitherpeculiar to it, or similar to those of the Lias andOolite. The figure engraved at PI. 27 c , isselected as an example of the character of afamily of Fishes most abundant in the Jurassicor Oolite formation ; it represents the genusGyrodus in the family of Pycnodonts, or thick-toothedFishes, which prevailed extensively duringthe middle ages of Geological History. Of thisextinct family there are five genera. Their leadingcharacter consists in a peculiar armature of allparts of the mouth with a pavement of thickround and flat teeth, the remains of which, underthe name of Bufonites, occur most abundantlythroughout the Oolite formation.* The use ofthis peculiar apparatus was to crush small shells,and small Crustacea, and to comminute putrescentsea-weeds. The habits of the family ofPycnodonts appear to have been omnivorous,and their power of progression slowerPI. 27 c . Fig. 3. represents a five fold series of these teeth onthe palate of Pycnoclus tritons from Stonesfield ; and Fig. 2, aseries of similar teeth placed on the vomer in the palate of theGyrodus Umbilicus from the great Oolite of Durrheim, in Baden.f A similar apparatus occurs in a living family of the OrderCycloids, in the case of the modern omnivorous Sea Wolf, Anar-282 LEPIDOID FISHES.Another family of these singular Fishes of theancient world, which was exceedingly abundantin the Oolitic or Jurassic series, is that of theLepidoids, a family still more remarkable thanthe Pycnodonts for their large rhomboidal bonyscales, of great thickness, and covered with beautifulenamel. The Dapedium of the lias (PI. 1.Fig. 54.) affords an example of these scales, wellknown to geologists. They are usually furnishedon their upper margin with a large process orhook, placed like the hook or peg near the uppermargin of a tile ; this hook fits into a depressionon the lower margin of the scales placed nextabove it. (See PI. 27, Figs. 4, 5, and PI. 15, Fig.17.) All Ganoidian Fishes, of every formation,prior to the Chalk, were enclosed in a similarcuirass, composed of bony scales, covered withenamel, and extending from the head to the raysof the tail.* One or two species only, havingthis peculiar armature of enamelled bony scales,rhicas Lupus, and other recent Fishes of different families. M.Agassiz observes, that it is a common fact, in the class of Fishes,to find nearly all the modifications which the teeth of theseanimals present, recurring in several families, which in otherrespects are very different.The Pycnodonts, as well as the fossil Sauroids, have enamelledscales, but it is in the Lepidoids that scales of thiskind are most highly developed. M. Agassiz has ascertainednearly 200 fossil species that had this kind of armour. Theuse of such an universal covering of thick bony and enamelledscales, surrounding like a cuirass the entire bodies of so manyspecies of Fishes, in all formations anterior to the Cretaceousdeposits, may have been to defend their bodies against watersFISHES IN CHALK FORMATION. 233have yet been discovered in the Cretaceousseries ; and three or four species in the Tertiaryformations. Among living Fishes, scales of thiskind occur only in the two genera, Lepidosteusand Polypterus.Not a single genus of all that are found in theOolitic series exists at the present time. Themost abundant Fishes of the Wealden formationbelong to genera that prevailed through theOolitic period.*Fishes of the Chalk Formation.The next and most remarkable of all changes inthe character of Fishes, takes place at the commencementof the Cretaceous formations. Generaof the first and second orders (Placoidean andGanoidian), which had prevailed exclusively inall formations till the termination of the Ooliticseries, ceased suddenly, and were replaced bygenera of new orders (Ctenoidean and Cyclopsthen for the first time introduced. Nearlytwo-thirds of the latter also are now extinct ; butthese approach nearer to Fishes of the tertiaryseries, than to those which had preceded theformation of the Chalk.that were warmer, or subject to more sudden changes of temperature,than could be endured by Fishes whose skin wasprotected only by such thin, and often disconnected coverings, asthe membranous and horny scales of most modern Fishes.The most remarkable of these are the genus Lepidus,Pholidophorus, Pycnodus, and Hybodus.284 FOSSIL FISHES,Comparing the Fishes of the Chalk with thoseof the elder Tertiary formation of Monte Bolca,we find not one species, and but few genera, thatare common to both.*Fishes of the Tertiary Formations.As soon as we enter on the Tertiary strata,another change takes place in the character offossil Fishes, not less striking than that in fossilShells.The fishes of Monte Bolca are of the Eoceneperiod, and are well known by the figures engravedin the Ittiolitologia Veronese, of Volta ;and in Knorr. About one-half of these fishesIt has been already stated, that the remarkable deposit offossil Fishes at Engi, in the Canton of Glaris, are referred byM. Agassiz to the lower portion of the Cretaceous system.Many genera of these are identical with, and others closelyapproximate to, the fishes of the Inferior chalk (Planer kalk) ofBohemia, and of the Chalk of Westphalia (see Leonard andBrown. Neues Jahrbuch, 1834). Although the mineral characterof the slate of Glaris presents, as we have before stated,an appearance of high antiquity, its age is probably the same asthat of the Gault, or Skeleton clay of England. This alterationof character is consistent with the changes that have given an airof higher antiquity than belongs to them, to most of the Secondaryand Tertiary formations in the Alps.The Fishes of the Upper chalk are best known by the numerousand splendid examples discovered at Lewes by Mr.Mantelll, and figured in his works. These Fishes are in an unexampledstate of perfection ; in the abdominal cavities of onespecies (Macropoma) the stomach, and compromises are preservedentire,, in their natural place.IN THE TERTIARY FORMATIONS. 285belong to extinct genera, and not one is identicalwith any existing species ; they are all marine,and the greater number approach most nearlyto forms now living within the tropics.*To this first period of the Tertiary formationsbelong also the Fishes of the London clay ;many of the species found in Sheppy, thoughnot identical with those of Monte Bolca, areclosely allied to them. The Fishes of Linusalso are of this era. The Fishes in the gypsumof Mont Martre are referred to the same periodby M. Agassiz, who differs from Cuvier, in attributingthem all to extinct genera.The Fishes of Meninges have, by all writers,been referred to a very recent local lacustrinedeposit. M. Agassiz assigns them to the secondperiod of the Tertiary formations, coeval withthe Molasse of Switzerland and the sandstoneof Fontainebleau. Of seventeen extinct species,one only is of an extra-European genus, and allbelong to existing genera.The gypsum of Aix contains some speciesreferable to one of the extinct genera of MontMartre, but the greatest part are of existinggenera. M. Agassiz considers the age of thisfor-M. Agassiz has re-arranged these fishes under 127 Species,all extinct, and 77 Genera. Of these Genera 38 are extinct, and39 still living; the latter present 81 fossil species at Monte Bolca,and the former 46 species. These 39 living Genera appear forthe first time in this formation.286 FOSSIL SHARKS.nation as nearly coinciding with that of theMeninges deposits.The Fishes of the Crag of Norfolk, and thesuperior Sub-apennine formation, as far as theyare yet known, appear for the most part relatedto genera now common in tropical seas, but areall of extinct species.Family of Sharks.As the family of Sharks is one of the mostuniversally diffused and most voracious amongmodern Fishes, so there is no period in geologicalhistory in which many of its forms did notprevail.* Geologists are familiar with the occurrenceof various kinds of large, and beautifullyenamelled teeth, some of them resembling theexternal form of a contracted leech, (PL 27 e ,and 27 f ) : these are commonly described by thename of Palate bones, or Palates. As theseteeth are usually insulated, there is little evidenceto indicate from what animals they havebeen derived.In the same strata with them are found largebony Spines, armed on one side with prickles,resembling hooked teeth, (see PI. 27 d . C. 3. a.)These were long considered to be jaws, andtrue teeth ; more recently they have been ascer-M. Agassiz has ascertained the existence of more than onehundred and-fifty extinct species of fossil Fishes allied to thisfamily.THREE SUB-FAMILIES. 287gained to be dorsal spines of Fishes, and fromtheir supposed defensive office, like those of thegenus Balistes and Silures, have been namedIchthyodorulites.M. Agassiz has at length referred all thesebodies to extinct genera in the great family ofSharks, a family which he separates into threesub-families, each containing forms peculiar tocertain geological epochs, and which changesimultaneously with the other great changes infossil remains.The first and oldest sub-family, Restraints,beginning with the Transition strata,appears in every subsequent formation, till thecommencement of the Tertiary, and has onlyone living representative, viz. the CastrationPhilippi, or Port Jackson Shark. (PI. 1. Fig.18.) The second family, Hybodonts, beginningwith the Muschel-kalk, and perhaps with theCoal formation, prevails throughout the Ooliteseries, and ceases at the commencement of theChalk. The third family of " Squaloids" ortrue Sharks, commences with the Cretaceousformation, and extends through the Tertiarystrata into the actual creation.*The character of the Cestracionts is marked by the presenceof large polygonal obtuse enamelled teeth, covering the interiorof the mouth with a kind of tesselated pavement. (PI. 27 d . A. 1 ,3, 4, and PI. 27 d , B. 1,2, 3, 4, 5.) In some species not lessthan sixty of these teeth occupied each jaw. They are rarelyfound connected together in a fossil state, in consequence of the288 BONY SPINES OF SHARKS.Fossil Spines, or Ichthyodoridites*The bony spines of the dorsal fins of the PortJackson Shark (PI. 1. Fig. 18.) throw importantlight on the history of fossil Spines; and enableperishable nature of the cartilaginous bones to which they wereattached ; hence the spines and teeth usually afford the onlyevidence of the former existence of these extinct fossil species.They are dispersed abundantly throughout all strata, from theCarboniferous series to the most recent Chalk.In plate 27% Figs. 1, 2, represent a series of teeth of thegenus Crocus, in the family of Cestracionts, from the lias ofSomersetshire ; and PI. 27 f , a series of teeth of the genusPtychodus, in the same family, a genus which occurs abundantlyand exclusively in the Chalk formation.In the section PI. 1, Fig. 19 represents a tooth of Psam-modus, and Fig. 19', a tooth of Crocus, from the Carboniferouslimestone; and Fig. 18', a recent tooth of the Cestracion Philippi.The Cestracion Philippi, (PI. 1, Fig. 18, and PI. 27 d , A.)is the only living species in the family of Sharks that has flattesselated teeth, and enables us to refer numerous fossil teeth ofsimilar construction to the same family. As the small anteriorcutting teeth (PI. 27 d , A. Figs. 1. 2. 5.) in this species, present acharacter of true Sharks, which has not been found in any of thefossil Cestracionts, we have in this dentition of a living species,the only known link that connects the nearly extinct family ofCestracionts with the true Sharks or Squaloids.The second division of the family of Sharks, Hybodonts, commencingprobably with the Coal formation, prevailed during thedeposition of all the Secondary strata beneath the Chalk ; the teethof this division possess intermediate characters between the bluntpolygonal crushing teeth of the sub-family Cestracion, and thesmooth and sharp-edged cutting teeth of the Squaloids, or trueSharks, which commenced with the Cretaceous formations. TheySee PI. 27 d . C. 3.ICHTHYODORULITES. 289us to refer those very common, but little understoodfossils, which have been called Ichthyodo-rules, to extinct genera and species of the subfamilyof Cestracionts. (See page 286). Severalliving species of the great family of Sharks haveare distinguished from those of true Sharks by being plicated, bothon the external and internal surface of the enamel. (See Plate27 d . B. Figs. 8, 9, 10). Plate 27 d C. l. re represents a rareexample of a series of teeth of Hybodus reticulated, still adheringto the cartilaginous jaw bones, from the Lias of Lyme Regis.Striated teeth of this family abound in the Stonesfield slate andin the Wealden formation.Another genus in the sub-family of Hybodonts, is the Onchus,found in the Lias at Lyme Regis ; the teeth of this genus are represented,PI. 27 d . B. 6, 7.In the third, or Squalid division of fossils of this family, wehave the character of true Sharks ; these appear for the firsttime in the Cretaceous formations, and extend through all theTertiary deposits to the present era. (PI. 27 d . B. 11, 12, 13.)In this division the surface of the teeth is always smooth on theouter side, and sometimes plicated on the inner side, as it is alsoin certain living species ; the teeth are often flat and lancet-shaped,with a sharp cutting border, which, in many species, isserrated with minute teeth. Species of this Squalid familyalone, abound in all strata of the Tertiary formation.The greater strength, and flattened condition of the teeth ofthe families of Sharks (Cestracionts and Hybodonts), that prevailedin the Transition and Secondary formations beneath theChalk, had relation, most probably, to their office of crushingthe hard coverings of the Crustacea, and of the bony enamelledscales of the Fishes, which formed their food. As soon as Fishesof the Cretaceous and Tertiary formations assumed the softerscales of modern Fishes, the teeth of the Squalid sub-familyassumed the sharp and cutting edges that characterise the teethof living Sharks. Not one species of the blunt-toothed Restraintfamily has yet been discovered in any Tertiary formation.G. U'290 BONY SPINES OF SHARKS.smooth horny spines connected with the dorsalfin. In the Cestracion Philippi alone, (PL 1,Fig. 18), we find a bony spine armed on itsconcave side with tooth-like hooks, or prickles,similar to those that occur in fossil Ichthyo-dorulites : these hooks act as points of suspensionand attachment, whereby the dorsal fin isconnected with this bony spine, and its movementsregulated by the elevation or depressionof the spine, during the peculiar rotatory actionof the body of Sharks. This action of thespine in raising and depressing the fin resemblesthat of a moveable mast, raising and loweringbackwards the sail of a barge.The common Dog-Fish, or Spine Shark,(Spinal Acanthus, Cuv.), and the CenteringVulgaris, have a horny elevator spine on eachof their dorsal fins, but without teeth or hooks ;similar small toothless horny spines have beenfound by Mr. Mantelll in the chalk of Lewes.These dorsal spines had probably a further useas offensive and defensive weapons against voraciousfishes, or against larger and stronger individualsof their own species.*The variety we find of fossil spines, from theGreywacke series to the Chalk inclusive, indiaSmith saw a captain of a vessel in Jamaica whoreceived many severe cuts in the body from the spines of a Sharkin Montego Bay. (See Griffith's Cuvier).The Spines of Balistes and Silures have not their base, likethat of the spines of Sharks, simply imbedded in the flesh, andFOSSIL RAYS. "291cates the number of extinct genera and speciesof the family of Sharks, that occupied the watersthroughout these early periods of time. Not lessvaried are the forms of palate bones and teeth,in the same formations that contain thesespines ; but as the cartilaginous skeletons towhich they belonged have usually perished,and the teeth and spines are generally dispersed,it is chiefly by the aid of anatomicalanalogies, or from occasional juxtaposition inthe same stratum, that their respective speciescan be ascertained.Fossil Rays.The Rays form the fourth family in the orderPlacoidians. Genera of this family aboundamong living fishes ; but they have not beenfound fossil in any stratum older than the Lias ;they occur also in the Jurassic limestone.Throughout the tertiary formation they arevery abundant ; of one genus, Myliobatis, thereare seven known species ; from these have beenderived the palates that are so frequent in theLondon clay and crag. (See PI. 27 d , B. Fig.14.) The genus Trygon, and Torpedo, occuralso in the Tertiary formations.attached to strong muscles ; but articulate with a bone beneaththem. The Spine of Balistes also is kept erect by a secondspine behind its base, acting like a bolt or wedge, which issimultaneously inserted, or withdrawn, by the same muscularmotion that raises or depresses the spine.292 GENERAL CONCLUSION.Conclusion.In the facts before us, we have an uninterruptedseries of evidence, derived from the familyof Fishes, by which both bony and cartilaginousforms of this family, are shewn to haveprevailed during every period, from the firstcommencement of submarine life, unto the presenthour. The similarity of the teeth, andscales, and bones, of the earliest SauroidFishes of the coal formation (Megalichthys),to those of the living Lepidosteus, and the correspondenceof the teeth and bony spines ofthe only living Restraint in the family ofSharks, with the numerous extinct forms of thatsub-family, which abound throughout the Carboniferousand Secondary formations, connectextreme points of this grand perpetrated divisionof the animal kingdom, by one unbroken chain,more uniform and continuous than has hithertobeen discovered in the entire range of geologicalresearches.It results from the review here taken of thehistory of fossil Fishes, that this important classof vertebrated animals presented its actual gradationsof structure amongst the earliest inhabitantsof our planet; and has ever performedthe same important functions in the generaleconomy of nature, as those discharged by theirliving representatives in our modern seas, andCOMMON OBJECT OF CREATION. 293lakes, and rivers. The great purpose of theirexistence seems at all times to have been, to fillthe waters with the largest possible amount ofanimal enjoyment.The sterility and solitude which have sometimesbeen attributed to the depths of the ocean,exist only in the fictions of poetic fancy. Thegreat mass of the water that covers nearly three-fourthsof the globe is crowded with life, perhapsmore abundantly than the air, and thesurface of the earth ; and the bottom of thesea, within a certain depth accessible to light,swarms with countless hosts of worms, and creepingthings, which represent the kindred familiesof low degree which crawl upon the land.The common object of creation seems everto have been, the infinite multiplication of life.As the basis of animal nutrition is laid in thevegetable kingdom, the bed of the ocean is notless beautifully clothed with submarine vegetation,than the surface of the dry land withverdant herbs and stately forests. In bothcases, the undue increase of herbivorous tribesis controlled by the restraining influence of thosewhich are carnivorous ; and the common resultis, and ever has been, the greatest possibleamount of animal enjoyment to the greatestnumber of individuals.From no kingdom of nature does the doctrineof gradual Development and Transmutation of2.94 RETROGRADE DEVELOPMENT.species derive less support, than from the progressionwe have been tracing in the class ofFishes. The Sauroid Fishes occupy a higherplace in the scale of organization, than the ordinaryforms of bony Fishes ; yet we find examplesof Sauroids of the greatest magnitude, and inabundant numbers in the Carboniferous andSecondary formations, whilst they almost disappearand are replaced by less perfect formsin the Tertiary strata, and present only twogenera among existing Fishes.In this, as in many other cases, a kind of retrogradedevelopment, from complex to simpleforms, may be said to have taken place. Assome of the more early Fishes united in asingle species, points of organization which, ata later period, are found distinct in separatefamilies, these changes would seem to indicate inthe class of Fishes a process of Division, and ofSubtraction from more perfect, rather than ofAddition to less perfect forms.Among living Fishes, many parts in the organizationof the Cartilaginous tribes, (e. g. thebrain, the pancreas, and organs subservient togeneration,) are of a higher order than the correspondingparts in the Bony tribes ; yet we findthe cartilaginous family of Squaloids co-existingwith bony fishes in the Transition strata, andextending with them through all geological formations,unto the present time.FOSSIL SHELLS. 295In no kingdom of nature, therefore, does itseem less possible to explain the successivechanges of organization, disclosed by geology,without the direct interposition of repeated actsof Creation .Chapter XV.Proofs of Design in the Fossil Remainsof Mollusks*SECTION I.FOSSIL UNIVALVE AND BIVALVE SHELLS.We are much limited in our means of obtaininginformation as to the anatomical structure ofthose numerous tribes of extinct animals whichare comprehended under Cuvier's great divisionof Mollusks. Their soft and perishable bodieshave almost wholly disappeared, and their externalshells, and, in a few cases, an internalapparatus of the nature of shell, form the onlyevidence of the former existence of the myriadsof these creatures that occupied the ancientwaters.The enduring nature of the calcareous cover-seenote, p. 62.296 MOLLUSKS AND Considers.kings which these animals had the power ofsecreting, has placed our knowledge of FossilShells almost on a footing with that of recentConchology. But the plan of our presentenquiry forbids us here to take more than ageneral review of the history, and economy ofthe creatures by which they were constructed.We find many and various forms, both of Univalveand Bivalve shells, mixed with numerousremains of Articulated and Radiated animals, inthe most ancient strata of the Transition periodthat contain any traces of organic life. Manyof these shells agree so closely with existingspecies, that we may infer their functions tohave been the same ; and that they were inhabitedby animals of form and habits similar tothose which fabricate the living shells mostnearly resembling them.*All Turbinated and simple shells are constructedby Mollusks of a higher Order than theConchifers, which construct Bivalves ; the formerhave heads and eyes ; the Conchifers, or constructorsof bivalves, are without either of theseimportant parts, and possess but a low degree ofany other sense than touch, and taste. Thusthe Mollusk, which occupies a Whelk, or aLimpet shell, is an animal of a higher OrderSee Mr. Broderip's Introduction to his Paper on some newspecies of Brachiopoda, Zool. Trans., vol. 1, p. 141.TWO DIVISIONS OF TRACHELIPODS. 297than the Conchifer enclosed between the twovalves of a Muscle or an Oyster shell.Lamarck has divided his Order of Tracheli-pods* into two great sections, viz. herbivorousand carnivorous ; the carnivorous are also divisibleinto two families of different office, theone attacking and destroying living bodies, theother eating dead bodies that have perished inthe course of nature, or from accidental causes ;after the manner of those species of predaceousbeasts and birds, e. g. the Hyaenas and Vultures,which, by preference, live on carrion. The sameprinciple of economy in nature, which causesthe dead carcases of the hosts of terrestrialherbivorous animals to be accelerated in theirdecomposition, by forming the food of numerouscarnivora, appears also to have been applied tothe submarine inhabitants of the most ancient,as well as of the existing seas ; thus convertingthe death of one tribe into the nutriment andsupport of life in others.It is stated by Mr. Dillwyn, in a paper readbefore the Royal Society, June 1823, that Plinyhas remarked, that the animal which was sup-thisname is derived from the position of the foot, or locomotiveapparatus, on the lower surface of the neck, or of theanterior part of the body. By means of this organ Trachelipodscrawl like the common garden snail (Helix asperse). This Helixoffers also a familiar example of the manner in which they havethe principal viscera packed within the spiral shell.298 TURBINATED UNIVALVES,posed to yield the Tyrian dye, obtained its foodby boring into other shells by means of anelongated tongue ; and Lamarck says, that allthose Mollusks whose shells have a notch orcanal at the base of their aperture, are furnishedwith a similar power of boring, by meansof a retractile proboscis.* In his arrangementof invertebrate animals, they form a section ofthe Trachelipods, which he calls carnivorous.(Zoophytes). In the other section of Tracheli-pods, which he calls herbivorous (Phytiphages)the aperture of the shell is entire, and the animalshave jaws formed for feeding on vegetables.Mr. Dillwyn further asserts, that every fossilTurbinated Univalve of the older beds, from theThe proboscis, by means of which these animals are enabledto drill holes through shells, is armed with a number of minuteteeth, set like the teeth of a file, upon a retractile membrane,which the animal is enabled to fix in a position adapted forboring or filing a hole from without, through the substance ofshells, and through this hole to extract and feed upon the juicesof the body within them. A familiar example of this organ maybeseen in the retractile proboscis of Buccinum Camillus, and BuckNatum, the common whelks of our own shores. Avaluable Paper on this subject has recently been published byMr. Osier (Phil. Trans., 1832, Part 2, P. 497), in which hegives an engraved figure of the tongue of the Buccinum Unda-tum,covered with its rasp, whereby it perforates the shells ofanimals destined to become its prey. Mr. Osier modifies therule or the distinction between the shells of carnivora and herbsby shewing that, although it is true that all beaked shellsindicate their molluscous inhabitant to have been carnivorous, anentire aperture does not always indicate an herbivorous character.THEIR DISTRIBUTION AMD FUNCTIONS. 290Transition lime to the Lias, belongs to the herbivorousgenera ; and that the herbivorous classextends through every stratum in the entireseries of geological formations, and still retainsits place among the inhabitants of our existingseas. On the other hand, the shells of marinecarnivorous Univalves are very abundant in theTertiary strata above the Chalk, but are extremelyrare in the Secondary strata, from theChalk downwards to the Inferior oolite ; beneathwhich no trace of them has yet been found.Most collectors have seen upon the sea shorenumbers of dead shells, in which small circularholes have been bored by the predaceous tribes,for the purpose of feeding upon the bodies ofthe animals contained within them ; similarholes occur in many fossil shells of the Tertiarystrata, wherein the shells of carnivorous Tramalso abound ; but perforations of thiskind are extremely rare in the fossil shells of anyolder formation. In the Green-sand and Oolite,they have been noticed only in those few caseswhere they are accompanied by the shells ofequally rare carnivorous Mollusks ; and in theLias, and strata below it, there are neither perforations,nor any shells having the notched mouthpeculiar to perforating carnivorous species.It should seem, from these facts, that in theeconomy of submarine life, the great family ofcarnivorous Trachelipods, performed the same300 TESTACEOUS CEPHALOPODSnecessary office during the Tertiary period,which is allotted to them in the present ocean.We have further evidence to shew, that intimesanterior to, and during the deposition ofthe Chalk, the same important functions wereconsigned to other carnivorous Mollusks, viz.the Testaceous Cephalopods 5* these are of comparativelyrare occurrence in the Tertiary strata,and in our modern seas ; but, throughout theSecondary and Transition formations, where carnivorousTrachelipods are either wholly wanting,or extremely scarce, we find abundant remainsof carnivorous Cephalopods, consisting of thechambered shells of Nautili and Ammonites,and many kindred extinct genera of polytha-famous shells of extraordinary beauty. TheMolluscous inhabitants of all these chamberedshells, probably possessed the voracious habitsof the modern Cuttle Fish, and by feedinglike them upon young Testacea and Crustacea,restricted the excessive increase of animal lifeat the bottom of the more ancient seas. Theirsudden and nearly total disappearance at thecommencement of the Tertiary era, would havecaused a blank in the " police of nature,"allowing the herbivorous tribes to increase to anexcess, that would ultimately have been destructiveof marine vegetation, as well as ofthemselves, had they not been replaced by aSee explanation of the term Cephalopod, in note at p. 303.REPLACED BY CARNIVOROUS TRACHELIPODS. 301different order of carnivorous creatures, destinedto perform in another manner, the office whichthe inhabitants of Ammonites and various extinctgenera of chambered shells then ceased to discharge.From that time onwards, we have evidenceof the abundance of carnivorous Tracheaand we see good reason to adopt theconclusion of Mr. Dillwyn, that " in the formationsabove the Chalk, the vast and suddendecrease of one predaceous tribe has been providedfor by the creation of many new genera,and species, possessed of similar appetencies, andyet formed for obtaining their prey by habits entirelydifferent from those of the Cephalopoda."*The design of the Creator seems at all timesto have been, to fill the waters of the seas,and cover the surface of the earth with thegreatest possible amount of organized beingsenjoying life ; and the same expedient of adaptingthe vegetable kingdom to become the basis of thelife of animals, and of multiplying largely theamount of animal existence by the addition ofCarnivora to the Herbivora, appears to haveprevailed from the first commencement of organiclife unto the present hour.*Mr. Dillwyn observes further, that all the herbivorous marineTrachelipods of the Transition and Secondary strata were furnishedwith an operculum, as if to protect them against thecarnivorous Cephalopods which then prevailed abundantly; butthat in the Tertiary formations, numerous herbivorous generaappear, which are not furnished with opercula, as if no longerrequiring the protection of such a shield, after the extinction302 SPECIFIC GRAVITY OF SHELLS.Mr. De la Beche has recently published a listof the specific gravities of living shells of differentgenera, from which he shews that their weightand strength are varied in accommodation to thehabits and habitation of the animals by whichthey are respectively constructed; and points outevidence of design, such as we discover, in allcarefully conducted investigations of the worksof nature, whether among the existing or extinctforms of the animal creation.*of the Ammonites and of many cognate genera of carnivorousTrachelipods, at the termination of the Secondary period, i. e.after the deposition of the Chalk formation." It can scarcely escape the observation of the reader, that,while the specific gravities of the land shells enumerated isgenerally greatest, the densities of the floating marine shells aremuch the smallest. The design of the difference is obvious :The land shells have to contend with all changes of climate, andto resist the action of the atmosphere, while, at the same time,they are thin for the purpose of easy transport, their density istherefore greatest. The Argonaut, Nautilus, and creatures of thelike habits require as light shells as may be consistent with therequisite strength ; the relative specific gravity of such shells isconsequently small. The greatest observed density was that of aHelix, the smallest, that of an Argonaut. The shell of theIanthina, a floating Molluscous creature, is among the smallestdensities. The specific gravity of all the land shells examinedwas greater than that of Carrara marble ; in general more approachingto Arragonite. The freshwater and marine shells,with the exception of the Argonaut, Nautilus, Ianthina, Litho-domus, Haliotis, and great radiated crystalline Teredo from theEast Indies, exceeded Carrara marble in density. This marbleand the Haliotis are of equal specific gravities"— De la Beche'sGeological Researches, 1834, p. 76.NAKED MOLLUSKS. 303SECTION II.FOSSIL REMAINS OF NAKED MOLLUSKS, TENS, ANDINK-BAGS OF LOLIGO.It is well known that the common Cuttle Fish,and other living species of Cephalopods,* whichhave no external shell, are protected from theirenemies by a peculiar internal provision, consistingof a bladder-shaped sac, containing ablack and viscid ink, the ejection of whichdefends them, by rendering opaque the water inwhich they thus become concealed. The mostfamiliar examples of this contrivance are foundin the Sepia vulgaris, and Loligo of our own seas.(See PI. 28, Fig. 1.)It was hardly to be expected that we shouldfind, amid the petrified remains of animals of theThe figure of the common Calmar, or Squid (Loligo VulgarisLam.— Sepia loligo of Linnaeus), see PI. 28, Fig. 1,illustrates the origin of the term Cephalopod, a term applied toa large family of molluscous animals, from the fact of their feetbeing placed around their heads. The feet are lined internallywith ranges of horny cups, or suckers, by which the animalseizes on its prey, and adheres to extraneous bodies. Themouth, in form and substance resembles a Parrot's beak, and issurrounded by the feet. By means of these feet and suckers theSepia octopus, or common Poulpe (the Polypus of the ancients),crawls with its head downwards, along the bottom of the sea.304 FOSSIL INK-BAGS.ancient world, (remains which have been buriedfor countless centuries in the deep foundationsof the earth,) traces of so delicate a fluid as theink which was contained within the bodies ofextinct species of Cephalopods, that perishedat periods so incalculably remote ; yet thepreservation of this substance is establishedbeyond the possibility of doubt, by the recentdiscovery of numerous specimens in the Lias ofLyme Regis,* in which the ink-bags are preservedin a fossil state, still distended, as whenthey formed parts of the organization of livingbodies, and retaining the same juxta-position toa horny pen, which the ink-bag of the existingLoligo bears to the pen within the body of thatanimal. (PL 28, Fig. 1.)Having before us the fact of the preservationof this fossil ink, we find a ready explanation ofit, in the indestructible nature of the carbon ofwhich it was chiefly composed. Cuvier describesthe ink of the recent Cuttle Fish, as being a densefluid of the consistence of pap, " bouillie," suspendedin the cells of a thin net-work thatpervades the interior of the ink-bag ; it verymuch resembles common printers' ink. A substanceof this nature would readily be transowe this discovery to the industry and skill of MissMary Aiming, to whom the scientific world is largely indebted,for having: brought to light so many interesting remains of fossilReptiles from the Lias at Lyme Regis.FOSSIL PENS. 305ferret to a fossil state, without much diminutionof its bulk.*PL 28, Fig. 5, represents an ink-bag of arecent Cuttle Fish, in which the ink is preservedin a desiccated state, being not much diminishedfrom its original volume. Its form is similar tothat of many fossil ink-bags (PL 29, Figs. 3 — 10),and the indurated ink within it differs only fromthe fossil ink, inasmuch as the latter is impregnatedwith carbonate of lime.In a communication to the Geological Society,February 1829, I announced that these fossilink-bags had been discovered in the Lias atLyme Regis, in connexion with horny bodies,resembling the pen of a recent Loligo.These fossil pens are without any trace ofnacre, and are composed of a thin, laminated,So completely are the character and qualities of the inkretained in its fossil state, that when, in 1826,1 submitted aportion of it to my friend Sir Francis Chantry, requesting himto try its power as a pigment, and he had prepared a drawingwith a triturated portion of this fossil substance ; the drawingwas shewn to a celebrated painter, without any information asto its origin, and he immediately pronounced it to be tintedwith sepia of excellent quality, and begged to be informed bywhat colourman it was prepared. The common sepia used indrawing is from the ink-bag of an oriental species of cuttle-fish.The ink of the cuttle-fishes, in its natural state, is said to besoluble only in water, through which it diffuses itself instantaneously; being thus remarkably adapted to its peculiar servicein the only fluid wherein it is naturally employed.G. X306 RESEMBLANCE TO RECENT LOLIGO.semi-transparent substance, resembling horn.Their state of preservation is such as to admit ofa minute comparison of their internal structurewith that of the pen of the recent Loligo; andleads to the same result which we have collectedfrom the examination of so many other examplesof fossil organic remains; namely, that althoughfossil species usually differ from their living representatives,still the same principles of constructionhave prevailed through every cognate genus,and often also through the entire families underwhich these genera are comprehended.The petrified remains of fossil Loligo, therefore,add another link to the chain of argumentwhich we are pursuing, and aid us in connectingsuccessive systems of creation which have followedeach other upon our Planet, as parts ofone grand and uniform Design. Thus the unionof a bag of ink with an organ resembling a penin the recent Loligo, is a peculiar and strikingassociation of contrivances, affording compensationfor the deficiency of an external shell, to ananimal much exposed to destruction from itsfellow ten ants of the deep ; we find a similarassociation of the same organs in the petrifiedremains of extinct species of the same family,that are preserved in the ancient marl and limestonestrata of the Lias. Cuvier drew his figuresof the recent Sepia with ink extracted from itsown body. I have drawings of the remains ofSUDDEN INTERMENT OF FOSSIL LOLIGO. 307extinct species prepared also with their own ink;with this fossil ink I might record the fact, andexplain the causes of its wonderful preservation.I might register the proofs of instantaneous deathdetected in these ink-bags, for they contain thefluid which the living sepia emits in the momentof alarm ; and might detail further evidence oftheir immediate burial, in the retension of theforms of these distended membranes (PL 29.Figs. 3 — 10.) ; since they would speedily havedecayed, and have spilt their ink, had they beenexposed but a few hours to decomposition in thewater. The animals must therefore have diedsuddenly, and been quickly buried in the sedimentthat formed the strata, in which theirpetrified ink and ink-bags are thus preserved.The preservation also of so fragile a substanceas the pen of a Loligo, retaining traces even ofits minutest fibres of growth, is not much lessremarkable than the fossil condition of the ink-bags,and leads to similar conclusions.*We have elsewhere applied this line of argument to provethe sudden destruction and burial of the Saurians, whose skeletonswe find entire in the same Lias that contains the pens andink-bags of Loligo. On the other hand, we have proofs of intervalsbetween the depositions of the component strata of the Lias,in the fact, that many beds of this formation have become therepository of Coprolites, dispersed singly and irregularly at intervalsfar distant from one another, and at a distance from anyentire skeletons of the Saurians, from which they were derived ;and in the further fact, that those surfaces only of the Coprolites,which lay uppermost at the bottom of the sea, have often308 SIMILAR REMAINS IN GERMANY.We learn from a recent German publication(Zeiten's Versteinerungen Wurttembergs. Stuttgart,1832, PI. 25 and PI. 37,) that similar remainsof pens and ink bags are of frequent occurrencein the Lias shale of Allen and Boll.* Hence itis clear that the same causes which producedthese effects during the deposition of the Lias atLyme Regis, produced similar and nearly contemporaneouseffects, in that part of Germanywhich presents such identity in the characterand circumstances of these delicate organic remains.!suffered partial destruction from the action of water before theywere covered and protected by the muddy sediment that hasafterwards permanently enveloped them. Further proof of theduration of time, during the intervals of the deposition of the Lias,is found in the innumerable multitudes of the shells of variousMollusks and Conchifers which had time to arrive at maturity, atthe bottom of the sea, during the quiescent periods which intervenedbetween the muddy invasions that destroyed, and buriedsuddenly the creatures inhabiting the waters, at the time andplace of their arrival.As far as we can judge from the delineations and lines ofstructure in Zeiten's plate, our species from Lyme Regis is thesame with that which he has designated by the name of LoligoAalensis; but I have yet seen no structure in English specimenslike that of his Loligo Bollensis.f Although the resemblance between the pens of the Loligoand a feather (as might be expected from the very different usesto which they are applied) does not extend to their internalstructure, we may still, for convenience of description, considerthem as composed of the three following parts, which, in all ourfigures, will be designated by the same letters, A. B. C.First, the external filaments of the plume, (PL 28, 29, 30,STRUCTURE OF FOSSIL PENS. 309Paley has beautifully, and with his usualfelicity, described the Unity and Universality ofProvidential care, as extending from the constructionof a ring of two hundred thousandmiles diameter, to surround the body of Saturn,and be suspended, like a magnificent arch, abovethe heads of his inhabitants, to the concertingA.) analogous to those of a common feather. These filamentsterminate inwards on a straight line, or base, where theyusually form an acute angle with the outer edges of the marginalbands. Secondly, two marginal bands, B. B., dividing thebase of the filaments from the body of the shaft ; the surface ofthese bands, B., usually exhibits angular lines of growth in thesmaller fossil pens (PI. 28, Fig. 6, and PI. 29, Fig. 2,) whichbecome obtuse and vanish into broad curves, in larger specimens,PI. 29, Fig. 1 , and PI. 30. Thirdly, the broad shaft, which formsthe middle of the pen, is divided longitudinally into two equalparts by a straight line, or axis, C. : it is made up of a numberof thin plates, of a horn-like substance, laid on each other, likethin sheets of paper in pasteboard; these thin plates are composedalternately, of longitudinal, and transverse fibres ; the former(PI. 28, Fig. 7, f. f.) straight, and nearly parallel to the axisof the shaft, the latter (PI. 28, Fig. 7, e. e.) crossing the shafttransversely in a succession of symmetrical and undulating curves.These transverse fibres do not interlace the others, as the woofinterlaces the weaver's warp, but are simply laid over, and adheringto them, as in the alternate laminae of paper made from slicesof papyrus ; the strength of such paper much exceeds that madefrom flax or cotton, in which the fibres are disposed irregularlyin all directions. The fibres of both kinds are also collected atintervals into fluted fasciculi, PI. 30, f, and e, forming a successionof grooves and ridges fitted one into another, wherebythe entire surface of each plate is locked into the surface ofthe adjacent plate, in a manner admirably calculated to combineelasticity with strength.310 PROOFS OF DESIGN.and providing an appropriate mechanism for theclasping and clasping of the filaments in thefeather of the Humming-bird. The geologistdescries a no less striking assemblage of curiousprovisions, and delicate mechanisms, extendingfrom the entire circumference of the crustof our planet, to the minutest curl of the smallestfibre in each component lamina of the pen ofthe fossil Loligo. He finds these pens uniformlyassociated with the same peculiar defensive provisionof an internal ink-bag, which is similarlyassociated with the pen of the living Loligo inour actual seas ; and hence he concludes, thatsuch a union of contrivances, so nicely adjustedto the wants and weaknesses of the creatures inwhich they occur, could never have resultedfrom the blindness of chance, but could onlyhave originated in the will and intention of theCreator.SECTION III.Proofs of Design in the Mechanism of FossilChambered Shells.NAUTILUS.I shall select from the family of Multilocular,or Chambered shells, the few examples which Ishall introduce from mineral conchology, withCHAMBERED SHELLS. 311a view of illustrating certain points that haverelation to the object of the present Treatise.I select these, first, because they afford proofsof mechanical contrivances, more obviouslyadapted to a definite purpose, than can be foundin shells of simpler character. Secondly, becausethe use of many of their parts can beexplained, by reference to the economy andorganization of the existing animals, most nearlyallied to the extinct fossil genera and specieswith which we are concerned. And, thirdly, becausemany of these chambered shells can beshewn, not merely to have performed the officeof ordinary shells, as a defence for the bodyof their inhabitants ; but also to have beenhydraulic instruments of nice operation, anddelicate adjustment, constructed to act in subordinationto those universal and unchangingLaws, which appear to have ever regulated themovement of fluids.The history of Chambered shells illustratesalso some of those phenomena of fossil conchology,which relate to the limitation of speciesto particular geological Formations;* and affordsstriking proofs of the curious fact, that manyThus, the Nautilus multifarious is limited to strata ofthe Transition formation ; the N. bidorsatus to the Muschelkalk ;N. obesus, and N. linnaeus, to the Oolite Formation ; N. elegant,and N. undulated, to the Chalk. The divisions of the Tertiaryformations have also species of Nautili peculiar to themselves.312 PROGRESS OF ORGANIZATION.genera, and even whole families, have beencalled into existence, and again totally annihilated,at various and successive periods, duringthe progress of the construction of the crust ofour globe.The history of Chambered Shells tends furtherto throw light upon a point of importancein physiology, and shows that it is not alwaysby a regular gradation from lower to higherdegrees of organization, that the progress of lifehas advanced, during the early epochs of whichgeology takes cognizance. We find that manyof the more simple forms have maintainedtheir primeval simplicity, through all the variedchanges the surface of the earth has undergone ;whilst, in other cases, organizations of a higherorder preceded many of the lower forms ofanimal life ; some of the latter appearing, for thefirst time, after the total annihilation of manyspecies and genera of a more complex character.*The introduction, in the Tertiary periods, of a class ofanimals of lower organization, viz. the carnivorous Trachelipods,(See Chap. XV. Section 1,) to fill the place which, during theSecondary periods, had been occupied by a higher order, namely,the carnivorous Cephalopods, affords an example of Retrocessionwhich seems fatal to that doctrine of regular Progression,which is most insisted on by those who are unwilling to admitthe repeated interferences of Creative power, in adjusting thesuccessive changes that animal life has undergone.It will appear, on examination of the shells of fossil Nautili,that they have retained, through strata of all ages, their amorisSHELLS ILLUSTRATED BY RECENT, .313The prodigious number, variety, and beauty,of extinct Chambered shells, which prevailthroughout the Transition and Secondary strata,render it imperative that we should seek forevidence in living nature, of the character andhabits of the creatures by which they wereformed, and of the office they held in the ancienteconomy of the animal world. Such evidencewe may expect to find in those inhabitants of thepresent sea, whose shells most nearly resemblethe extinct fossils under consideration, namely,in the existing Nautilus Pompilius, (See PL 31,Fig. 1), and Spirula, (PI. 44, Figs. 1, 2).*final simplicity of structure ; a structure which remains fundamentallythe same in the Nautilus Pompilius of our existing seas,as it was in the earliest fossil species that we find in the Transitionstrata. Meantime the cognate family of Ammonites, whose shellswere more elaborately constructed than those of Nautili, commencedtheir existence at the same early period with them in theTransition strata, and became extinct at the termination ofthe Secondary formations. Other examples of later creationsof genera and species, followed by their periodical and totalextinction, before, or at the same time with the cessation of theAmmonites, are afforded by those cognate Multilocular shells,namely, the Hamite, Turrilite, Scaphite, Baculite, and Belemnite,respecting each of which I shall presently notice a fewparticulars.I omit to mention the more familiar shell of the argonautsor Paper Nautilus, because, not being a chamberedspecies, it does not apply so directly to my present subject ; andalso, because doubts still exist whether the Sepia found withinthis shell be really the constructor of it, or a parasitic intruderinto a shell formed by some other animal not yet discovered. Mr.Broderip, Mr. Gray, and Mr. G. Sowerbyby, are of opinion, thatthis shell is constructed by an animal allied to Carinthia.314 EXTENT OF THE GENUS NAUTILUS.I must enter at some length into the naturalhistory of these shells, because the conclusionsto which I have been led, by a long and carefulinvestigation of fossil species, are at variancewith those of Cuvier and Lamarck, as to the factof Ammonites being external shells, and alsowith the prevailing opinions as to the action ofthe siphon and air chambers, both in Ammonitesand Nautili.Mechanical Contrivances in the Nautilus.The Nautilus not only exists at present in ourtropical seas, but is one of those genera whichoccur in a fossil state in formations of everyage ; and the molluscous inhabitants of theseshells, having been among the earliest occupantsof the ancient deep, have maintainedtheir place through all the changes that thetenants of the ocean have undergone.The recent publication of Mr. R. Owen's excellentMemoir on the Pearly Nautilus, (NautilusPompilius Lin.) 1832, affords the first scientificdescription ever given of the animal by whichthis long-known shell is constructed.* ThisIt is a curious fact, that although the shells of the Nautilushave been familiar to naturalists, from the days of Aristotle, andabound in every collection, the only authentic account of theanimals inhabiting them, is that by Rumphius, in his history ofAmboyna, accompanied by an engraving, which, though tole-nautilusPOMP1I.1US. 315Memoir is therefore of high importance, in itsrelation to geology ; for it enables us to assert,with a confidence we could not otherwise haveassumed, that the animals by which all fossilNautili were constructed, belonged to the existingfamily of Cephalopodous Mollusks, allied tothe common Cuttle Fish. It leads us further toinfer, that the infinitely more numerous speciesof the family of Ammonites, and other cognategenera of Multilocular shells, were also constructedby animals, in whose economy they heldan office analogous to that of the existing shellof the Nautilus Pompilius. We therefore entirelyconcur with Mr. Owen, that not only is the acquisitionof this species peculiarly acceptable,from its relation to the Cephalopods of the presentcreation ; but that it is, at the same time, theliving type of a vast tribe of organized beings,whose fossilized remains testify their existence ata remote period, and in another order of things.*rally correct, as far as it goes, is yet so deficient in detail that itis impossible to learn any thing from it respecting the internalorganization of the animal.I rejoice in the present opportunity of bearing testimony tothe value of Mr. Owen's highly philosophical and most admirablememoir upon this subject; a work not less creditable to theauthor, than honourable to the Royal College of Surgeons,under whose auspices this publication has been so handsomelyconducted.A further important light is thrown upon those species offossil Multilocular shells, e. g. Orthoceratites, Baculites. FOSSIL CHAMBERED SHELLS,By the help of this living example, we are preparedto investigate the question of the uses, towhich all fossil Chambered shells may have beensubservient, and to show the existence of designand order in the mechanism, whereby they wereappropriated to a peculiar and important function,in the economy of millions of creatures long-sinceswept from the face of the living world.From the similarity of these mechanisms to thosestill employed in animals of the existing creation,we see that all such contrivances andadaptations, however remotely separated by timeor space, indicate a common origin in the willand design of one and the same Intelligence.We enter then upon our examination of thestructure and uses of fossil Chambered shells,mites, Scaphites, Belemnites, &c. (See PI. 44), in which thelast, or external chamber, seems to have been too small tocontain the entire body of the animals that formed them, byPeron's discovery of the well-known chambered shell, theSpirula, partially enclosed within the posterior extremity ofthe body of a Sepia (PI. 44, Figs. 1,2). Although some doubtshave existed respecting the authenticity of this specimen, inconsequenceof a discrepancy between two drawings professedlytaken from it (the one published in the Encyclopedia methodise,the other in Peron's Voyage), and from the loss of thespecimen itself before any anatomical examination of it had beenmade, the subsequent discovery by Captain King of the sameshell, attached to a portion of the mutilated body of somedescribed Cephalopod allied to the Sepia, leaves little doubtof the fact that the Spirula was an internal shell, having itsdorsal margin only exposed, after the manner represented in boththe drawings from the specimen of Peron. (See PI. 44, Fig. 1.)ILLUSTRATED BY NAUTILUS POMPILIUS. 317with a preliminary knowledge of the facts, thatthe recent shells, both of N. Pompilius andSpirula, are formed by existing Cephalopods ;and we hope, through them, to be enabled toillustrate the history of the countless myriads ofsimilarly constructed fossil shells whose use andoffice has never yet been satisfactorily explained.We may divide these fossils into two distinctclasses ; the one comprising external shells,whose inhabitants resided, like the inhabitantof the N. Pompilius, in the capacious cavity oftheir first or external chamber (PI. 31, Fig. 1) ;the other, comprising shells, that were whollyor partially included within the body of a Cephalopod,like the recent Spirula, (PL 44, Figs. 1, 2).In both these classes, the chambers of the shellappear to have performed the office of air vessels,or floats, by means of which the animal wasenabled either to raise itself and float near thesurface of the sea, or sink to the bottom.It will be seen by reference to PI. 31, Fig I,*that in the recent Nautilus Pompilius, the onlyorgan connecting the air chambers, with thebody of the animal, is a pipe, or siphuncle, whichdescends through an aperture and short project-theanimal is copied from PL 1 of Mr. Owen's Memoir ; theshell from a specimen in the splendid and unique collection ofmy friend W. J. Broderip, Esq., by whose unreserved communicationsof his accurate and extensive knowledge in Natural History,I have been long and largely benefited.318 MECHANISM OF NAUTILUS POMPILIUS.ing tube (y) in each successive transverse plate,till it terminates in the smallest chamber at theinner extremity of the shell. By means of thispipe, the animal has power to increase or diminishits specific gravity, as Fishes do, by distendingtheir membranous air bladder with air,or by causing it to collapse. Ashen the pipeof the Nautilus is filled with any fluid, theweight of that fluid, being added to the body andshell, renders the mass specifically heavier thanwater, and the animal sinks. When it is inclinedto rise, it withdraws the fluid from the pipe,and thus again, becoming specifically lighter,rises upwards to the surface.The motion of the Nautilus, when floating,with its arms expanded, is retrograde, like thatof the naked Cuttle Fish, being produced by thereaction of water, violently ejected from thefunnel (k). The fingers and tentacula (p, p,)are here represented as closed around the beak,which is consequently invisible ; when the animalis in action, they are probably spread forthlike the expanded rays of the sea Anemone.The horny beak of this recent Nautilus (SeePI. 31, Fig. 2, 3) resembles the bill of a Parrot.Each mandible is armed in front, with a hardand indented calcareous point, adapted to theoffice of crushing shells and crustaceous animals,of which latter, many fragments were found inthe stomach of the individual here represented.RHYNCHOLITES. 319As these belonged to species of hairy brachiaCrustacea, that live exclusively at the bottomof the sea, they shew that this Nautilus, thoughoccasionally foraging at the surface, obtains partof its food from the bottom. As it also had agizzard, much resembling that of a fowl, we seein this organ, further evidence that the existingNautilus has the power of digesting hard shells.*A similar apparatus is shewn to have existedin the beaks of the inhabitants of many speciesof fossil Nautili, and Ammonites, by the abundanceof fossil bodies called Rhyncholites, orbeak-stones, in many strata that contain thesefossil shells, e. g. in the Oolite of Stonesfield, inthe Lias at Lyme Regis and Bath, and in theMuschel-kalk at Luneville.As we are warranted in drawing conclusionsfrom the structure of the teeth in quadrupeds,and of the beak in birds, as to the nature of theIn PI. 31, Fig. 3 represents the lower mandible, armed infront like Fig. 2. with a hard and calcareous margin ; and Fig. 4represents the anterior calcareous part of the palate of the upperMandible Fig. 2. formed of the same hard calcareous substanceas its point ; this substance is of the nature of shell.These calcareous extremities of both mandibles are of sufficientstrength to break through the coverings of Crustacea and shells,and as they are placed at the extremity of a beak composed ofthin and tough horn, the power of this organ is thereby materiallyincreased.In examining the contents of the stomach of the Sepia vulgaris,and Loligo, I have found them to contain numerous shellsof small Conchifera.320 USE OF CHAMBERED SHELLS.food on which they are respectively destined tofeed, so we may conclude, from the resemblanceof the fossil beaks, or Rhyncholites, (PI. 31, Fig.5 — 11), to the calcareous portions of the beak ofthe Cephalopod, inhabiting the N. Pompilius,that many of these Rhyncholites were the beaksof the cephalopod vous inhabitants of the fossilshells with which they are associated; and thatthese Cephalopods performed the same office inrestraining excessive increase among the Crustaceousand Testaceous inhabitants of the bottomof the Transition and Secondary seas, that isnow discharged by the living Nautili, in conjunctionwith the carnivorous Trachelipods.*Assuming, therefore, on the evidence of theseanalogies, that the inhabitants of the shells of thefossil Nautili and Ammonites were Cephalopods,of similar habits to those of the animal whichconstructs the shell of the N. Pompilius, we shallnext endeavour to illustrate, by the organizationand habits of the living Nautilus, the manner inwhich these fossil shells were adapted to the useof creatures, that sometimes moved and fed atthe bottom of deep seas, and at other times roseand floated upon the surface.The Nautili (see PI. 31. Fig. 1. and PI. 32.Figs. 1. 2.) constitute a natural genus of spiraldiscoidal shells, divided internally into a seriesSee p. 250.CHAMBERS OF NAUTILUS. 321of chambers that are separated from each otherby transverse plates ; these plates are perforatedby a tube or siphon, passing through the transverseplates, either at their centre, or towardstheir internal margin. (PI. 1. Fig. 31. PL 32.Fig. 2. and PL 33.)The external open chamber is very large, andforms the receptacle of the body of the animal.The internal close chambers are void, and haveno communication with the outer chamber, exceptingfor the passage of a membranous tube,which descends through an aperture in eachplate to the innermost extremity of the shell,(PL 31, y. y. a. b. c. d. e. and PL 32, a. b. d.e. f.). These air chambers are destined to counterbalancethe weight of the increasing body andshell of the animal, and thereby to render thewhole so nearly of the weight of water, that thedifference arising from the membrane of thesiphuncle being either empty, or filled with afluid, may cause the mass to swim or sink.*The siphuncle represented in PI. 31, Fig. 1, illustrates thestructure and uses of that organ ; in the smallest whorls, fromd. inwards, it is enclosed by a thin calcareous covering, orsheath, of so soft a nature as to be readily scraped off by thepoint of a quill; this sheath may admit of expansion or contraction,together with the membraneous tube enclosed withinit. In the fossil Nautili, a similar calcareous sheath is often preserved,as in PI. 32, Figs. 2, 3, and PI. 33, and forms a connectedseries of tubes of carbonate of lime, closely fitted tothe collar of each transverse plate. In four chambers of theG. Y322 CHAMBERS CONTAINED ONLY AIR.As neither the siphuncle, nor the externalshell have any kind of aperture through whicha fluid could pass into the close chambers,* itfollows that these chambers contain nothingrecent shell (PL 31, Fig. 1, a. b. c. d.) this sheath is partiallyremoved from the desiccated membranous pipe within it, whichhas assumed the condition of a black elastic substance, resemblingthe black continuous siphuncular pipe that is frequentlypreserved in a carbonaceous state in fossil Ammonites.At that part of each transverse plate, which is perforated forthe passage of the siphuncle, (PI. 31, Fig. 1, y. y.), a portionof its shelly matter projects inwards to about one-fourth of thedistance across each chamber, and forms a collar, around themembranous pipe, thus directing its passage through the transverseplates, and also affording to it, when distended with fluid,a strong support at each collar. A similar projecting collar isseen in the transverse plate of a fossil Nautilus. (PL 32, Fig. 2, e,and Fig. 3, e, i. and PL 33.) A succession of such supportsplaced at short intervals from one another, divides this long andthin membranaceous tube, when distended, into a series of shortcompartments, or small oval sacs, each sac communicating withthe adjacent sacs by a contracted aperture or neck at both itsends, and being firmly supported around this neck by the collarof each transverse plate. (See PL 32, Figs. 2, 3, and PL 33.)The strength of each sac is thus increased by the shortness ofthe distance between its two extremities, and the entire pipe, thussubdivided into thirty or forty distinct compartments, derivesfrom every subdivision an accession of power to sustain thepressure of any fluid that may be introduced to its interior.We learn from Mr. Owen, that there was no possibility ofthe access of water to the air chambers between the exteriorof this pipe and the siphon apertures of the transverse plates ;because the entire circumference of the mantle in which the siphuncleoriginates, is firmly attached to the shell by a hornygirdle, impenetrable to any fluid. — Memoir on Nautilus Pomplies, p. 47.FORTIFICATION OF CHAMBERS. 3*23more than air, and must consequently be exposedto great pressure when at the bottom ofthe sea. Several contrivances are therefore introducedto fortify them against this pressure.First, the circumference of the external shellis constructed every way upon the principles ofan Arch, (see PI. 31, Fig. 1, and PI. 32, Fig. 1.)so as to offer the greatest resistance to pressuretending to force it inwards in all directions.Secondly, this arch is further fortified by theaddition of numerous minute Ribs, which arebeautifully marked in the fossil specimens representedat PI. 32, Fig. 1 . In this fossil the externalshell exhibits fine wavy lines of growth, which,though individually small and feeble, are collectivelyof much avail as ribs to increase theaggregate amount of strength. (See PI. 32, Fig. 1 .a. to b.)Thirdly, the arch is rendered still stronger bythe position of the edges of the internal Transverseplates, nearly at right angles to the sidesof the external shell, (see PL 32, Fig. 1, b. to c.)The course of the edges of these transverse platesbeneath the ribs of the outer shell is so directed,that they act as cross braces, or spinners, tofortify the sides of the shell against the inwardpressure of deep water. This contrivance isanalogous to that adopted in fortifying a shipfor voyages in the Arctic Seas, against thepressure of ice-bergs, by the introduction of.'324 ADDITION OF CHAMBERS.an extraordinary number of transverse beamsand bulk heads.*We may next notice a fourth contrivance bywhich the apparatus that gives the shell itspower of floating, is progressively maintained indueproportion to the increasing weight and bulkof the body of the animal, and of the externalchamber in which it resides ; this is effected bysuccessive additions of new transverse Platesacross the bottom of the outer chamber, thusconverting into air chambers that part, whichhad become too small for the body of the Sepia.This operation, repeated at intervals in due proportionto the successive stages of growth of theouter shell, maintains its efficacy as a float,The disposition of the curvatures of the transverse ribs, orlines of growth, in a different direction from the curvatures ofthe internal transverse plates, affords an example of further contrivancefor producing strength in the shells both of recent andfossil Nautili. As the internal transverse plates are convex inwards,(see PL 32, Fig. 1, b. to c.) whilst the ribs of the outershell are in the greater part of their course convex outwards,these ribs intersect the curved edges of the transverse plates atmany points, and thus divide them into a series of curvilinearparallelograms ; the two shorter sides of each parallelogrambeing formed by the edges of transverse plates, whilst its twolonger sides are formed by segments of the external ribs. Thesame principle of construction here represented in our plate ofNautilus hexagon, extends to other species of its family ofNautilus, in many of which the ribs are more minute ; it is alsoapplied in other families of fossil chambered shells; e. g. theAmmonites, PL 35, and PL 38. Scaphites, PL 44, Fig. 15.Hamites, PL 44, Fig. 8—13. Turrilites, PL 44, Fig. 14, andBaculites, PL 44, Fig. 5.DISTANCES OF TRANSVERSE PLATES. 3*25enlarging gradually and periodically until theanimal has arrived at full maturity.*A fifth consideration is had of mechanicaladvantage, in disposing the Distance at whichthese successive transverse Plates are set fromone another. (See PI. 31. Fig. 1. and PI. 32,Fig. 1, 2). Had these distances increased in thesame proportion as the area of the air chambers,the external shell would have been without duesupport beneath those sides of the largest chambers,where the pressure is greatest : for this aremedy is provided in the simple contrivanceof placing the transverse plates proportionallynearer to one another, as the chambers, frombecoming larger, require an increased degree ofsupport.Sixthly, The last contrivance, which I shallhere notice, is that which regulates the ascentand descent of the animal by the mechanism ofthe Siphuncle. The use of this organ has neveryet been satisfactorily made out; even Mr.Owen's most important Memoir leaves its mannerof operation uncertain ; but the appearanceswhich it occasionally presents in a fossil state,(See PI. 32, Fig. 2, 3, and PL 33,)t supplyIn a young Nautilus Pompilius in the collection of Mr.Brodevip, there are only seventeen Septa. Dr. Hook says thathe has found in some shells as many as forty. A cast, expressingthe form of a single air chamber, of the Nautilus Hexagonis represented in PI. 42, Fig. 1.t PI. 32, Fig. 2, represents a fractured portion of the interiorof a Nautilus Hexagon, having the transverse plates (c. c'.)326 MANNER OF ACTIONevidence, which taken in conjunction with Mr.Owen's representation of its termination in alarge sac surrounding the heart of the animal,(P. !54, p, p, a. a.) appears sufficient to decide thislong disputed question. If we suppose this sac(p, p.) to contain a pericardial fluid, the placeof which is alternately changed from the pericardiumto the siphuncle, we shall find in thisshifting fluid an hydraulic balance or adjustingpower, causing the shell to sink when the pericardialfluid is forced into the siphuncle, and toencrusted with calcareous spar ; the Siphuncle also is similarlyencrusted, and distended in a manner which illustrates theaction of this organ. (PI. 32, Fig. 2, a. a 1 , a 3 , a 3 , d. e. f,and Fig. 3, d. e. f). The fracture at Fig. 2, b. shews the diameterof the siphuncle, where it passes through a transverseplate, to be much smaller than it is midway between these Plates(atd. e. f). The transverse sections at Fig. 2 a. and b., andthe longitudinal sections at Fig. 2, d. e. f. and Fig. 3, d. e. f.,shew that the interior of the siphuncle is filled with stone, of thesame nature with the stratum in which the shell was lodged.These earthy materials, having entered the orifice of the pipe ata in a soft and plastic state, have formed a cast which shews theinterior of this pipe, when distended, to have resembled a stringof oval beads, connected at their ends by a narrow neck, andenlarged at their centre to nearly double the diameter of thisneck.A similar distension of nearly the entire siphuncle by the stonymaterial of the rock in which the shell was imbedded, is seen inthe specimen of Nautilus stratum from the Lias of Whitby,represented at PI. 33. The Lias which fills this pipe, must haveentered it in the state of liquid mud, to the same extent that thepericardium fluid entered, during the hydraulic action of the siphunclein the act of sinking ; not one of the air-chambers hasadmitted the smallest particle of this mud; they are all filledOF THE SIPHUNCLE. 3*27become buoyant, whenever this fluid returnsto the pericardium. On this hypothesis alsothe chambers would be continually filled withair alone, the elasticity of which would readilyadmit of the alternate expansion and contractionof the siphuncle, in the act of admittingor rejecting the pericardial fluid.The principle to which we thus refer the risingand sinking of the living Nautilus, is the samewhich regulates the ascent and descent of theWater Balloon : the application of external pres-withcalcareous spar, subsequently introduced by gradual infiltration,and at successive periods which are marked by changesin the colour of the spar. In both these fossil Nautili, the entireseries of the earthy casts within the siphuncle represents the bulkof fluid which this pipe could hold.The sections, PI. 32, Fig. 3, d. e. f., shew the edges of the calcareoussheath surrounding the oval casts of three compartmentsof the expanded siphuncle. This calcareous sheath was probablyflexible, like that surrounding the membranous pipe ofthe recent Nautilus Pompilius. (PI. 31, Fig. 1, b. d. e.) Thecontinuity of this sheath across the air chambers, (PJ. 32,Figs. 2, d. e. f. Fig. 3, d. e. f. and PI. 33), shows that therewas no communication for the passage of any fluid from thesiphuncle into these chambers : had any such existed, someportion of the fine earthy matter, which in these two fossilsforms the casts of the siphuncle, must have passed through itinto these chambers. Nothing has entered them, hut pure crystallizedspar, introduced by infiltration through the pores of theshell, after it had undergone sufficient decomposition to be percolatedby water, holding in solution carbonate of lime.The same argument applies to the solid casts of pure crystallizedcarbonate of lime, which have entirely filled the chambersof the specimen PI. 32, Fig. 1 ; and to all fossil Nautili andAmmonites, in which the air chambers are either wholly void, or328 NAUTILUS POMPILIUS.sure through a membrane that covers the columnof water in a tall glass, forces a portion of thiswater into the cavity, or single air-chamber ofthe balloon, which immediately begins to sink ;on the removal of this pressure, the elasticityof the compressed air causing it to return to itsformer volume, again expels the water, and theballoon begins to rise.*I shall conclude this attempt to illustrate thestructure and economy of fossil Nautili bythose of the living species, by shewing in whatmanner the chambers of the pearly Nautilus,supposing them to be permanently filled onlywith air, and the action of the siphuncle, supposingit to be the receptacle only of a fluidsecretion, interchanging its place alternatelyfrom the siphuncle to the pericardium, wouldbe subsidiary to the movements of the animal,both at the surface, and bottom of the sea.First, The animal was seen and captured bypartially, or entirely filled with pure crystallized carbonate oflime. (See PI. 42, Fig, 1, 2, 3, and PI. 36). In all such cases,it is clear that no communication existed, by which water couldpass from the interior of the siphon to the air chambers. Whenthe pipe was ruptured, or the external shell broken, the earthysediment, in which such broken shells were lodged, findingthrough these fractures admission to the air chambers, has filledthem with clay, or sand or limestone.The substance of the siphuncle is a thin and strong membrane,with no appearance of muscular fibres, by which it couldcontract or expand itself; its functions, therefore, must havebeen entirely passive, in the process of admitting or ejecting anyfluid to or from its interior. — See Owen's Memoir, p. 10.ITS ACTION AT THE SURFACE. 3*29Mr. Bennett, floating at the surface, with theupper portion of the shell raised above the water,and kept in a vertical position by means of theincluded air (see PI. 31. Fig. 1.); this positionis best adapted to the retrograde motion, whicha Sepia derives from the violent ejection ofwater through its funnel (k) ; thus far, the air-chambers,serve to maintain both the shell andbody of the animal in a state of equilibrium atthe surface.Secondly, The next point to be considered isthe mode of operation of the siphuncle and air-chambers,in the act of sinking suddenly fromthe surface to the bottom. These are explainedin the note subjoined.*It appears from the figure of the animal, PI. 34, with whichI have been favoured by Mr. Owen, that the upper extremityof the siphuncle marked by the insertion of the probe b., terminatesin the cavity of the pericardium p, p. As this cavity maycontain a fluid, more dense than water, excreted by the glandularfollicles d. d., and is apparently of such a size that its contentswould suffice to fill the siphuncle, it is probable that this fluidforms the circulating medium of adjustment, and regulates theascent or descent of the animal by its interchange of place fromthe pericardium to the siphuncle.When the arms and body are expanded, the fluid remains inthe pericardium, and the siphuncle is empty, and collapsed, andsurrounded by the portions of air that are permanently confinedwithin each air-chamber ; in this state, the specific gravity of thebody and shell together is such as to cause the animal to rise,and be sustained floating at the surface.When, on any alarm, the arms and body are contracted, anddrawn into the shell, the retraction of these parts, causing pressureon the exterior of the pericardium, forces its fluid contentsdownwards into the siphuncle ; and the bulk of the body being330 ACTION AT THE BOTTOM.Thirdly, It remains to consider the effect ofthe air, supposing it to be retained continuallywithin the chambers, at the bottom of the sea.Here, if the position of the moving animal bebeneath the mouth of the shell, like that of asnail as it crawls along the ground, the air withinthe chambers would maintain the shell, buoyant,and floating over the body of the animal in athus diminished, without increasing the bulk of the shell, intowhose cavities the fluid is withdrawn, the specific gravity of thewhole mass is suddenly increased, and the animal begins to sink.The air within each chamber remains under compression, aslong as the siphuncle continues distended by the pericardialfluid; and returning, by its elasticity, to its former state, as soonas the pressure of the arms and body is withdrawn from thepericardium, forces the fluid back again into the cavity of thisorgan ; and thus the shell, diminished as to its specific gravity,has a tendency to rise.The place of the pericardial fluid, therefore, will be always inthe pericardium, excepting when it is forced into and retained inthe siphuncle, by muscular pressure, during the contraction ofthe arms and body closed up within the shell. When these areexpanded, either on the surface, or at the bottom of the sea,the water will have free access to the branches, and the movementsof the heart will proceed freely in the distended pericardium;which will be emptied of its fluid at those times only, whenthe body is closed, and the access of water to the franchise consequentlyimpeded.The following experiments shew that the weight of fluid requisiteto be added to the shell of a Nautilus, in order to make itsink, is about half an ounce.I took two perfect shells of a Nautilus Pompilius, each weighingabout six ounces and a half in air, and measuring about seveninches across their largest diameter ; and having stopped theSiphuncle with wax, I found that each shell, when placed in freshwater,required the weight of a few grains more than an ounce toOPINIONS OF HOOK AND PARKINSON. 331vertical position, with little or no muscular exertion,and leave the creature at ease to regulatethe movements of its tentacula (p) in crawlingand seizing its prey.*Dr. Hook considered (Hook's Experiments,8vo. 1726, page 308) that the air chamberswere filled alternately with air or water ; andParkinson (Organic Remains, vol. iii. p. 102),admitting that these chambers were not accessibleto water, thinks that the act of risingor sinking depends on the alternate introductionof air or water into the siphuncle ; but he is ata loss to find the source from which this aircould be obtained at the bottom of the sea, or tomake it sink. As the shell, when attached to the living animal,was probably a quarter of an ounce heavier than these dry deadshells, and the specific gravity of the body of the animal mayhave exceeded that of water to the amount of another quarter ofan ounce, there remains about half an ounce, for the weight offluid which being introduced into the siphuncle, would causethe shell to sink ; and this quantity seems well proportionedto the capacity both of the pericardium, and of the distendedsiphuncle.If the chambers were filled with water, the shell could notbe thus suspended without muscular exertion, and instead ofbeing poised vertically over the body, in a position of ease andsafety, would be continually tending to fall flat upon its side ;thus exposing itself to injury by friction, and the animal toattacks from its enemies. Rumphius states, that at the bottom,He creeps with his boat above him, and with his head andbarbs (tentacula) on the ground, making a tolerably quick progress.I have observed that a similar vertical position is maintainedby the shell of the Planorbis corners, whilst in the act ofcrawling: at the bottom.332 CONCLUSION.explain " in what manner the animal effectedthose modifications of the tube and its containedair, on which the variation of its buoyancydepended"* The theory which supposes thechambers of the shell to be permanently filled ivithair alone, and the siphuncle to be the organ whichregulates the rising or sinking of the animal, bychanging the place of the pericardial fluid, seemsadequate to satisfy every hydraulic condition ofa Problem that has hitherto received no satisfactorysolution.I have dwelt thus long upon this subject, onaccount of its importance, in explaining thecomplex structure, and hitherto imperfectly understoodfunctions, of all the numerous and widelydisseminated families of fossil chambered shells,that possessed siphunculi. If, in all these families,it can be shewn that the same principlesof mechanism, under various modifications, haveprevailed from the first commencement of organiclife unto the present hour, we can hardlyavoid the conclusion which would refer suchunity of organizations to the will and agencyof one and the same intelligent First Cause, andlead us to regard them all as " emanations ofthat Infinite Wisdom, that appears in the shapeand structure of all other created beings, "fThe recent observations of Mr. Owen shew, that there is nogland connected with the siphuncle, similar to that which issupposed to secrete air in the air-bladder of fishes.f Dr. Hook's Experiments, p. 306.AMMONITES. 333SECTION IV.AMMONITES.Having entered thus largely into the history ofthe Mechanism of the shells of Nautili, we havehereby prepared ourselves for the considerationof that of the kindred family of Ammonites, inwhich all the essential parts are so similar inprinciple to those of the shells of Nautili, as toleave no doubt that they were subservient to alike purpose in the economy of the numerousextinct species of Cephalopodous Mollusks, fromwhich these Ammonites have been derived.Geological Distribution of Ammonites.The family of Ammonites extends through theentire series of the fossiliferous Formations, fromthe Transition strata to the Chalk inclusive.M. Brochant, in his Translation of De la Beche'sManual of Geology, enumerates 270 species;these species differ according to the age of thestrata in which they are found, \ and vary intThus one of the first forms under which this family appeared,the Ammonites Henslowe, (PI. 40, Fig. 1), ceased with theTransition formation; the A. Nodus (PI. 40, Figs. 4, 5.)began and terminated its period of existence with the Muschel-Talk. Other genera and species of Ammonites, in like manner,begin and end with certain definite strata, in the Oolitic and Cretaceousformations; e. g. the A. Auckland (PI. 37, Fig. 6.) isEXTENT AND NUMBER OF SPECIES.size from a line to more than four feet in diameter.*peculiar to the Lias ; the A. Goodhalli to the Greensand ; and theA. Rustics to the Chalk. There are few, if any, species whichextend through the whole of the Secondary periods, or whichhave passed into the Secondary, from the Transition period.The following Tabular Arrangement of the distribution ofAmmonites, in different geological formations, is given by ProfessorPhillips in his Guide to Geology, 1834, p. 77.SUB-GENERA OF AMMONITES.LIVING SPECIES.COOOCO0)■l-JOSU0)"C<.1'53<'2o(-o-OQEhcooQJSfact)CJpoasSS<'*3aCDQo"fioPcuP-:In Tertiary strata. . . .In Cretaceous system.In Saliferous system .In Carboniferous systIn Primary strata . .Total, 223 species.It is easy to see how important, in questions concerning therelative antiquity of stratified rocks, is a knowledge of Ammonites,since whole sections of them are characteristic of certainsystems of rocks." — Phillips's Guide to Geology, 8vo. 1 834, sec. 82.X The strata here termed primary are those which, in theSection, (PI. 1), I have included in the lower region of the transitionseries.Mr. Sowerbyby (Min. Conch, vol. iv. p. 79 and p. 81,) andMr. Mantelll speak of Ammonites in Chalk, having a diameterof three feet. Sir T. Harvey, and Mr. Keith Milnes, have recentlymeasured Ammonites in the Chalk near Margate, whichexceeded four feet in diameter ; and this in cases where thediameter can have been in a very small degree enlarged bypressure.GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION. 335It is needless here to speculate either on thephysical, or final causes, which produced thesecurious changes of species, in this highest orderof the Molluscous inhabitants of the seas, duringsome of the early and the middle ages of geologicalchronology ; but the exquisite symmetry,beauty, and minute delicacy of structure, thatpervade each variation of contrivance throughoutseveral hundred species, leave no room to doubtthe exercise of Design and Intelligence in theirconstruction ; although we cannot always pointout the specific uses of each minute variation, inthe arrangement of parts fundamentally thesame.The geographical distribution of Ammonitesin the ancient world, seems to have partaken ofthat universality, we find so common in the animalsand vegetables of a former condition of ourglobe, and which differs so remarkably fromthe varied distribution that prevails among existingforms of organic life. We find, the samegenera, and, in a few cases, the same species ofAmmonites, in strata, apparently of the sameage, not only throughout Europe, but also indistant regions of Asia, and of North and SouthAmerica.*Dr. Gerard has discovered at the elevation of sixteen thousandfeet in the Himalaya Mountains, species of Ammonites,e. g. A. Wolcott, and A. Communis, identical with those of theLias at Whitby and Lyme Regis. He has also found in the sameparts of the Himalaya, several species of Belemnite, with PARTS OF AN AMMONITE.Hence we infer that during the Secondary andTransition periods a more general distribution ofthe same species, than exists at present, prevailedin regions of the world most remotelydistant from one another.An Ammonite, like a Nautilus, is composed ofthree essential parts: 1st. An external shell,usually of a flat discoidal form, and having itssurface strengthened and ornamented with ribs(see PI. 35, and PI. 37.) 2nd. A series of internalair chambers formed by transverse plates, intersectingthe inner portion of the shell, (see PI. 36and 41). 3rd. A siphuncle, or pipe, commencingat the bottom of the outer chamber, andthence passing through the entire series of airchambers to the innermost extremity of the shell,(see PI. 36, d. e. f. g. h. i.) In each of theseparts, there are evidences of mechanism, andrebratulse, and other Bivalves, that occur in the English Oolite ;thereby establishing the existence of the Lias, and Oolite formationsin that elevated and distant region of the world. He hasalso collected in the same Mountains, shells of the genera Spirited,Producta, and Terebratula, which occur in the Transition formationsof Europe and America.The Greensand of New Jersey also contains Ammonites mixedwith Hamites and Scaphites, as in the Greensand of England,and Captain Beeches and Lieutenant Beecher found Ammoniteson the coast of Chili, in Lat. 36. S. in the Cliffs near Conception; a fragment of one of these Ammonites is preserved in theMuseum of Haller Hospital at Gosport.Mr. Sowerbyby possesses fossil shells from Brazil resembling thoseof the Inferior Oolite of England.AMMONITES WERE EXTERNAL SHELLS. 337consequently of design, a few of which I shallendeavour briefly to point out.External Shell.The use and place of the shells of Ammoniteshas much perplexed geologists and conchologists.Cuvier and Lamarck, guided by the analogiesafforded by the Spirula, supposed them to beinternal shells.* There is, however, good reasonto believe that they were entirely external, andthat the position of the body of the animal withinthese shells was analogous to that of the inhabitantof the Nautilus Pompilius. (See PL 31,Fig. 1).The smallness of the outer chamber, or place of lodgmentfor the animal, is advanced by Cuvier in favour of his opinionthat Ammonites, like the Spirula, were internal shells. Thisreason is probably founded on observations made upon imperfectspecimens. The outer chamber of Ammonites is veryseldom preserved in a perfect state, but when this happens, itis found to bear at least as large a proportion to the chamberedpart of the shell, as the outer cell of the N. Pompiliusbears to the chambered interior of that shell. It often occupiesmore than half, (see PI. 36. a. b. c. d.) and, in some cases,the whole circumference of the outer whorl. This open chamberis not thin and feeble, like the long anterior chamber of theSpirula, which is placed within the body of the animal producingthis shell ; but is nearly of equal thickness with the sides ofthe close chambers of the Ammonite.Moreover, the margin of the mature Ammonite is in some speciesreflected in a kind of scroll, like the thickened margin of the shellof the garden snail, giving to this part a strength which wouldapparently be needless to an internal shell. (See PI. 37. Fig. 3. d.)The presence of spines also in certain species, (as in A.G. Z338 ANIMAL OCCUPIED THE LAST CHAMBER.Mr. De la Beche has shewn that the mineralcondition of the outer chamber of many Ammonites,from the Lias at Lyme Regis, proves thatthe entire body was contained within it ; andthat these animals were suddenly destroyed andburied in the earthy sediment of which the liasis composed, before their bodies had either undergonedecay, or been devoured by the crustaceousCarnivora with which the bottom of thesea then abounded.*As all these shells served the double office ofaffording protection, and acting as floats, it wasnecessary that they should be thin, or theywould have been too heavy to rise to the surface :it was not less necessary that they should bestrong, to resist pressure at the bottom of thesea ; and accordingly we find them fitted for thisdouble function, by the disposition of their ma-aratus,A. Sowerbii,) affords a strong argument against thetheory of their having been internal shells. These spines whichhave an obvious use for protection, if placed externally, wouldseem to have been useless, and perhaps noxious in an internalposition, and are without example in any internal structure withwhich we are acquainted.In the Ammonites in question, the outer extremity of thefirst great chamber in which the body of the animal was contained,is filled with stone only to a small depth, (see PI. 36,from a. to b.) ; the remainder of this chamber from b. to c, isoccupied by brown calcareous spar, which has been ascertainedby Dr. Prout to owe its colour to the presence of animal matter,whilst the internal air chambers and siphuncle are filled with-pure white spar. The extent of the brown calcareous spar, therefore,in the outer chamber, represents the space which wasFORTIFICATION OF AMMONITES. 339trials, in a manner calculated to combine lightnessand buoyancy with strength.First, The entire shell, (PI. 35,) is one continuousarch, coiled spirally around itself in sucha manner, that the base of the outer whorls restsupon the crown of the inner whorls, and thusthe keel or back is calculated to resist pressure,in the same manner as the shell of a commonhen's egg resists great force, if applied in thedirection of its longitudinal diameter.Secondly, besides this general arch-like form,the shell is further strengthened by the insertionof ribs, or transverse arches, which give to manyof the species their most characteristic feature,and produce in all, that peculiar beauty whichinvariably accompanies the symmetrical repetitionof a series of spiral curves. See PI. 37,Figs. 1—10.)From the disposition of these ribs over theoccupied by the body of the animal after it had shrunk withinits shell, at the moment of its death, leaving void the outerportion only of its chamber, from a. to b., to receive the muddysediment in which the shell was imbedded.I have many specimens from the lias of Whitby, of the AmmonitesCommunis, in which the outer chamber thus filled withspar, occupies nearly the entire last whorl of the shell, its largestextremity only being filled with lias. From specimens of thiskind we also learn, that the animal inhabiting the shell of anAmmonite, had no ink bag ; if such an organ existed, tracesof its colour must have been found within the cavity which containedthe body of the animal at the moment of its death. Theprotection of a shell seems to have rendered the presence of anink bag superfluous.340 FLUTED FORM OF TvIBS.surface of the external shell, there arise mechanicaladvantages for increasing its strength,founded on a principle that is practically appliedin works of human art. The principle I alludeto, is that by which the strength and stiffnessof a thin metallic plate are much increased bycorrugating, or applying flutings to its surface.A common pencil-case, if made of corrugated orfluted metal, is stronger than if the same quantityof metal were disposed in a simple tube.Culinary moulds of tin and copper are in thesame way strengthened, by folds or flutingsaround their margin, or on their convex surfaces.The recent application of thin plates of corrugatediron to the purpose of making self-supportingroofs, in which the corrugations of theiron supply the place, and combine the power ofbeams and rafters, is founded on the same principlethat strengthens the vaulted shells of Ammonites.In all these cases, the ribs or elevatedportions, add to the plates of shell, or metal,the strength resulting from the convex form ofan arch, without materially increasing theirweight ; whilst the intermediate depressed partsbetween these arches, are suspended and supportedby the tenacity and strength of thematerial. (See PL 37, Figs. 1—10.*)The figures engraved at PI. 37, afford examples of variouscontrivances to give strength and beauty to the external shell.The first and simplest mode, is that represented in PI. 35 andSUB-DIVISION OF RIBS. 341The general principle of dividing and subdividingthe ribs, in order to multiply supports asthe vault enlarges, is conducted nearly on thesame plan, and for the same purpose, as thedivisions and subdivisions of the ribs beneaththe groin work, in the flat vaulted roofs of theflorid Gothic Architecture.Another source of strength is introduced inmany species of Ammonites by the elevation ofparts of the ribs into little dome-shaped tuber.37, Fig. 1 and 6. Here each rib is single, and extends overthe whole surface, becoming gradually wider, as the space enlargestowards the outer margin, or back of the shell.The next variation is that represented (PI. 37, Figs. 2, 7, 9,),where the ribs, originating singly on the inner margin, soon bifurcateinto two ribs that extend outwards, and terminate uponthe dorsal keel.In the third case, (PI. 37. Fig 4), the ribs, originate simply,and bifurcating as the shell enlarges, extend this bifurcationentirely around its circular back. Between each pair of bifurcatedribs, a third or auxiliary short rib is interposed, to fill upthe enlarged space on the dorsal portion where the shell isbroadest.In a fourth modification, (PI. 37, Fig 3), the ribs, originatingsingly on the internal margin, soon become tribunate, andexpand outwards, around the circular back of the shell. Aperfect mouth of this shell is represented at PI. 37. Fig. 3, d.A fifth case is that (PI. 37, Fig. 5,) in which the simple ribbecomes tribunate as the space enlarges, and one or moreauxiliary short ribs are also interposed, between each tribulation.These subdivisions are not always maintained with numericalfidelity through every individual of the same species, nor over thewhole surface of the same shell ; their use, however, is alwaysthe same, viz. to cover and strengthen those spaces which theexpansion of the shell towards its outer circumference, wouldhave rendered weak without the aid of some such compensation.342 VAULTED DOMES AND BOSSES.les, or bosses, thus superadding the strength ofa dome to that of the simple arch, at each pointwhere these bosses are inserted.*The bosses thus often introduced at the origin,division, and termination of the ribs, resemblethose applied by architects to the intersections ofthe ribs in Gothic roofs, and are much more efficientin producing strength. j" These tuberculeshave the effect of little vaults or domes ; and theyare usually placed at those parts of the externalshell, beneath which there is no immediate supportfrom the internal transverse plates (seePL 37, Fig. 8. PL 42, Fig. 3. c. d. e. and PL 40\Fig. 5.)JThese places are usually either at the point of bifurcation,as in PI. 37, Figs. 2, 7, 9, 10, or at the point of tribulation, asin Fig. 3.f The ribs and bosses in vaulted roofs project beneath theunder surface of the arch ; in the shells of Ammonites, they areraised above the convex surface.% In PI. 37, Fig. 9 (A. varians), the strength of the ribs andproportions of the tubercles are variable, but the general characterexhibits a triple series of large tubercles, rising from the surfaceof the transverse ribs. Each of these ribs commences with asmall tubercle near the inner margin of the shell. At a shortdistance outwards is a second and larger tubercle, from whichthe rib bifurcates, and terminates in a third tubercle, raised atthe extremity of each fork upon the dorsal margin.Many species of Ammonites have also a dorsal ridge or keel,(PI. 37, Figs. 1. 2. 6.) passing along the back of the shell, immediatelyover the siphuncle, and apparently answering, in somecases, the further purpose of a cut-water, and keel (PL 37, Figs.1, 2.). In certain species, e. g. in the A. laetus (PI. 37.ECONOMY AND VARIETY OF COMPENSATIONS. 343Similar tubercles are introduced with the sameadvantage of adding Strength as well as Beautyin many other cognate genera of chamberedshells. (PI. 44, Fig. 9. 10. 14. 15.)In all these cases, we recognize the exercise ofDiscretion and Economy in the midst of Abundance; distributing internal supports but sparingly,to parts which, from their external form,were already strong, and dispensing them abun-Fig. 7, a. c.) there is a double keel, produced by a deep depressionalong the dorsal margin; and the keels are fortified by aline of tubercles placed at the extremity of the transverse ribs.In the A. varians (PI. 37, 9. a. b. c.) which has a triple keel,the two external ones are fortified by tubercles, as. in Fig. 7, and.the central keel is a simple convex arch.PI. 37, Fig. 8, offers an example of domes, or bosses, compensatingthe weakness that, without them, would exist in theA. catena, from the minuteness of its ribs, and the flatness ofthe sides of the shell. These flat parts are all supported by anabundant distribution of the edges of the transverse platesdirectly beneath them, whilst those parts which are elevated intobosses, being sufficiently strong, are but slightly provided withany other support. The back of this shell also, being nearly flat,(PI. 37, Fig. 8. b. c.) is strongly supported by ramifications ofthe transverse plates.In PI. 37, Fig. 6, which has a triple keel, (that in the centrepassing over the siphuncle), this triple elevation affords compensationfor the weakness that would otherwise arise from the greatbreadth and flatness of the dorsal portion of this species. Betweenthese three keels, or ridges, are two depressions or dorsalfurrows, and as these furrows form the weakest portion of theshell, a compensation is provided by conducting beneath themthe denticulated edges of the transverse plates, so that they presentlong lines of resistance to external pressure.344 TRANSVERSE PLATES AND AIR CHAMBERS.cantle beneath those parts only, which withoutthem, would have been weak.We find an infinity of variations in the formand sculpture of the external shell, and a notless beautiful variety in the methods of internalfortification, all adapted, with architectural advantage,to produce a combination of Ornamentwith Utility. The ribs also are variously multiplied,as the increasing space demands increasedsupport ; and are variously adorned and armedwith domes and bosses, wherever there is needof more than ordinary strength.Transverse Plates, and Air Chambers.The uses of the internal air chambers will bestbe understood by reference to our figures. PL36 represents a longitudinal section of an Ammonitebisecting the transverse plates in thecentral line where their curvature is most simple.On each side of this line, the curvature of theseplates become more complicated, until, at theirtermination in the external shell, they assumea beautifully sinuous, or foliated arrangement,resembling the edges of a parsley leaf, (PI. 38),the uses of which, in resisting pressure, I shallfurther illustrate by the aid of graphic representations.At PI. 35, from d. to e. we see the edgesof the same transverse plates which, in PL 36,THEIR USE IN RESISTING PRESSURE. 345are simple curves, becoming foliated at theirjunction with the outer shell, and thus distributingtheir support more equally beneath allits parts, than if these simple curves had beencontinued to the extremity of the transverseplates. In more than two hundred knownspecies of Ammonites, the transverse plates presentsome beautifully varied modifications ofthis foliated expansion at their edges; the effectof which, in every case, is to increase thestrength of the outer shell, by multiplying thesubjacent points of resistance to external pressure.We know that the pressure of the sea, atno great depth, will force a cork into a bottlefilled with air, or crush a hollow cylinder orsphere of thin copper; and as the air chambersof Ammonites were subject to similar pressure,whilst at the bottom of the sea, they requiredsome peculiar provision to preserve them fromdestruction,* more especially as most zoologistsCaptain Smith found, on two trials, that the cylindricalcopper air tube, under the vane attached to Massey's patent loo-collapsed,and was crushed quite flat under a pressure of aboutthree hundred fathoms. A claret bottle, filled with air, and wellcorked, was burst before it had descended four hundred fathoms.He also found that a bottle filled with fresh water, and corked, hadthe cork forced at about a hundred and eighty fathoms belowthe. surface ; in such cases, the fluid sent down is replaced bysalt water, and the cork which had been forced in, is sometimesinverted.Captain Beaufort also informs me, that he has frequently sunkcorked bottles in the sea more than a hundred fathoms deep,346 CURVATURES OF TRANSVERSE PLATES.agree that they existed at great depths, " dansles grandes profondeurs des mers"*Here again we find the inventions of artanticipated in the works of nature, and the sameprinciple applied to resist the inward pressure ofthe sea upon the shells of Ammonites, that anengineer makes use of in fixing transverse staysbeneath the planks of the wooden centre onwhich he builds his arch of stone.The disposition of these supports assumesthroughout the family of Ammonites a differentarrangement from the more simple curvature ofthe edges of the transverse plates within theshells of Nautili ; and we find a probable causefor this variation, in the comparative thinness ofthe outer shells of many Ammonites ; since thisexternal weakness creates a need of more internalsupport under the pressure of deep water,than was requisite in the stronger and thickershells of Nautili.This support is effected by causing the edgesof the transverse plates to deviate from a simplesome of them empty, and others containing a fluid. The emptybottles were sometimes crushed, at other times, the cork wasforced in, and the bottle returned full of sea water. The cork ofthe bottles containing a fluid was uniformly forced in, and thefluid exchanged for sea water ; the cork was always returned tothe neck of the bottle, sometimes, but not always, in an invertedposition.See Lamarck, who cites Bruguieres with approbation on thispoint.— Animaux sans: Vert: vol. vii. p. 635.SINUOUS EDGES OF TRANSVERSE PLATES. 347curve, into a variety of attenuated ramificationsand undulating sutures. (See PI. 38. and PI.37, Figs. 6, 8). Nothing can be more beautifulthan the sinuous windings of these suturesin many species, at their union with the exteriorshell; adorning it with a succession of mostgraceful forms, resembling festoons of foliage,and elegant embroidery. When these thin septaare converted into iron pyrites, their edges appearlike golden filigrane work, meanderingamid the pellucid spar, that fills the chambersof the shell.*The A. Heterophyllus, PI. (38), is so called from the apparentoccurrence of two different forms of foliage ; its laws ofdentation are the same as in other Ammonites, but the ascendingsecondary saddles (PI. 38. S. S.) which, in all Ammonites areround, are in this species longer than ordinary, and catch attentionmore than the descending points of the lobes, (PI. 38. d. 1.)The figures of the edge of one transverse plate are repeated ineach successive plate. The animal, as it enlarged its shell, thusleaving behind it a new chamber, more capacious than thelast, so that the edges of the plates never interfere or becomeentangled.Although the pattern on the surface of this Ammonite isapparently so complicated, the number of transverse plates isbut sixteen in one revolution of the shell ; in this, as in almostall other cases, the extreme beauty and elegance of the foliationsresult from the repetition, at regular intervals, of one symmetricalsystem of forms, viz. those presented by the externalmargin of a single transverse plate. No trace of these foliationsis seen on the outer surface of the external shell. (SeePL 38, c.)The figures of A. obtuse, (PI. 35 and PL 36), shew the relationsbetween the external shell and the internal transverse partsVARIED PROPORTIONS OF SUPPORT.The shell of the Ammonites Heterophyllus(PI. 38, and PI. 39,) affords beautiful exemplificationsof the manner in which the mechanicalstrength of each transverse plate is so disposed,as to vary its support in proportion to the differentdegrees of necessity that exist for it indifferentparts of the same shell.*nations of an Ammonite. PI. 35 represents the form of the externalshell, wherein the body occupied the space extending froma. to c, and corresponding with the same letters in PI. E. 36.This species has a single series of strong ribs passing obliquelyacross the shell of the outer chamber, and also across the air-chambers.From c. to the inmost extremity of the shell, theseribs intersect, and rest on the sinuous edges of the transverseplates which form the air chambers. These edges are not seenwhere the outer shell is not removed. (PI. 35, e.) A smallportion of the shell is also preserved at PI. 35, b.From d. inwards, these sinuous lines mark the terminations ofthe transverse plates at their junction with the external shell ;they are not coincident with the direction of the ribs, and thereforemore effectually co-operate with them in adding strength tothe shell, by affording it the support of a series of various propsand buttresses, set nearly at right angles to its internal surface.Thus on the back or keel, PI. 39, from V. to B., where theshell is narrow, and the strength of its arch greatest, the intervalsbetween the septa are also greatest, and their sinuosities comparativelydistant ; but as soon as the flattened sides of the sameshell, PI. 38, assume a form that offers less resistance coeternalpressure, the foliations at the edges of the transverse platesapproximate more closely ; as in the flatter forms of a Gothicroof, the ribs are more numerous, and the tracery more complex,than in the stronger and more simple forms of the pointedarch.The same principle of multiplying and extending the ramificationsof the edges of the transverse plates, is applied to otherspecies of Ammonites, in which the sides are flat, and require aDOUBLY VAULTED INTERNAL ARCHES. 349At Plate 41. we have a rare and most beautifulexample of the preservation of the transverseplates of the Ammonites giganteus converted tochalcedony, without the introduction of anyearthy matter into the area of the air-chambers.This shell is so laid open as to shew themanner in which each transverse plate forms atortuous partition between the successive air-chambers.By means of these winding plates,the external shell, being itself a continuous arch,is further fortified with a succession of compoundarches, passing transversely across its internalcavity ; each arch being disposed in the form ofa double tunnel, vaulted not only at the top, buthaving a corresponding series of inverted archesalong the bottom.We can scarcely imagine a more perfect instrumentthan this for affording universal resistanceto external pressure, in which the greatestpossible degree of lightness is combined with thegreatest strength.similar increase of support ; whilst in those species to which themore circular form of the sides gives greater strength (as in A.obtuse, PI. 35.) the sinuosities of the septa are proportionatelyfew.It seems probable that some improvement might be made, infortifying the cylindrical air-tube of Massey's Patent Log fortaking soundings at great depths, by the introduction of transverseplates, acting on the principle of the transverse plates ofthe chambered portion of the shells of Nautili and Ammonites,or rather of Orthoceratites, and Baculites, (see PI. 44, Figs. 4.and 5.)350 COMPLEX FORM OF AIR CHAMBERS.The form of the air-chambers in Ammonites ismuch more complex than in the Nautili, inconsequenceof the tortuous windings of thefoliated margin of the transverse plates.*Siphuncle.It remains to consider the mechanism of theSiphuncle, that important organ of hydraulicadjustment, by means of which the specificgravity of the Ammonites was regulated. ItsPI. 42, Fig. 1, represents the cast of a single chamber of N.Hexagon, convex inwards, and concave outwards, and boundedat its margin by lines of simple curvature. In a few species onlyof Nautilus the margin is undulated, (as in PI. 43, Fig. 3, 4,) butit is never jagged, or denticulated like the margin of the casts ofthe chambers of Ammonites.In Ammonites, the chambers have a double curvature, andare, at their centre, convex outwards (see PI. 36. d. and PI. 39.d. V.). PI. 42, Fig. 2, represents the front view of the cast ofa single chamber of A. excavated ; d, is the dorsal lobe enclosingthe siphuncle, and e. f. the auxiliary ventral lobes, whichopen to receive the inner whorl of the shell. PI. 42. Fig. 3. representsa cast of three chambers of A. catena, having two transverseplates still retained in their proper place between them.The foliated edges of these transverse plates have regulated thefoliations of the calcareous casts, which, after the shell hasperished, remain locked into one another, like the sutures of askull.The substance of the casts in all these cases is pure crystallinecarbonate of lime, introduced by infiltration through thepores of the decaying shell. Each species of Ammonite has itspeculiar form of air-chamber, depending on the specific form ofits transverse plates. Analogous variations in the form of theair-chambers are co-extensive with the entire range of species inthe family of Nautili.HYDRAULIC ACTION OF SIPHUNCLE. 351mode of operation as a pipe, admitting or rejectinga fluid, seems to have been the same as thatwe have already considered in the case of Nautili.*The universal prevalence of such delicatehydraulic contrivances in the Siphuncle, and ofsuch undeviating and systematic union of buoyancyand strength in the air-chambers, throughoutthe entire family of Ammonites and Nautili,are among the most prominent instances of orderand method, that pervade these remains of formerIn the family of Ammonites, the place of the Siphuncle isalways upon the exterior, or dorsal margin of the transverse plates.(See PI 36. d. e. f. g. h. i., and PI. 42, Fig. 3. a, b.) It isconducted through them by a ring, or collar, projecting outwards ;this collar is seen, well preserved, at the margin of all the transverseplates in PI. 36. In Nautili, the collar projects uniformlyinwards, and its place is either at the centre, or near the innermargin of the transverse plates. (See PI. 31, Fig, 1. y. andPI. 42. 1.)The Siphuncle represented at PI. 36, is preserved in a blackcarbonaceous state, and passes from the bottom of the externalchamber (d.) to the inner extremity of the shell. At e. f. g. h. itsinterior is exposed by section, and appears filled, like the adjacentair-chambers, with a cast of pure calcareous spar. At PI. 42.Fig. 3. b. a similar cast fills the tube of the Siphuncle, and also theair-chambers. Here again, as in PI. 36, its diameter is contractedat its passage through the collar of each transverse plate,with the same mechanical advantages as in the Nautilus.The shell engraved at PI. 42. Fig. 4. from a specimen found bythe Marquis of Northampton in the Green sand of Earl Stoke,near Devises, and of which Figs. 5. 6. are fragments, is remarkablefor the preservation of its Siphuncle, distended and empty,and still fixed in its place along the interior of the dorsal marginof the shell. This Siphuncle, and also the shell and transverse352 SPECIFIC GRAVITY REGULATED BY SIPHUNCLE.races that inhabited the ancient seas ; andstrange indeed must be the construction of thatmind, which can believe that all this order andmethod can have existed, without the directionand agency of some commanding and controllingIntelligence.Theory of Von Buck.Besides the uses we have attributed to thesinuous arrangement of the transverse septa ofAmmonites, in giving strength to the shell toplates, are converted into thin chalcedony, the pipe retaining inthese empty chambers the exact form and position it held in theliving shell.The entire substance of the pipe, thus perfectly preservedin a state that rarely occurs, shews no kind of aperture throughwhich any fluid could have passed to the interior of the air-chambers.The same continuity of the Siphuncle appears atPI. 42, Fig. 3. and in PI. 36, and in many other specimens.Hence we infer, that nothing could pass from its interior into theair-chambers, and that the office of the Siphuncle was to bemore or less distended with a fluid, as in the Nautili, for thepurpose of adjusting the specific gravity, so as to cause theanimal to float or sink.Dr. Prout has analyzed a portion of the black material of theSiphuncle, which is so frequently preserved in Ammonites, andfinds it to consist of animal membrane penetrated by carbonateof lime. He explains the black colour of these pipes, by supposingthat the process of decomposition, in which the oxygen andhydrogen of the animal membrane escaped, was favourable to theevolution of carbon, as happens when vegetables are convertedinto coal, under the process of mineralization. The lime hastaken the place of the oxygen and hydrogen which existed in thepipe before decomposition.von such's theory of ammonites. 353resist the pressure of deep water, M. Von Suchhas suggested a further use of the lobes thusformed around the base of the outer chamber,as affording points of attachment to the mantleof the animal, whereby it was enabled to fixitself more steadily within its shell. The arrangementof these lobes varies in every speciesof Ammonite, and he has proposed to found onthese variations, the specific character of all theshells of this great family.*The most decided distinction between Ammonites and Nautili,is founded on the place of the siphon. In the Ammonite,this organ is always on the back of the shell, and never so in theNautilus. Many other distinctions emanate from this leading*difference ; the animal of the Nautilus having its pipe usuallyfixed near the middle, (See PI. 31, Fig. 1), or towards the ventralmargin (PL 32, Fig. 2, and PI. 42, Fig. 1.) of the transverseplates, is thereby attached to the bottom of the external chamber,which is generally concave, and without any jagged termination,or sinuous flexure, of its margin. As the siphon in Ammonitesis comparatively small, and always placed on the dorsal margin(PI. 36, d. and PI. 39, d.), it would have less power than theoiphuncle of Nautili to keep the mantle in its place at thebottom of the shell ; another kind of support was therefore suppliedby a number of depressions along the margin of the transverseplate, forming a series of lobes at the junction of this platewith the internal surface of the shell.The innermost of these, or ventral lobe, is placed on the innermargin of the shell (PI. 39, V.) ; opposite to this, and on theexternal margin, is placed the dorsal lobe (D), embracing thesiphon and divided by it into two divergent arms. Beneath thedorsal lobe are placed the superior lateral lobes (L), one on eachside of the shell ; and still lower, the inferior lateral lobe (1), nextabove the ventral lobe.The separations between these lobes form seats, or saddles,G. A A354 USES OF LOBES IN AMMONITES.The uses ascribed by Von Such to the lobesof Ammonites in affording attachment to thebase of the mantle around the margin of thetransverse plates, would in no way interfere withthe service we have assigned to the same lobes,in supporting the external shell against the pressureof deep water. The union of two beneficialresults from one and the same mechanical expedient,confirms our opinion of the excellence ofthe workmanship, and increases our admirationof the Wisdom in which it was contrived.upon which the mantle of the animal rested, at the bottom ofthe outer chamber ; these saddles are distinguished in the samemanner as the lobes — that between the dorsal and superiorlateral lobe, forming the dorsal saddle (S. d.), that between thesuperior and inferior lateral lobes, forming the lateral saddle(S. L.), and that between the inferior lateral and ventral lobe,the ventral saddle (S. V.). This general disposition, variouslymodified, pervades all forms of Ammonites ; but when, as inPL 39, the turn of the shell increases rapidly in width, so thatthe last whorl nearly, or entirely, covers the preceding whorls,the additional part is furnished with small auxiliary lobes, varyingwith the growth of the Ammonite to the number of three,four, or five pairs. (PI. 39, a. 1, a. 2, a. 3, a. 4, a. 5.)All the lobes, as they dip inwards, are subdivided by numerousdentations, which afford points of attachment to the mantleof the animal ; thus each lobe is flanked by a series of accessorylobes, and these again are provided with further symmetricaldentations, the extremities of which produce all the beautifulappearances of complicated foliage, which prevail through thefamily of Ammonites, and of which we have a striking exampleon the surface of PI. 38.The extremities of the dentations are always sharp andpointed, inwards, towards the air chamber, (PI. 38, d. 1.) ; butPROOFS OF DESIGN IN AMMONITES. sooConclusion.On examining the proofs of Contrivance andDesign that pervade the testaceous remains of thefamily of Ammonites, we find, in every species,abundant evidence of minute and peculiar mechanisms,adapting the shell to the double purposeof acting as a float, and of forming a protectionto the body of its inhabitant.As the animal increased in bulk, and advancedalong the outer chamber of the shell, the spacesleft behind it were successively converted into airchambers, simultaneously increasing the powerof the float. This float, being regulated by apipe, passing through the whole series of thechambers, formed an hydraulic instrument ofextraordinary delicacy, by which the animalare smooth and rounded upwards towards the body of theanimal, (PI. 38, S. S.), and thus the jagged terminations ofthese lobes may have afforded holdfast whereby the base of themantle could fix itself firmly, and as it were take root, aroundthe bottom of the external chamber.No such dentations exist in any species of Nautilus. In theN. Pompilius, Mr. Owen has shewn that the base of the mantleadheres to the outer shell, near its junction with the transverseplate by means of a strong horny girdle ; a similar contrivanceprobably existed also in all the fossil species of Nautili. Thesides of the mantle also of the N. Pompilius are fixed to thesides of the great external chamber by two strong broad lateralmuscles, the impressions of which are visible in most specimensof this shell.350 CONCLUSIONS.could, at pleasure, control its ascent to the surface,or descent to the bottom of the sea.To creatures that sometimes floated, a thickand heavy shell would have been inapplicable ;and as a thin shell, inclosing air, would beexposed to various, and often intense degrees ofpressure at the bottom, we find a series of provisionsto afford resistance to such pressure, inthe mechanical construction both of the externalshell, and of the internal transverse plates whichformed the air chambers. First, the shell is madeup of a tube, coiled round itself, and externallyconvex. Secondly, it is fortified by a seriesof ribs and vaulting disposed in the form ofarches and domes on the convex surface of thistube, and still further adding to its strength.Thirdly, the transverse plates that form the airchambers, supply also a continuous successionof supports, extending their ramifications, withmany mechanical advantages, beneath thoseportions of the shell which, being weakest, weremost in need of them.If the existence of contrivance proves the exerciseof mind ; and if higher degrees of perfectionin mechanism are proof of more exalted degreesof intellect in the Author from whom they proceeded; the beautiful examples which we find inthe petrified remains of these chambered shells,afford evidence coeval and co-extensive with themountains wherein they are entombed, attestingNAUTILUS Syphon. 357the Wisdom in which such exquisite contrivancesoriginated, and setting forth the Providence andCare of the Creator, in regulating the structureof every creature of his hand.SECTION V.NAUTILUS Syphon, AND NAUTILUS Sic Sac.The name of Nautilus Sypho* has been appliedto a very curious and beautiful chamberedshell found in the Tertiary strata at Dax, nearBordeaux ; and that of Nautilus Zic Zac to acognate shell from the London clay. (See PI. 43,Figs. 1,2,3,4.)These fossil shells present certain deviationsfrom the ordinary characters of the genus Nautilus,whereby they in some degree partake ofthe structure of an Ammonite.These deviations involve a series of compensationsand peculiar contrivances, in order torender the shell efficient in its double office ofacting as a float, and also as a defence andchamber of residence to the animal by which itwas constructed.Some details of these contrivances, relatingThis shell has been variously described by the names of AmmonitesStun, Nautilus Sypho, and N. Zonarius. (See M. deBasterot. Mem. Geol. de Bordeaux).358 CONTRIVANCES IN NAUTILUS Syphonto the Nautilus Sypho will be found in the subjoinednote.*As the place of the siphon in this species isupon the internal margin of the transverse plates(PI. 43, Fig. 2, b\b 2 ,b\) it had less power thanthe more central siphuncle of the Nautilus toattach the mantle of the animal to the bottomof the outer chamber. For this defect we find aThe transverse plates, (PI. 43, Fig 1, a. a 1 , a 2 .), present apeculiarity of structure in the prolongation of the collar, orsiphuncular aperture entirely across the area of the air chambersso that the whole series of transverse plates are connected in onecontinuous spiral chain. This union is effected by the enlargementand elongation of the collar for the passage of thesiphuncle into the form of a long and broad funnel, the point ofwhich b. fits closely into the neck of the funnel next beneath it,c. whilst its inner margin, resting upon the arch of the subjacentwhorl of the shell, transfers to this arch a portion of the externalpressure upon the transverse plates, thereby adding to theirstrength.As this structure renders it impossible for the flexible siphuncleto expand itself into the area of the air chambers, as in otherNautili and in Ammonites, the diameter of each funnel is madelarge enough to allow space within it for the distension of thesiphuncle, by a sufficient quantity of fluid to cause the animal tosink.At each articulation of the funnels, the diameter of the siphuncleis contracted, as the sophocles of Ammonites and Nautili arecontracted at their passage through the collars of their transverseplates.Another point in the organization of the siphuncle is illustratedby this shell, namely, the existence of a soft calcareous sheath,(PL 43, Fig. l,b. c. d.), analogous to that of the N. Pompilius,(PI. 31, Fig. 1, a. b. c. d.), between each shelly funnel and themembranous pipe or siphuncle enclosed within it. At PI. 43,Fig. 1, b, we have a section of this sheath folding round theAND NAUTILUS Sic Sac. .35.9compensation, resembling that which Von Suchconsiders to have been afforded by the lobes ofAmmonites to the inhabitants of those shells.This compensation will be illustrated by a comparisonof the lobes in N. Sypho (PL 43, Fig. 2.),with a similar provision in the Nautilus Zic Zac(PI. 43, Figs. 3. 4.)*smaller extremity of the funnel a'. From c, to d, it lines theinside of the subjacent funnel a 2 ; and from d, continues downwardsto the termination of the funnel a 2 , on the inside of e.At e, and f, we see the upper termination of two perfect sheaths,similar to that of which a section is represented at b. c. d. Thissheath, from its insertion between the point of the upper siphonand mouth of the lower one, (Fig. 1, a), must have acted asacollar, intercepting all communication between the interiorof the shelly siphuncular tube and the air chambers. The areaof this shelly tube is sufficient, not only to have contained thedistended siphuncle, but also to allow it to be surrounded with avolume of air, the elasticity of which would act in forcing backthe pericardial fluid from the siphuncle, in the same manner aswe have supposed the air to act within the chambers of theN. Pompilius.On each side of the transverse plate in both these speciesthere is an undulation, or sinus, producing lobes (PI. 43, Fig. 2.a 1 , a 2 , a 3 , Fig. 3. a. and Fig. 4. a. b.) There is also a deepbackward curvature of the two ventral lobes, Fig. 4. c. c. Allthese lobes may have acted conjointly with the siphuncle, togive firm attachment to the mantle of the animal at the bottomof the outer chamber. The shell Fig. 1. is broken in such amanner, that no portion of any lateral lobe is visible on the sidehere represented. At Fig. 2. a 1 , we see the projection of thelateral lobes, on each side of the convex internal surface of atransverse plate ; at a 2 we see the interior of the same lobes, onthe concave side of another transverse plate ; and at a 3 thepoints of a third pair of lobes attached to the sides of the largestair-chamber that remains in this fragment.360 COMPENSATIONS AND LINKS.A still more important use of the lobes formedby the transverse plates both of N. Sypho andN. Zic Zac, may be found in the strength whichthey impart to the sides of the external shell (seePI. 43, Figs. 1 , 2,3,4.), under propping their flattestand weakest part, so as to resist pressure moreeffectually than if the transverse plates had beencurved simply, as in N. Pompilius. One causewhich rendered some such compensation necessary,may be found in the breadth of the intervalsbetween each transverse plate ; the weaknessresulting from this distance, being compensatedby the introduction of a single lobe, acting onthe same principle as the more numerous andcomplex lobes in the genus Ammonite.The N. Sypho and N. Zic Zac seem, therefore,to form Links between the two great genera ofNautilus and Ammonite, in which an intermediatesystem of mechanical contrivances is borrowed,as it were, from the mechanics of the Ammonite,and applied to the Nautilus. The adoption oflobes, analogous to the lobes of the Ammonite,compensating the disadvantages, that wouldotherwise have followed from the marginal positionof the siphuncle in these two species, andthe distances of their transverse plates.*In some of the most early forms of Ammonites which we findin the Transition strata, e. g. A. Henslowe, A. Stratum, and A.Spherical, PI. 40, Figs. 1, 2, and 3,) the lobes were few, andnearly of the same form as the single lobe of the Nautilus Sypho,SHELLS ALLIED TO NAUTILUS. 361It is a curious fact, that contrivances, similarto those which existed in some of the most earlyforms of Ammonite, should have been againadopted in some of the most recent species offossil Nautili, in order to afford similar compensationfor weakness that would otherwisehave been produced by aberrations from thenormal structure of the genus Nautilus. Allthis seems inexplicable on any theory whichwould exclude the interference of controllingIntelligence.SECTION VI.CHAMBERED SHELLS ALLIED TO NAUTILUSAND AMMONITE.We have reason to infer, from the fact of therecent N. Pompilius being an external shell,that all fossil shells of the great and ancientfamily of Nautili, and of the still more numerousfamily of Ammonites, were also externalshells, inclosing in their outer chamber the bodyand of N. Zic sac; like them also the margin was simple anddestitute of fringed edges. The A. nodus (PI. 40, Figs. 4 and5.), which is peculiar to the early Secondary deposits of the ,offers an example of an intermediate state, in whichthe fringed edge is partially introduced, on the descending orinward portions only, of the lobated edge of the transverse plates.'362 Spicula.of a Cephalopod. We further learn, from Peron sdiscovery of the shell of a Spirilla partially enclosedwithin the body of a Sepia,* (see PI. 44,Fig. 1, 2), that many of those genera of fossilchambered shells, which, like the Spirula, donot terminate externally in a wide chamber,were probably internal, or partially enclosedshells, serving the office of a float, constructedon the same principles as the float of the Spirula.In the class of fossil shells thus illustratedby the discovery of the animal inclosing theSpirula, we may include the following extinctfamilies, occurring in various positions from theearliest Transition strata to the most recentSecondary formations: — Orthoceratite, Situate,Baculite, Hamite, Scaphite, Turrilite, Nummu-lite, Belemnite-tThe uncertainty which has arisen respecting the animalwhich constructs the Spirula, from the circumstance of the specimendiscovered by Peron having been lost, is in some degreeremoved by Captain King's discovery of another of these shells,attached to a fragment of the mantle of an animal of unknownspecies resembling a Sepia, which I have seen in the possessionof Mr. Owen, at the Royal College of Surgeons, London.f In the genus Situate, Orthoceratite, and Belemnite, PI. 44,f. 3, 4, 17, the simple curvature of the transverse plates resemblesthe character of the Nautilus. In the Baculite, Hamite,Scaphite, and Turrilite, PI. 44, Fig. 5, 8, 12, 13, 14, 15, thesinuous foldings and foliated edges of the transverse platesresemble those of the Ammonites.ORTHOCERATITE. 363Orthoceratite, PL 44, Fig. 4.The Orthoceratites (so called from their usualform, — that of a straight horn) began their existenceat the same early period with the Nautili,in the seas which deposited the Transition strata ;and are so nearly allied to them in structure,that we may conclude they performed a similarfunction as floats of Cephalopodous Mollusks.This genus contains many species, which aboundin the strata of the Transition series, and is oneof those which, having been called into existenceamongst the earliest inhabitants of our planet,was at an early period also consigned to almosttotal destruction.*An Orthoceratite (see PI. 44, Fig 4) is, likethe Nautilus, a multilocular shell, having itschambers separated by transverse plates, concaveexternally, and internally convex ; and pierced,either at the centre or towards the margin, by aSiphuncle, (a.) This pipe varies in size, moreSee D'Orbigny's Tableau Methodise des Cephalopodes.There are, I believe, only two exceptions yet known to thegeneral fact, that the genus Orthoceratite became extinct beforethe deposition of the Secondary strata had commenced. Themost recent rocks in which they have been noticed, are a smalland problematical species in the Lias at Lyme, and anotherspecies in Alpine Limestone of the Oolite formation, at Halstadt,in the Tyrol.3(J4 ORTHOCERATITE.than that of any other multilocular shell, viz.from one-tenth to one-half of the diameter of theshell; and often assumes a tumid form, whichwould admit of the distension of a membranoussiphon. The base of the shell beyond the lastplate presents a swelling cavity, wherein thebody of the animal seems to have been partlycontained.The Orthoceratites are straight and conical,and bear the same relation to the Nautili whichBaculites (see PI. 44, Fig. 5) bear to Ammonites; the Orthoceratites, with their simpletransverse septa, resembling straight Nautili ;and the Baculites, with a sinuous septa, havingthe appearance of straight Ammonites. Theyvary considerably in external figure, and also insize ; some of the largest species exceeding ayard in length, and half a foot in diameter. Asingle specimen has been known to containnearly seventy air chambers. The body of theanimal which required so large a float to balanceit, must have greatly exceeded, in all its proportions,the most gigantic of our recent Cephalopods; and the vast number of Orthoceratitesthat are occasionally crowded together in a singleblock of stone, shows how abundantly they musthave swarmed in the waters of the early seas.These shells are found in the greatest numbersin blocks of marble, of a dark red colour, fromthe transition Limestone of Leland, which someSituate. BACULITE. 365years ago was imported largely to various partsof Europe for architectural purposes.*Situate.Together with the Orthoceratite, in the TransitionLimestone of Leland, there occurs a cognategenus of Chambered shells, called Lituites. (PL44, Fig. 3.) These are partially coiled up intoa spiral form at their smaller extremity, whilsttheir larger end is continued into a straight tube,of considerable length, separated by transverseplates, concave outwards, and perforated by asiphuncle (a). As these Lituites closely resemblethe shell of the recent Spirula (PL 44, Fig. 2),their office may have been the same, in theeconomy of some extinct Cephalopod.Saculite.As in rocks of the Transition series, the formof a straight Nautilus is presented by the genusPart of the pavement in Hampton Court Palace, that ofthe hall of University College, Oxford, and several tombs of thekings of Poland in the cathedral at Cracow, are formed of thismarble, in which many shells of Orthoceratites are discoverable.The largest known species are found in the Carboniferous limestoneof Closeburn, near Edinburgh, being nearly of the size ofa man's thigh. The presence of such gigantic Mollusks seemsto indicate a highly exalted temperature, in the then existingclimate of these northern regions of Europe. See Sowerbyby'sMin. Con. PI. 246.366 BACULITE.Orthoceratite, so we find in the Cretaceous formationalone, the remains of a genus which may beconsidered as a straight Ammonite. (See PI. 44,Fig. 5.)The Baculite (so called from its resemblanceto a straight staff) is a conical, elongated, andsymmetrical shell, depressed laterally, and dividedinto numerous chambers by transverseplates, which, like those in the Ammonite, aresinuous, and terminated by foliated dentationsat their junction with the external shell ; beingthus separated into dorsal, ventral, and laterallobes and saddles, analogous to those of Ammonites.*It is curious, that this straight modificationof the form of Ammonites should not have appeared,until this Family had arrived at the laststage of the Secondary deposits, throughout whichit had occupied so large an extent; and that,after a comparatively short duration, the Bacu-lite should have become extinct, simultaneouslywith the last of the Ammonites, at the terminationof the Chalk formation.The external chamber (a) is larger than the rest, and swelling; and capable of containing a considerable portion of theanimal. The outer shell was thin, and strengthened, like theAmmonite, by oblique ribs. Near the posterior margin of theshell, the transverse plates are pierced by a Siphuncle (PI. 44,5 b , c,). This position of the Siphuncle, and the sinuous formand denticulated edges of the transverse plates, are characterswhich the Baculite possesses in common with the Ammonite.HAMITE. 367Hamite.If we imagine a Baculite to be bent roundnear its centre, until the smaller extremity becamenearly parallel to its larger end, it wouldpresent the most simple form of that cognategenus of chambered shells, which, from theirfrequently assuming this hooked form, have beencalled Hamites. At PL 44, Fig. 9, 11, representportions of Hamites which have this most simplecurvature; other species of this genus have amore tortuous form, and are either closely coiledup, like the small extremity of a Spirula, (PL 44,Fig. 2,) or disposed in a more open spiral. (PL44, Fig. 8.)*It is probable that some of these HamitesBoth these forms of Hamite bear the same relation toAmmonites that Lituites bear to Nautili ; each being nearly suchas shells of these genera would respectively present, if partiallyunrolled. See Phillips' Geol. Yorkshire, PI. 1, Figs. 22, 29, 30.Baculites and Hamites have two characters which connectthem with Ammonites ; first, the position of the Siphuncle,on the back, or outer margin of the shell, (PI. 44, Figs. 5 b , c.8% a. 10. 11, a. 12, a. 13, a.); secondly, the foliated characterof the margin of the transverse plates, at their junction with theexternal shell. (PI. 44, Fig. 5, 8, 12, 13.) The external shell ofHamites is also fortified by transverse folds or ribs, increasingthe strength both of the outer chambers and of the air chambers,upon the same principles that we have pointed out in the caseof Ammonites. (See PI. 44, Fig. 8, 9, 11, 12, 13.)In certain species of Hamites, as in certain Ammonites, themarginal Siphuncle has a keel-shaped pipe raised over it. Othershave a series of spines on each side of the back. (PI. 44,Fig. 9, 10.)368 Capite.were partly internal, and partly external shells ;where the spines are present, the portion so armedwas probably external. Nine species of Hamitesoccur in the single formation of Gault or Skeletonclay immediately below the chalk, near Scarborough.(See Phillip's Geology of Yorkshire.)Some of the larger species equal a man's wristin diameter.*Scaphite.The Scaphites constitute a genus of Ellipticalchambered shells, (see PL 44, Fig. 15, 16,) ofremarkable beauty, which are almost peculiarto the Chalk formation ; they are so rolled up ateach extremity, whilst their central part continuesnearly in a horizontal plane, as to resemblethe ancient form of a boat ; whence the name ofScaphite has been applied to themesThe Hamites grandis, (Sowerbyby, M. C. 593,) from the Greensandat Hythe, is of these large dimensions.f The inner extremity of the Scaphite is coiled up like that ofan Ammonite, (PI. 44, Fig. 15,c. and Fig. 16) in whorls embracingone another ; the last and outer chamber (a) is larger than allthe rest together, and is sometimes (probably in the adult state)folded back so as to touch the spire, and thereby materially tocontract the mouth, which is narrower than the last or outerchamber. (PI. 44, Fig. 15, b.) In this character of the externalchamber, the Scaphite differs from the Ammonite ; in all otherrespects it essentially agrees with it ; its transverse plates beingnumerous, and pierced by a marginal Siphuncle, at the backof the shell (Fig.16, a.); and their edges being lobated, deeplycut, and foliated. (Fig. 15, c.)TURRILITE. 3G9It is remarkable that those approximationsto the structure of Ammonites which are presentedby Scaphites and Hamites, should haveappeared but very rarely, and this in the liasand inferior oolite,* until the period of the cretaceousformations, when the entire type of theancient and long continued genus Ammonite wasabout to become extinct.Turrilite.The last genus I shall mention, allied to thefamily of Ammonites, is composed of spiral shells,of another form, coiled around themselves in theform of a winding tower, gradually diminishingtowards the apex (PI. 44, Fig. 14). tThe same essential characters and functionspervade the Turrilites, which we have been tracingin the Scaphites, Hamites, Baculites, andAmmonites. In each of these genera it is theexterior form of the shell that is principallyThe Scaphites bifurcated occurs in the Lias of Nuremberg,and Hamites annulatus in the Inferior oolite of France.f The shells of the Turrilites are extremely thin, and theirexterior is adorned and strengthened (like that of Ammonites),with ribs and tubercles. In all other respects also, except themanner in which they are coiled up, they resemble Ammonites ;their interior being divided into numerous chambers by transverseplates, which are foliated at their edges, and pierced by asiphuncle, near the dorsal margin. (PI. 44, Fig. 14, a, a.) Theouter chamber is large,G. B B370 UNITY OF DESIGN.varied, whilst the interior is similarly constructedin all of them, to act as a float, subservient tothe movements of Cephalopodous Mollusks. Wehave seen that the Ammonites, beginning withthe Transition strata, appear in all formations,until the termination of the Chalk, whilst theHamites and Scaphites are very rare, and theTurrilites and Baculites do not appear at all,until the commencement of the Cretaceous formations.Having thus suddenly appeared, theybecame as suddenly extinct at the same periodwith the Ammonites, yielding up their place andoffice in the economy of nature to a lower orderof Carnivorous mollusks in the Tertiary and existingseas.In the review we have taken of genera in thefamily of Chambered shells, allied to Nautilus,and Ammonite, we have traced a connected seriesof delicate and nicely adjusted instruments,adapted to peculiar uses in the economy ofevery animal to which they were attached.These all attest undeviating Unity of design,pervading many varied adaptations of the sameprinciple ; and afford cumulative evidence, notonly of the exercise of Intelligence, but also ofthe same Intelligence through every period oftime, in which these extinct races inhabited theancient deep.BELEMNITES. 371SECTION VII.Belemnilc.We shall conclude our account of chamberedshells with a brief notice of Belemnites. Thisextensive family occurs only in a fossil state, andits range is included within that series of rockswhich in our section are called Secondary.*These singular bodies are connected with theother families of fossil chambered shells we havealready considered ; but differ from them inhaving their chambers inclosed within a cone-shapedfibrous sheath, the form of which resemblesthe point of an arrow, and has givenorigin to the name they bear.M, de Blainville, in his valuable memoir onBelemnites, (1827) has given a list of ninety-oneauthors, from Theophrastus downwards, whohave written on this subject. The most intelligentamong them agree in supposing thesebodies to have been formed by Cephalopodsallied to the modern Sepia. Voltz, Zeiten, rascal,and Count Munster, have subsequentlypublished important memoirs upon the samesubject. The principal English notices on Be-samnitesare those of Miller, Geol. Trans. N. S.The lowest stratum in which Belemnites are said to havebeen found is the Muschel-kalk, and the highest the upperChalk of Maestricht.372 ITS COMPONENT PARTS.London, 1826, and that of Sowerbyby, in his Min.Conch, vol. vi. p. 169, et seq.A Belemnite was a compound internal shell,made up of three essential parts, which arerarely found together in perfect preservation.First, a fibro-calcareous cone-shaped shell,terminating at its larger end in a hollow cone(PL 44, Fig. 17. and PI. 44', Fig. 7, 9, 10,11, 12.*Secondly, a conical thin horny sheath, or cup,commencing from the base of the hollow cone ofthe fibro-calcareous sheath, and enlarging rapidlyas it extends outwards to a considerableThis part of the Belemnite is usually called the sheath, orguard: it is made up of a pile of cones, placed one within another,having a common axis, and the largest enclosing all therest. (See PI. 44, Fig. 17.) These cones are composed of crystallinecarbonate of lime, disposed in fibres that radiate from aneccentric axis to the circumference of the Belemnite. The crystallinecondition of this shell seems to result from calcareousinfiltrations (subsequent to interment), into the intervals betweenthe radiating calcareous fibres of which it was originally composed.The idea that the Belemnite was a heavy solid stonybody, whilst it formed part of a living and floating sepia, wouldbe contrary to all analogies afforded by the internal organs ofliving Cephalopods. The odour, resembling burnt horn, producedon burning this part of a Belemnite, arises from theremains of horny membranes interposed between each successivefibro-calcareous cone.An argument in favour of the opinion that Belemnites wereinternal organs, arises from the fact of their surface being oftencovered with vascular impressions, derived from the mantle inwhich it was inclosed. In some species of Belemnites the backis granulated, like the back of the internal shell of Sepia officials.CHAMBERED ALVEOLUS. 373distance. PI. 44', Fig. 7, b, e, e', e". This hornycup formed the anterior chamber of the Belemnite,and contained the ink bag, (c), and someother viscera.*Thirdly, a thin conical internal chamberedshell, called the Alveolus, placed within the calcareoushollow cone above described. (PL 44,Fig. 17, a. and PI. 44', Fig. 7, b, b'.)This chambered portion of the shell is closelyallied in form, and in the principles of its construction,both to the Nautilus and Orthoceratite.(See PL 44, Fig. 17, a, b. and Fig. 4.) It isdivided by thin transverse plates into a seriesof narrow air-chambers, or areola, resemblinga pile of watch-glasses, gradually diminishingtowards the apex. The transverse plates areoutwardly concave, inwardly convex ; and areperforated by a continuous siphuncle, (PL 44,Fig. 17, b.), placed on the inferior, or ventralmargin.We have already (Ch. XV. Section II.) describedthe horny pens and ink-bags of the Loligo,found in the Lias at Lyme Regis. Similar ink-bagshave recently been found in connectionwith Belemnites in the same Lias. Some of theseink-bags are nearly a foot in length, and showThis laminated horny sheath is rarely preserved in connectionwith the fibro-calcareous shelly sheath ; but in the Lias atLyme Regis it is frequently found without the shell. Certainportions of it are often highly nacreous, whilst other parts of thesame sheath retain their horny condition..'374 ANIMAL BELEMNO-SEPIA.that the JBelemno- sepia, t from which they werederived, attained great size.The fact of these animals having been providedwith so large a reservoir of ink, affords anapriori probability that they had no externalshell ; the ink-bag, as far as we yet know, beinga provision confined to naked Cephalopods,-)- In 1829, I communicated to the Geological Society of Londona notice respecting the probable connection of Belemniteswith certain fossil ink-bags, surrounded by brilliant nacre, foundin the Lias at Lyme Regis. (See Phil. Mag. N. S. 1829, p. 388.)At the same time I caused to be prepared the drawings of fossils,engraved in PI. 44", which induced me to consider these ink-bagsas derived from Cephalopods connected with Belemnites.I then withheld their publication, in the hope of discoveringcertain demonstration, in some specimen that should presentthese ink-bags in connection with the sheath or body of a Belemnite,and this demonstration has at length been furnished bya discovery made by Professor Agassiz (October, 1834), in thecabinet of Miss Philpotts, at Lyme Regis, of two importantspecimens, which appear to be decisive of the question. (SeePI. 44', Figs. 7, 9.)Each of these specimens contains an ink-bag within the anteriorportion of the sheath of a perfect Belemnite ; and we arehenceforth enabled with certainty to refer all species of Belem-notes to a family in the class of Cephalopods, for which I would,in concurrence with M. Agassiz, propose the name of Belemno-sepia. Such ink-bags are occasionally found in contact withtraces of isolated alveoli of Belemnites : they are more frequentlysurrounded only by a thin plate of brilliant nacre.The specimen (PI. 44", Fig. 1), was procured by me fromMiss Mary Canning in 1829, who considered it as appertaining toa Belemnite. Near its lower end we see the lines of growth ofthe horny anterior sheath, but no traces of the posterior calcareoussheath ; within this horny sheath is placed the ink-bag.The conical form of this anterior chamber seems to have beenINK BAG. 375which have not that protection from an externalshell, which is afforded by the shell of the N.Pompilius to its inhabitant, that has no ink-bag.No ink, or ink-bags have been ever seen withinthe shell of any fossil Nautilus or Ammonite :had such a substance existed in the body ofthe animals that occupied their outer chamber,altered by pressure. It is composed of a thin laminated substance(see PI. 44", Fig. 1, d.), which in some parts is brilliantlynacreous, whilst in other parts it presents simply the appearanceof horn. The outer surface of this cup is marked transverselywith gentle undulations, which probably indicate stagesof growth. Miss Baker has a Belemnite from the inferior Oolitenear Northampton, in which one half of the fibrous cup beingremoved, the structure of the conical shell of the alveolus is seenimpressed on a cast of iron-stone, and exhibits undulating linesof growth, like those on the exterior of the shell of N. Pom-filius.M. Blainville, although he had not seen a specimen of Belemnitein which the anterior horny conical chamber is preserved, hasargued from the analogy of other cognate chambered shells thatsuch an appendage was impertinent to this shell. The soundnessof his reasoning is confirmed by the discovery of the specimenbefore us, containing this part in the form and place whichhe had predicted. " Par analogie elle etait done evidemmentdorsale et terminate, et lorsqu'elle etait complete, e'est-a-direpursue d'une cavite, extremity posterior des viscera deanimal (tres-probablement l'organe secrete de la generationet partie du foie) y etait referee." — Blainville Mem. sur lesBelemnites. 1827. Page 28.Count Munster (Mem. Geol. par A. Boue, 1832, V. 1, PI. 4,Figs. 1, 2, 3, 15) has published figures of very perfect Belemnitesfrom Solenhofen, in some of which the anterior horny sheath ispreserved, to a distance equal to the length of the solid calcareousportion of the Belemnite (PI. 44', Figs. 10, 11, 12, 13), but inneither of these are there any traces of an ink-bag.o7(i CAUSES OF PARTIAL PRESERVATION.some traces of it must have remained in thosebeds of Has at Lyme Regis, which are loadedwith Nautili and Ammonites, and have preservedthe ink of naked Cephalopods in so perfect acondition. The young Sepia officials, whilstincluded within the transparent egg, exhibits itsink-bag distended with ink, provided beforehandfor use as soon as it is excluded ; and thisink-bag is surrounded by a covering of brilliantnacreous matter, similar to that we find on certaininternal membranes of many fishes.*I would here add a few words in explanation of the curiousfact, that among the innumerable specimens of Belemnites whichhave so long attracted the attention of naturalists, not one has tillnow been found entire in all its parts, having the ink within itsexternal chamber; either the fibro-calcareous sheath is founddetached from the horny sheath and ink-bag, or the ink-bag isfound apart from the Belemnite, and surrounded only by the nacreoushorny membrane of its anterior chamber. We knowfrom the condition of the compressed nacreous Ammonites in theLias-shale at Watched, that the nacreous lining only of theseshells is here preserved, whilst the shell itself has perished. Thisfact seems to explain the absence of the calcareous sheath andshell in almost every specimen of ink-bags at Lyme Regis, whichis surrounded with iridescent nacre, like that of the Ammonitesof Watched. The matrix in these cases may have had a capacityfor preserving nacreous or horny substances, whilst it allowed themore soluble calcareous matter of shells to be removed, probablydissolved in some acid.The greater difficulty is to explain the reason, why amidst themillions of Belemnites that are dispersed indiscriminately throughalmost all strata of the Secondary series, and sometimes formentire pavements in beds of shale connected with the Lias andInferior oolite, it so rarely happens that either the horny sheath,or the ink-bag, have been preserved. We may, I think, explainliELEMNITE COMPARED WITH NAUTILUS. 377Comparing the shell of Belemnite, with thatof Nautilus, we find the agreement of all theirthe absence of the nacreous horny sheath, by supposing that acondition of the matrix favourable to the preservation of thecalcareous sheath was unfavourable to the preservation of hornymembrane ; and we may also explain the absence of ink-bags,by supposing that the decomposition of the soft parts of theanimal usually caused the ink to be dispersed, before the bodywas buried in the earthy sediment then going on.At the base of Golden Cap hill, near Charmouth, the shorepresents two strata of marl almost paved with Belemnites, andseparated by about three feet only of comparatively barren marl.As great numbers of these Belemnites have Repulse, and otherextraneous shells attached to them, we learn from this circumstancethat the bodies and ink-bags had decomposed, and theBelemnites lain some time uncovered at the bottom. Thesefacts are explained by supposing that the sea near this spot wasmuch frequented by Belemno-sepise during the intervals of thedeposition of the Lias. Similar conclusions follow, from thestate of many Belemnites in the chalk of Antrim, which hadbeen perforated by small boring animals, whilst they lay at thebottom of the sea, and these perforations filled with casts ofchalk or flint, when the matter of the chalk strata was depositedupon them, in a soft and fluid state. (See Allan's Paper onBelemnite, Trans. Royal Soc. Edin., and Miller's Paper, Geol.Trans. Lond. 1826, p. 53.)Thus of the millions of Belemnites which crowd the Secondaryformations, only the fibro-calcareous sheath and chambered alveoliare usually preserved ; whilst in certain shale beds thissheath and shell have sometimes entirely disappeared, and thehorny or nacreous sheath and ink-bag alone remain. See PI. 44",Fig. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. In the rare case, PI. 44', Fig. 7,which has afforded the clue to this hitherto unexplained enigma,we have all the three essential parts of a Belemnite preserved intheir respective places nearly entire. The ink-bag (c) is placedwithin the anterior horny cup (e, e', e") ; and the chamberedalveolus (b b') within the hollow cone of the posterior fibro-calcareousshell, or common Belemnite.378 ANALOGIES.most important parts to be nearly complete ;*and the same analogies might be traced throughthe other genera of chambered shells. tThe air chambers and siphuncle are, in both these families,essentially the same.In Belemnites, the anterior extremity of the fibro-calcareousshell, which forms a hollow straight cone, surrounding thetransverse plates of the chambered alveolus, represents the hollowcoiled-up cone containing all the transverse plates, whichmake up the alveolus of the Nautilus.The anterior horny cup, or outer chamber of the Belemnite,surrounding the ink bag, and other viscera, represents the largeanterior shelly chamber which contains the body of the Nautilus.The posterior portion of the Belemnite, which is elongatedbackwards into a fibrous pointed shaft, is a modification of theapex of the straight cone of this shell, to which there seems tobe no equivalent in the apex of the coiled-up cone of Nautilus.The cause of this peculiar addition to the ordinary parts ofshells, seems to rest in the peculiar uses of the shaft of the Belemnite,as an internal shell, acting like the internal shell of theSepia Officinalis, to support the soft parts of the animals, withinthe bodies of which they were respectively enclosed. The fibrousstructure of this shaft is such as is common to many shells, andis most obvious in the Pinned.f Comparing the Belemnite, or internal shell of Belemno-sepia with the Sepiostaire, (Blainville), or internal shell of theSepia Officinalis, we have the following analogies. In theSepiostaire, (PL 44', Fig. 2, a. e. and Figs. 4, 4', 5), the smallconical apex (a) represents the apex of the long calcareous posteriorsheath of the Belemnite, (Fig. 7, a.), and the calcareousplates, alternating with horny plates, which form the shield andshallow cup of the Sepiostaire, (PL 44', Fig. 2, e. and Fig. 5. e.),represent the hollow fibro-calcareous cone or cup of the Belemnite,surrounding its alveolus.The margin of the horny plates, interposed between the calcareousplates of the shield and cup of the Sepiostaire, (PL 44',Fig. 4, e, e, e', e'.), represents the horny marginal cavity of theNUMBER OF SPECIES. 379Eighty-eight species of Belemnites have alreadybeen discovered ;* and the vast numericalamount to which individuals of these specieswere extended, is proved by the myriads of theirfossil remains that fill the Oolitic and Cretaceousformations. When we recollect that throughoutboth these great formations, the still more numerousextinct family of Ammonites is co-extensivewith the Belemnites; and that each species ofAmmonite exhibits also contrivances, more complexand perfect than those retained in the fewcone of the Belemnite, beyond the base of its hollow calcareouscone, (PI. 44', Fig. 7, e. e'. e"). This horny sheath of the Belemnitewas probably formed by the prolongation of the hornylaminae which were interposed between its successive cones offibro-cancerous matter.The chambered alveolus of the Belemnite is represented bythe congeries of thin transverse plates, (PI. 44, Fig. 4, b.)which occupy the interior of the shallow cup of Sepiostaire,(e. e'.) ; these plates are composed of horny matter, penetratedwith carbonate of lime.The hollow spaces between them, (Fig. 5, b, b',), which arenearly a hundred in number in the full grown animal, act as airchambers to make the entire shell permanently lighter thanwater ; but there is no siphuncle to vary the specific gravity of thisshell ; and the thin chambers between its transverse plates arestudded with an infinity of minute columnar, and sinuous partitions,planted at right angles to the plates, and giving themsupport. (Fig. 6', 6", 6'").The absence of a siphuncle renders the Sepiostaire an organ ofmore simple structure, and of lower office, than the more compoundshell of Belemnite.(See index to M. Brochant de Villiers' Translation of De laBeche's Manual of Geology).380 AFFINITIES OF CHAMBERED SHELLS.existing cognate genera of Cephalopods; wecannot but infer that these extinct families filleda larger space, and performed more importantfunctions among the inhabitants of the ancientseas, than are assigned to their few living representativesin our modern oceans.Conclusion.It results from the view we have taken of thezoological affinities between living and extinctspecies of chambered shells, that they are allconnected by one plan of organization ; eachforming a link in the common chain, whichunites existing species with those that prevailedamong the earliest conditions of life upon ourglobe; and all attesting the Identity of the design,that has effected so many similar ends throughsuch a variety of instruments, the principle ofwhose construction is, in every species, fundamentallythe same.Throughout the various living and extinctgenera of Chambered shells, the use of the airchambers and siphon, to adjust the specificgravity of the animals in rising and sinking,appears to have been identical. The additionof a new transverse plate within the conicalshell added a new air chamber, larger than thepreceding one, to counterbalance the increase ofweight that attended the growth of the shell andbody of all these animals.NATURAL HYDRAULIC INSTRUMENTS. 381These beautiful arrangements are, and everhave been, subservient to a common object, viz.the construction of hydraulic instruments of essentialimportance in the economy of creaturesdestined to move sometimes at the bottom, andat other times upon or near the surface of thesea. The delicate adjustments whereby the sameprinciple is extended through so many gradesand modifications of a single type, show theuniform and constant agency of some controllingIntelligence ; and in searching for the originof so much method and regularity amidst variety,the mind can only rest, when it has passed back,through the subordinate series of Second causes,to that great First Cause, which is found in thewill and power of a common Creator.SECTION VIII.Terminated POLYTHALAMOUS SHELLS.Nummulites.If the present were a fit occasion for such minuteinquiries, the investigations of the various knownspecies of Microscopic shells would unfold aseries of contrivances having relation to the economyof the minute Cephalopods by which theywere constructed, not less striking than those wehave been examining in the shells of extinct382 MINUTE MULTILOCULAR SHELLS.Genera and species of larger Cephalopods.M. D'Orbigny has noticed from 600 to 700 speciesof these shells, and has prepared magnifiedmodels of 100 species, comprehending all theGenera.*The greater number of these shells are microscopic,and swarm in the Mediterranean andAdriatic. Their fossil species abound chiefly inthe Tertiary formations, and have hitherto beennoticed principally in Italy. (See Soldan, asquoted at page 1 17 of this volume.) They occuralso in the Chalk of Merton, in the Jura Limestoneof the Charente inferior, and the Ooliteof Cane. They have been found by the Marquisof Northampton in Chalk flints from the neighbourhoodof Brighton.M. D'Orbigny, in his Classification of the shells of Cepha-lopodous Mollusks, has established three orders. 1. Those thathave but a single chamber, like the shell of the sepia and hornypen of the Loligo. 2. Polythalamous shells, which have asiphuncle passing through all the internal chambers, and whichterminate in a large external chamber, beyond the last partition,such as Nautili, Ammonites, and Belemnites. 3. Polythalamousinternal shells, which have no chamber beyond their last partition.Shells of this Order have no siphuncle, but the chamberscommunicate with each other by means of one or many smallforamina. On this distinction he has founded his Order Fora-ministres,containing five families and fifty-two genera.It may be necessary to apprize the reader that doubts havebeen entertained as to the cephalopodous structure of some ofthese minute multilocular shells ; and that there are not wantingthose who attribute to them a different organization.NUMMULITE. 383The Nummulite is the only Genus I shallselect on the present occasion from this Order.It is included in M. D'Orbigny's Section Nautilus.Nummulites (PL 44, Fig. 6, 7,) are so calledfrom their resemblance to a piece of money,they vary in size from that of a crown piece tomicroscopic littleness ; and occupy an importantplace in the history of fossil shells, on accountof the prodigious extent to which they are accumulatedin the later members of the Secondary,and in many of the Tertiary strata. They areoften piled on each other nearly in as close contactas the grains in a heap of corn, In thisstate they form a considerable portion of theentire bulk of many extensive mountains, e. g.in the Tertiary limestones of Verona and MonteBolca, and in secondary strata of the Cretaceousformation in the Alps, Carpathians, and Pyrenees.Some of the pyramids, and the Sphinx,of Egypt are composed of limestone loaded withNummulites.It is impossible to see such mountain-massesof the remains of a single family of shells thusadded to the solid materials of the globe, withoutrecollecting that each individual shell once heldan important place within the body of a livinganimal ; and thus recalling our imagination tothose distant epochs when the waters of theocean which then covered Europe were filled384 NUMMULTTE.with floating swarms of these extinct Mollusks,thick as the countless myriads of Bertie andClio Borealis that now crowd the waters of thepolar seas.*The Nummulites, like the Nautilus and Ammonite,are divided into air chambers, whichserved the office of a float ; but there is no enlargementof the last chamber which could havecontained any part of the body of the animal.The chambers are very numerous, and minutelydivided by transverse plates ; but are without aWe have an analogy to this supposed state of crowded populationof Nummulites in the ancient sea, in the marvellousfecundity of the northern ocean at the present time. It isstated by Cuvier, in his memoir on the Clio Borealis, that incalm weather, the surface of the water in these seas swarms withsuch millions of these mollusks (rising for a moment to the airat the surface, and again instantly sinking towards the bottom),that the whales can scarce open their enormous mouths withoutgulping in thousands of these little gelatinous creatures, an inchlong, which, together with Medusae, and some smaller animals,constitute the chief articles of their food ; and we have a fartheranalogy in the fact mentioned in Jameson's Journal, vol. ii.p. 12. " That the number of small Reduce in some parts ofthe Greenland seas is so great, that in a cubic inch, taken upat random, there are no less than 64. In a cubic foot this willamount to 110,592; and in a cubic mile (and there can be nodoubt of the water being charged with them to that extent), thenumber is such, that allowing one person to count a million in aweek, it would have required 80,000 persons, from the creationof the world, to complete the enumeration." — See Dr. Kidd'sadmirable Introductory Lecture to a course of Comparative Anatomy,Oxford, 1824, p. 35.NUMMULITE. 385siphuncle.* The form of the essential partsvaries in each species of this genus, but theirprinciples of construction, and manner of operation,appear in all to have been the same.The remains of Nummulites are not the onlyanimal bodies which have contributed to formthe calcareous strata of the crust of the earth ;other, and more minute species of Chamberedshells have also produced great, and most surprisingeffects. Lamarck (Note, v. 7. p. 611),speaking of the Militia, a small multilocularshell, no larger than a millet seed, with whichthe strata of many quarries in the neighbourhoodof Paris are largely interspersed, notices theimportant influence which these minute bodieshave exercised by reason of their numericalabundance. We scarcely condescend, says he,to examine microscopic shells, from their insignificant,size ; but we cease to think them insignificant,when we reflect that it is by means ofthe smallest objects, that Nature every whereproduces her most remarkable and astonishingphenomena. Whatever she may seem to losein point of volume in the production of livingbodies, is amply made up by the number of theindividuals, which she multiplies with admirableIn PI. 44, Figs. 6, 7, sections of two species of Nummuliteare copied from Parkinson. These show the manner in whichthe whorls are coiled up round each other, and divided by obliquesepta.G. C C.380 ARTICULATED ANIMALS.promptitude to infinity. The remains of suchminute animals have added much more to themass of materials which compose the exteriorcrust of the globe, than the bones of Elephants,Hippopotami, and Whales.Chapter XVI.Proofs of Design in the Structure of FossilArticulated Animals.The third grand division in Cuvier's arrangementof the animal kingdom, viz. the articulatedanimals, comprehends four classes.1 . The Annelidans, or worms with red blood.2. Crustaceans, most familiar to us under theform of Crabs and Lobsters.3. Arachnidans, or Spiders.4. Insects.SECTION I.First Class of Articulated Animals.FOSSIL ANNELIDANS.However numerous may have been the ancientspecies of Annelidans without a shelly covering,naked worms of this class can have left but slightFOSSIL ANNELIDANS. 387traces of their existence, except the holes theyperforated, and the little accumulations of sandor mud cast up at the orifice of these perforations;in a preceding chapter* we have noticedexamples of this kind. We have also abundantevidence of the early and continued prevalenceof that order of Annelidans, which formed shellycalcareous tubes, in the occurrence of fossil Serpulaein nearly all formations, from the Transitionperiods to the present time.SECTION IT.Second Class of Articulated Animals,FOSSIL CRUSTACEANS.The history of fossil Crustaceans has been hithertoalmost untouched by Palaeontologists, and theirrelations to the existing Genera of this great Classof the Animal Kingdom are too little known toadmit of discussion in this place. We may judgeof their extent in certain Formations, from thefact, that in the cabinet of Count Munster, thereare nearly sixty species collected from a singlestratum of the Jurassic Limestone of Solenhofen.See note at page 260..388 FOSSIL CRUSTACEANS.A rich harvest, therefore, remains in store for theNaturalist who will trace this interesting subjectthrough the entire series of Geological formations.The analogies between existing species, andcertain fossil remains of Crustaceans have beenbeautifully illustrated by the investigations ofM. Dearest. From him we learn, that all theinequalities of the external shell in the livingspecies have constant relation to distinct compartmentsin their internal organization. By theapplication of these distinctions to fossil species,he has pointed out a method of comparing themwith living Crustaceans in a new and unexpectedmanner, and has established satisfactory analogiesbetween the extinct and existing membersof this very numerous Class, in cases where thelegs and other parts on which generic distributionshave been founded, were entirely wanting.*Referring my readers to these valuable com-H. Von Meyer has recently noticed five or six extinctgenera of Macrourous Decapods in the Muschel-kalk of Germany.(Leonard and Brown Jahrbuch, 1835.)The subject of English fossil Astacids {Crawfishes) is at thistime receiving important illustration in the able hands of Prof.Phillips.In a recent communication to the Geological Society (June10, 1835), Mr. Broderip describes some very interesting remainsof Crustaceans from the Lias at Lyme Regis, in the collection ofViscount Cole. In one of these, the Lamellae of the externalAntennae, the form and situation of the eyes, and other charactersshow that it was a macrourous decayed intermediate betweenPalinurus and the Shrimps.A fragment of another macrourous decayed proves the exist-tributes,THEIR DISTRIBUTION. 389tenements of the history of fossil Crustaceans,I proceed to select one very remarkable family,the Trilobites, and to devote to them that detailedconsideration, to which they seem peculiarly entitled,from their apparently anomalous structure,and from the obscurity in which their historyhas been involved.Trilobites.The great extent to which Trilobites are distributedover the surface of the globe, and theirnumerical abundance in the places where theyhave been discovered, are remarkable featuresin their history ; they occur at most distantpoints, both of the Northern and Southern Hemisphere.They have been found all over NorthernEurope, and in numerous localities in NorthAmerica; in the Southern Hemisphere they occurin the Andes,* and at the Cape of Good Hope.once at this early period of a crustacean approaching to Pali-eurus,and as large as our common Sea Crawfish.Two other specimens exhibit the breathing organs of anotherdelicate Crustacean, with the tips of the four larger and foursmaller branchiae preserved, and pointing towards the region ofthe heart, showing that these fossil Crustaceans belonged to thehighest division of the Macroura. They reminded Mr. Broderipof the living Arctic forms of the macrourous teapots.I learn from Mr. Pentland that M. D'Qrbigny has latelyfound Trilobites accompanied by Strophomena and Producta inthe Greywacke slate formation of the Eastern Cordillera of theAndes of Bolivia. Fresh water shells, Melania, Melanopsis, andprobably Anton, occur also in the same rock; a fact which3.90 FOUND ONLY IN TRANSITION SERIES.No Trilobites have yet been found in anystrata more recent than the Carboniferous series ;and no other Crustaceans, except three formswhich are also Entomostracous, have been noticedin strata coeval with any of those that containthe remains of Trilobites ;* so that, duringthe long periods that intervened between thedeposition of the earliest fossiliferous strata andthe termination of the Coal formation, f the Trilobitesappear to have been the chief representativesof a class which was largely multiplied intoother orders and families, after these earliestforms of marine Crustaceans became extinct.The fossil remains of this family have longseems analogous to the recent discovery of similar fossils in theTransition rocks of Ireland, Germany, and the United States.The Fresh water fossils occurred near Potash, at an elevation of13,200 feet.M. D'Orbigny's specimens also confirm Mr. Pentland's view,as to the analogies between. the great Limestone formation ofthis district, and the Carboniferous limestones of England ; andas to the great extent also of the Red Marl, and New red sandstoneformations on the Continent of South America.In Scotland two genera of Entomostracous Crustaceans, theEurystheus, and Cypris, occur in the Fresh water lime-stonebeneath the Mid Lothian Coal Field ; the Eurystheus at Ireton,near Bathgate, and the Cypris at Burdiehouse, near Edinburgh.trans. Royal Soc. Edin. vol. xiii.) The third Genus, Limulus,has but recently been recognised in the Coal Formation, andwill be described presently. The Entomostracans appear tohave been the only representatives of the Class Crustaceans untilafter the Deposition of the Carboniferous Strata.-j- Trilobites of a new species have lately been found in Ironstonefrom the centre of the coal measures in Coalbrook-dale.Lond. and Edin. Phil. Mag. vol. 4. 1834, p. 376.OBSCURE NATURE OF TRILOBITES. 391attracted attention, from their strange peculiaritiesof configuration. M. Brogniart, in hisvaluable History of Trilobites, 1822, enumeratedfive genera,* and seventeen species; other writers(Dolman, Wittenberg, Delay, and Green,) haveadded five more genera, and extended the numberof species to fifty-two ; examples of four of thesegenera are given in Plate 46. Fossils of thisfamily were long confounded with Insects, underthe name of Entomolithus paradoxes; after manydisputes respecting their true nature, their placehas now been fixed in a separate section of theclass Crustaceans, and although the entire familyappears to have been annihilated at so early aperiod as the termination of the Carboniferousstrata, they nevertheless present analogies ofstructure, which place them in near approximationto the inhabitants of the existing seas.tThe anterior segment of the Trilobites (PL 46,a, passim,) is composed of a large semi-circular,or crescent-shaped shield, succeeded by an abdomen,or body (c), composed of numerous segmentsfolding over each other, like those in aLobster's tail, and generally divided by twoThe names of these Genera are Calymene, Asaphus, Ogyges,Paradoxes, and Agnostus. Some of these terms are devised expresslyto denote the obscure nature of the bodies to which theyare attached ; e. g. Asaphus, from aaa<j>rjQ, obscure ; Calymene,from kekoXv fJixevr), concealed ; Trapct()oi;og, wonderful ; ayvwaroc,unknown.f See M. Bedouin's Recherches sur les Rapports nature's quiexistent entre les Trilobites et les Animaux articles.392 THEIR FORM AND STRUCTURE.longitudinal furrows into three ranges of lobes,frown which they have derived the name ofTrilobites; Behind this body, in many species,is placed a triangular or semi-lunar tail or post-abdomen(d), less distinctly lobated than thebody. One of these Genera, the Calymene, hasthe property of rolling itself up into a ball likea common Wood-Louse. (See PL 46, Figs. 1,3, 4, 5.)The nearest approach among living animalsto the external form of Trilobites is that affordedby the genus Serolis in the class Crustacea.(See PL 45, Figs. 6, 7.)* The most strikingdifference between this animal, and the TrillsGenus Serolis was first established by Dr. Leach, on theauthority of specimens collected by Sir Joseph Banks, in the Straitsof Magellan (or rather of Magalhaens, the proper name of thenavigator, according to Capt. King) during Sir Joseph's voyagewith Captain Cook, and given by Sir Joseph to the LinnaeanSociety ; and of another specimen of the same Genus from Senegalgiven by Mr. Duquesne to Dr. Leach. From these Dr. Leachdescribed and named the species represented in our plate ; hisdescription of this Genus is published in the Dictionnaire desSciences Naturelles, v. 12, p. 340. Captain King has lately collectedmany specimens of Serolis on the east coast of Patagonia,lat. 45. S. 30 miles from the shore, and brought up by dredgingin 40 fathoms water \ and also at Port Famine, in the Straitsof Magalhaens, where it was thrown upon the beach by the tide ;here Captain King saw the beach literally covered with themdead ; he has observed them alive swimming close to the bottomamong the sea-weed ; their motions were slow and gradual, andnot like those of a shrimp ; he never saw them swimming nearthe surface ; their legs seemed shaped for swimming and crawlingon the bottom.ANIMALS ALLIED TO TRILOBITES. 393bites, consists in there being a fully developedseries of crustaceous legs and antennae in theSerolis (PL 45, Fig. 7.), whilst no traces of eitherof these organs have yet been discovered in connexionwith any Trilobite. M. Brogniart explainsthe absence of these organs, by conceiving thatthe Trilobites hold precisely that place in theclass Crustaceans (Gyimiobranchia), in which theantennae become very small, or altogether fail ;and that the legs being transformed to soft andperishable paddles (pattes), bearing branchiae,(or filamentous organs for breathing in water),were incapable of preservation*A second approximation to the character ofTrilobites occurs in the Limulus, or King crab(Lamarck, T. 5, p. 145.), a genus now mostabundant in the seas of warm climates, chieflyin those of India, and of the coasts of America(see PI. 45, Figs. 1 . 2.) The history of this genusis important, on account of its relations, both tothe existing and extinct forms of Crustaceans ;it has been found fossil in the Coal formation ofStaffordshire and Derbyshire ; and in the Jurassiclimestone of Aichstadt, near Pappenheim,together with many other marine Crustaceans ofa higher Order.*In the genus Limulus (see PL 45, Figs. 1. 2.) there are butfaint traces of antennae, and the shield (a.), which covers theanterior portion of the body, is expanded entirely over a seriesof small crustaceous legs (Fig. 2. a.). Beneath the second, orabdominal portion of the shell (c), is placed a series of thin394 Scrolls, LIMULUS, Branchial.A third example of this disposition, in ananimal belonging to the same class of Crustaceans,whereby the legs are reduced to softpaddles, and combine the functions of respirationwith those of locomotion, is afforded bythe Branchipus stagnalis, (Cancer stagnalis,Lin), of our English ponds, (see PL 45, Figs.3, e. 4, e. 5, e.)In the comparison here made between fourdifferent families of Crustaceans, for the purposeof illustrating the history of the long extinctTrilobites, by the analogies we find in the Serolis,Limulus, and Branchipus ; we have a beautifulexample, taken from the extreme points of timehorny transverse plates (Fig. 2, e. 2, e'. and 2, e".) supportingthe fibres of the branchiae, and at the same time acting as paddlesfor swimming. The same disposition of laminated branchiae isfound also in the Serolis, Fig. 7. e. Fig. 8, is a magnifiedrepresentation of these laminated branchiae, very similar to thoseat Figs. 3, e. and 5, e.Thus while the Serolis (Fig. 7) presents an union of antennaeand crustaceous legs with soft paddles bearing the Branchiae, wehave in the Limulus (Fig. 2), a similar disposition of legs andpaddles, and only slight traces of antennae ; in the Branchipus,(Figs. 3 and 5,) we find antennae, but no crustaceous legs; whilethe Trilobite, being without antennae, and having all its legsrepresented by soft paddles, as in Branchipus, is by the lattercondition placed near Branchipus among the EntomostracousCrustaceans, in the Order of Branchiopods, whose feet are representedby ciliated paddles, combining the functions of respirationand notation. At PI. 45, Fig. 3. e, Fig. 4. e, Fig. 5. e, representthe soft branchiae of Branchipus, performing the double officeof feet and lungs.NO TRANSMUTATION OF SPECIES. 395of which Geology takes cognizance, of thatsystematic and uniform arrangement of theAnimal Kingdom, under which every family isnearly connected with adjacent and cognate families.Three of the families under considerationare among the present inhabitants of thewater, while the fourth has been long extinct,and occurs only in a fossil state. When we seethemost ancient Trilobites thus placed in immediatecontact with our living Crustaceans, wecannot but recognize them as forming part andparcel of one great system of Creation, connectedthrough its whole extent by perfect unity ofdesign, and sustained in its minutest parts byuninterrupted harmonies of organization.We have in the Trilobites an example of thatpeculiar, and, as it is sometimes called, rudimentarydevelopment of the organs of locomotionin the Class Crustaceans, whereby the legs aremade subservient to the double functions ofpaddles and lungs. The advocate for the theoryof the derivation of existing more perfect species,by successive changes from more simple ancientforms, might imagine that he sees in the Trilobitethe extinct parent stock from which, by aseries of developments, consecutive forms of moreperfect Crustaceans may, during the lapse of ages,have been derived ; but according to this hypothesis,we ought no longer to find the same simplecondition as that of the Trilobite still retained in3,96 FOSSIL EYES OF TRILOBITES.the living Branchipus, nor should the primevalform of Limulus have possessed such an intermediatecharacter, or have remained advancedin the scale of organization, from its first appearancein the Carboniferous Series,* through themidway periods of the secondary formations, untothe present hour*Eyes of Trilobites.Besides the above analogies between the Trilobitesand certain forms of living Crustaceans,there remains a still more important point ofresemblance in the structure of their eyes. Thispoint deserves peculiar consideration, as it affordsthe most ancient, and almost the onlyThe very rare fossil engraved in Martin's Petrifacata Verbis(Tab. 45, Fig. 4,) by the name of Entomolithus Monopolies(Lunatic) appears to be a Limulus. It was found in IronStone of the Coal formation on the borders of Derbyshire.A similar fossil in the collection of Mr. Justice, of Madely, isengraved in our Plate 46", Fig. 3.In the Secondary period, during the deposition of the Jurassiclimestone, the Limulus abounded in the seas which then coveredcentral Germany ; and it still maintains its primeval intermediateform in the King Crab of the present ocean.My friend Mr. Stokes has discovered, on the under side ofa fossil Trilobite from Lake Huron (PI. 45, Fig. 12.), a crustaceousplate (f.) forming the entrance into the stomach, theshape and structure of which resemble those of the analogousparts in some recent Crabs. This organ forms another link ofconnexion between the Trilobite and living Crustaceans. — GeogTrans. N. S. vol. i. p. 208, PI. 27,FOSSIL EYES OF TRILOBITES. 397example yet found in the fossil world, of thepreservation of parts so delicate as the visualorgans of animals that ceased to live manythousands, and perhaps millions of years ago.We must regard these organs with feelings of noordinary kind, when we recollect that we havebefore us the identical instruments of vision,through which the light of heaven was admittedto the sensorium of some of the first createdinhabitants of our planet.The discovery of such instruments in so perfecta state of preservation, after having beenburied for incalculable ages in the early strataof the Transition formation, is one of the mostmarvellous facts yet disclosed by geological researches; and the structure of these eyes suppliesan argument, of high importance in connectingtogether the extreme points of the animal creation.An identity of mechanical arrangements,adapted to the construction of an optical instrument,precisely similar to that which forms theeyes of existing insects and Crustaceans, affordsan example of agreement that seems utterly inexplicablewithout reference to the exercise ofone and the same Intelligent Creative power.Professor Miller and Mr. Straus* have ablyand amply illustrated the arrangements, by whichthe eyes of Insects and Crustaceans are adaptedSee Lib. Went. Knowledge, v. 12. ; and Dr. Roget's BridgewaterTreatise, vol. ii. p. 486 et seq. and Fig. 422 — 428,398 COMPOUND AND FACETTED.to produce distinct vision, through the medium ofa number of minute facets, or lenses, placed atthe extremity of an equal number of conicaltubes, or microscopes ; these amount sometimes,as in the Butterfly, to the number of 35,000facets in the two eyes, and in the Dragon-flyto 14,000.It appears that in eyes constructed on thisprinciple, the image will be more distinct inproportion as the cones in a given portion of theeye are more numerous and long ; that, as compoundeyes see only those objects which presentthemselves in the axes of the individual cones,the limit of their field of vision is greater orsmaller as the exterior of the eye is more or lesshemispherical.If we examine the eyes of Trilobites with aview to their principles of construction, we findboth in their form, and in the disposition of thefacets, obvious examples of optical adaptation.In the Asaphus caucasus (see PI. 45, Figs. 9and 10.), each eye contains at least 400 nearlyspherical lenses fixed in separate compartmentson the surface of the cornea.* The form of theAs the Crystalline lens in the eyes of Fishes is spherical, andthose in the Eye of Trilobites are nearly so, there seems to bein this form an adaptation to the medium of Water, which wouldlead us to expect to find a similar form of lens in the compoundEyes of all marine Crustacea, and probably a different form inthe compound Eyes of Insects that live in Air.DISPOSITION OF THE LENSES. .3.99general cornea is peculiarly adapted to the usesof an animal destined to live at the bottom of thewater : to look downwards was as much impossibleas it was unnecessary to a creature living atthe bottom; but for horizontal vision in everydirection the contrivance is complete.! Theform of each eye is nearly that of the frustumof a cone (see PI. 45, Figs. 9 and 10.), incompleteon that side only which is directly oppositeto the corresponding side of the other eye, andin which if facets were present, their chief rangewould be towards each other across the head,where no vision was required. The exterior ofeach eye, like a circular bastion, ranges nearlyround three-fourths of a circle, each commandingso much of the horizon, that where the distinctvision of one eye ceases, that of the other eyebegins, so that in the horizontal direction thecombined range of both eyes was panoramic.If we compare this disposition of the eyes withthat in the three cognate Crustaceans, by whichwe have been illustrating the general structure ofthe Trilobites, we shall find the same mechanismpervading them all, modified by peculiar adaptationsto the state and habits of each ; thus inthe Branchipus (PL 45, Fig. 3, b, b), whichmoves with rapidity in all directions through thet The facetted eyes of Bees are disposed most favourably forhorizontal vision, and for looking downwards, — Lib. Went. Know.v. xii. p. 130.400 SIMILAR EYES IN COGNATE CRUSTACEANS.water, and requires universal vision, each eye isnearly hemispherical, and placed on a peduncle,by which it is projected to the distance requisiteto effect this purpose. (See PI. 45, Fig. 3, b,and b.)In the Serolis (PL 45, Fig. 6. b'.), the dispositionof the eye, and its range of vision, aresimilar to those in the Trilobite ; but the summitof the eye is less elevated ; as the flat back ofthis animal presents little obstruction to the raysof light from surrounding objects.*In the Limulus (PL 45, Fig. 1.), where theside eyes (b, b.) are sessile, and do not commandthe space immediately before the head, two othersimple eyes (b") are fixed in front, compensatingfor the want of range in the compound eyes overobjects in that direction. tIn the above comparison of the eyes of Trilobites,with those of the Limulus, Serolis, andBranchipus, we have placed side by side, examplesof the construction of that most delicate andFig. 1. b'. Fig. 3. b'. and Fig. 6. b'. are magnified representationsof the eyes to which these figures are respectivelyadjacent. Figs. 10. and 11. are differently magnified forms ofthe eye of Asaphus caucasus, which in Fig. 9. is represented ofits natural size. A few of these lenses are semi-transparent;they are still set in their original rims, or frame-work of thecornea, the whole being converted into calcareous spar.f These eyes are placed so close together, that, having beenmistaken for a single eye, they caused the name of MonoculusPolyphemus to be applied to this animal by Linnaeus.GENERAL RESULTS. 401complex organ the eye, selected from each extreme,and from a midway place in the progressiveseries of animal creations. We find in Trilobitesof the Transition rocks, which were amongthe most ancient forms of animal life, the samemodifications of this organ which are at thepresent time adapted to similar functions in theliving Serolis. The same kind of instrumentwas also employed in those middle periods ofgeological chronology when the Secondary stratawere deposited at the bottom of a warm sea, inhabitedby Limuli, in the regions of Europewhich now form the elevated plains of centralGermany.The results arising from these facts are notconfined to animal Physiology ; they give informationalso regarding the condition of the ancientSea and ancient Atmosphere, and therelations of both these media to Light, at thatremote period when the earliest marine animalswere furnished with instruments of vision, inwhich the minute optical adaptations were thesame that impart the perception of light to Crustaceansnow living at the bottom of the sea.With respect to the waters wherein the Trilobitesmaintained their existence throughout theentire period of the Transition formation, weconclude that they could not have been thatimaginary turbid and compound Chaotic fluid,from the precipitates of which some GeologistsG. D D402 INFERENCES RESPECTING THE ANCIENThave supposed the materials of the surface ofthe earth to be derived ; because the structureof the eyes of these animals is such, that anykind of fluid in which they could have beenefficient at the bottom, must have been pure andtransparent enough to allow the passage of lightto organs of vision, the nature of which is sofully disclosed by the state of perfection in whichthey are preserved.With regard to the Atmosphere also we infer,that had it differed materially from its actualcondition, it might have so far affected the raysof Light, that a corresponding difference fromthe eyes of existing Crustaceans would have beenfound in the organs on which the impressionsof such rays were then received.Regarding Light itself also, we learn, fromthe resemblance of these most ancient organizationsto existing eyes, that the mutual relationsof Light to the Eye, and of the Eye to Light,were the same at the time when Crustaceansendowed with the faculty of vision were firstplaced at the bottom of the primeval seas, as atthe present moment.Thus we find among the earliest organicremains, an Optical instrument of most curiousconstruction, adapted to produce vision of a peculiarkind, in the then existing representativesof one great Class in the Articulated division ofthe Animal Kingdom. We do not find thisSEA AND ATMOSPHERE AND LIGHT. 403instrument passing onwards, as it were, througha series of experimental changes, from moresimple into more complex forms ; it was createdat the very first, in the fulness of perfect adaptationto the uses and condition of the class ofcreatures, to which this kind of eye has everbeen, and is still appropriate.If we should discover a microscope, or telescope,in the hand of an Egyptian Mummy, orbeneath the ruins of Herculaneum, it would beimpossible to deny that a knowledge of the principlesof Optics existed in the mind by whichsuch an instrument had been contrived. Thesame inference follows, but with cumulative force,when we see nearly four hundred microscopiclenses set side by side, in the compound eye of afossil Trilobite ; and the weight of the argumentis multiplied a thousand fold, when we lookto the infinite variety of adaptations by whichsimilar instruments have been modified, throughendless genera and species, from the long-lostTrilobites, of the Transition strata, through theextinct Crustaceans of the Secondary and Tertiaryformations, and thence onwards throughoutexisting Crustaceans, and the countless hosts ofliving Insects.It appears impossible to resist the conclusionsas to Unity of Design in a common Author,which are thus attested by such cumulative evidencesof Creative Intelligence and Power;404 FOSSIL ARACHNIDANS.both, as infinitely surpassing the most, exaltedfaculties of the human mind, as the mechanismsof the natural world, when magnified by thehighest microscopes, are found to transcend themost perfect productions of human art.SECTION III.Third Class of Articulated Animals.FOSSIL ARACHNIDANS.Under the relations that now subsist betweenthe animal and vegetable kingdoms, the connectionof terrestrial Plants with Insects is so directand universal, that each species of plant is consideredto afford nutriment to three or four speciesof insects. The general principle which we havetraced throughout the Secondary and Tertiaryformations, ever operating to maintain on the surfaceof the earth the greatest possible amount oflife, affords a strong antecedent probability thatso large a mass of terrestrial vegetables as thatwhich is preserved in the Carboniferous strata ofthe Transition series, held the same relation, asthe basis of nutriment to Insect families of thisearly date, that modern vegetables do to this mostnumerous class of existing terrestrial animals.FOSSIL SPIDERS. 405Still further, the actual provisions for restrainingthis Insect class within due bounds, by thecontrolling agency of the carnivorous Arachnidanswould lead us to expect that Spiders and Scorpionswere employed in similar service duringthe successive geological epochs, in which wehave evidence of the abundant growth of terrestrialvegetables.Some recent discoveries confirm the argumentfrom these analogies, by the test of actual observation.The two great families in the higherorder of living Arachnidans (Pulmonary) areSpiders and Scorpions ; and we have evidence toshew that fossil remains of both these familiesexist in strata of very high antiquity.Fossil Spiders.Although no Spiders have been yet discoveredin any rocks so ancient as the Carboniferousseries, the presence of Insects in this series, andalso of Scorpions, renders it highly probable thatthe cognate family of Spiders was co-ordinatewith Scorpions, in restraining the Insect tribes ofthis early epoch, and that it will ere long be recognizedamong its fossil remains.*The animal found by Mr. W. Justice in the Iron stone ofCoalbrook Dale, and noticed by Mr. Prestwich as " apparentlya Spider" (Phil. Mag. May, 1834, v. iv. p. 376), has been subsequentlylaid open by me, and shewn to be an Insect, belongingto the family of Curculionidse. (PI. 46", Fig. 1.) At the timewhen it was figured, and supposed to be a Spider, its head and406 FOSSIL SCORPIONS.The existence of Spiders in the Jurassic portionof the Secondary formations has been established,by Count Munster's discovery of two speciesin the lithographic limestone of Solenhofen.M. Marcel de Serres and Mr. Murchison havediscovered fossil Spiders in Freshwater Tertiarystrata near Aix in Provence. (See PI. 46", Fig.12.)Fossil Scorpions.The address of my friend Count Sternberg tothe members of the National Museum of Bohemia(Prague, 1835), contains an account of his discoveryof a fossil Scorpion in the ancient Coalformation at the village of Choice, near Radnitz,on the S. W. of Prague. This most instructivefossil (the first of its kind yet noticed) was foundtail were covered by Iron stone, and its appearance much resembledan animal of this kind. Mr. Prestwich announces alsothe discovery, in the same formation, of a Coleopterous Insect,which will be further described in our next section, as referablealso to the Curculionidse.It is scarcely possible to ascertain the precise nature of theanimals, rudely figured as Spiders and Insects on Coal slate byLhwyd, (Monograph. Tab. 4,) and copied by Parkinson, (Org.Rem. V. iii. PL 17, Figs. 3, 4, 5, 6) ; but his opinion of themisrendered highly probable by the recent discoveries in Coal-brookDale : " Scraps olim suspicari me Araneorum quondamicones, una cum Lithophytisin Schists Carbonate observance :hoc jam ulterior experience edicts perte assert. Alias iconeshabet, quae ad Scarabseorum genus quam proxime account. Inpostern ergo non tantum Lithophyta, sed et quaedam Insecta inhoc lapide investigate conabimur." Lhwyd Exist. iii. ad fin.FOSSIL SCORPION. 407in July, 1834, in a stone-quarry, on the outcropof the Coal measures, near a spot where coal hasbeen wrought since the sixteenth century. Inthe same quarry were found four erect trunks oftrees, and numerous vegetable remains, of thesame species that occur in the great Coal formationof England .A series of drawings of this Scorpion was submittedto a select committee at the meeting ofNaturalists and Physicians of Germany, in Stuttgart,1834 ; and from their report the subjoinedparticulars are taken. All our Figures, (PI. 46.)are copied from those attached to this Report,in the Transactions of the Museum of Bohemia,April, 1835.*This fossil Scorpion differs from existing species, less in generalstructure than in the position of the eyes. In the latter respect,it approaches nearest to the genus Androctonus, which, like it,has twelve eyes, but differently disposed from those of the fossilspecies. From the nearly circular arrangement of these organsin the latter animal, it has been ranged under a new genus, .The sockets of all these twelve eyes are perfectly preserved,(PI. 46'. fig. 3.) One of the small eyes, and the left large eye,still" retain their form, with the cornea preserved in a wrinkledstate, and their interior filled with earth.The jaws also are very distinct, but in a reversed position. (PI.46' fig. 2. a.) Both these jaws have three projecting teeth, andone of them (PI. 46', Figs. 4. 5.) exhibits, when magnified, thehairs with which its horny integument was covered.The rings of the thorax, (apparently eight) and of the tail, aretoo much dislocated for their number to be accurately distinguished,but they differ from all known species. The view of the4(H3 EYES AND SKIN PRESERVED.As far as we can argue from the analogy ofliving species, the presence of large Scorpions isa certain index of the warmth of the climate inwhich they lived ; and this indication is in perfectharmony with those afforded by the tropicalaspect of the vegetables with which the Scorpion,found in the Bohemian coal-field, is associated.back (PI. 46', Fig. 1.) has been obtained by cutting into the stonefrom behind.The under surface of the animal is well exposed in Fig 2, withits characteristic pincers on the right claw. Between this clawand the tail lies a fossil carbonized Seed, of a species common; inthe Coal formation.The horny covering of this Scorpion is in a most extraordinarystate of preservation, being neither decomposed nor carbonized.The peculiar substance (Chitine or Elytrine) of which, like theelytra of Beetles, it is probably composed, has resisted decompositionand mineralization. It can readily be stripped off, is elastic,translucent, and horny. It consists of two layers, both retainingtheir texture. The uppermost of these (PI. 46' Fig. 6. a.) isharsh, almost opaque, of a dark-brown colour, and flexible; theunder skin (PL 46', Fig. 6. b.) is tender, yellow, less elastic, andorganized like the upper. The structure of both exhibits, underthe microscope, hexagonal cells, divided by strong partitions.Both are penetrated at intervals by pores, which are still open,each having a sunk areola, with a minute opening at its centrefor the orifices of the trachea. Fig. 7. represents impressions ofthe muscular fibres connected with the movement of the legs.FOSSIL INSECTS. 409SECTION IV.Fourth Class of Articulated Animals.FOSSIL INSECTS.*Although the numerical amount of living Insectsforms so vast a majority of the inhabitantsof the present land, few traces of this large classof Articulated animals have yet been discoveredin a fossil state. This may probably result fromthe circumstance, that the greatest portion offossil animal remains are derived from the inhabitantsof salt water, a medium in which onlyone or two species of Insects are now supposedto live.Had no indications of Insects been discoveredin a fossil state, the presence in any strata, ofScorpions or Spiders, both belonging to familiesconstructed to feed on Insects, would have affordeda strong a priori argument, in favour ofthe probability, of the contemporaneous existenceof that very numerous class of animals,which now forms the prey of the Arachnidans.This probability has been recently confirmed bythe discovery of two Coleoptera of the familyCurculionidee in the Iron-stone of CoalbrookSee PI. 46". Figs. 1. 2. & 4.— II.410 INSECTS IN THE COAL FORMATION.Dale,* and also of the wing of a Corydalis, whichwill be noticed in our description of PL 46".It is very interesting and important, to havediscovered in the Coal formation fossil remains,which establish the existence of the great InsectivorousClass Arachnidans, at this earlyperiod. It is no less important to have found alsoin the same formation the remains of Insects,which may have formed their prey. Had neitherof these discoveries been made, the abundanceof Land plants would have implied the probableabundance of Insects, and this probability wouldhave involved also that of the contemporaneousexistence of Arachnidans, to control their undueincrease. All these probabilities are now reducedto certainty, and we are thus enabled to fill upwhat has hitherto appeared a blank in the historyof animal life, from those very distant times whenthe Carboniferous strata were deposited.The Estuary, or Fresh-water formation of thosestrata of the Carboniferous series which containshells of Unio, in Coalbrook Dale, and in otherCoal basins, renders the presence of Insects andArachnidans in such strata, easy of explanation ;they may have been drifted from adjacent lands,by the same torrents that transported the ter-ourfigures (PI. 46". Figs. 1. 2.) represent these fossils oftheir natural size. See description of this Plate for further detailsrespecting them.INSECTS IN SECONDARY AND TERTIARY STRATA. 411restrict vegetables which have produced the bedsof Coal.The existence of the wing-covers of Insectsin the Secondary Series, in the Oolitic slate ofStonesfield, has been long known ; these are allColeopterous, and in the opinion of Mr. Curtismany of them approach most nearly to the Buprestis,a genus now most abundant in warmlatitudes. (See PI. 46". Figs. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10.)*Count Munster has in his collection twenty-fivespecies of fossil Insects, found in the JurassicLimestone of Solenhofen ; among these are fivespecies of the existing Family of Libellula, (SeeM. Aug. Oder has ascertained, that the Elytra and otherparts of the horny covering of insects, contain the peculiar substanceChitine, or Elytrine, which approaches nearly to the vegetableprinciple Lignite ; these parts of Insects burn withoutfusion, or swelling, like horn, and without the smell of animalmatter ; they also leave a Coal which retains their form.M. Oder found that even the hairs of a Scarabaeus nasicornisretained their form after burning, and therefore concludes thatthey are different from the hairs of vertebral animals. This circumstanceexplains the preservation of the hairs on the hornycover of the Bohemian Scorpion.He ascertained also that the Sinews (Nervures) of Scarabsei,are composed of Chitine, and that the soft flexible laminae of theshell of a crab, which remain after the separation of the Lime,also contain Chitine.Cuvier observes, that the Integuments of Entomostracans, arerather horny than calcareous, and that in this respect they approximateto the nature of Insects and Arachnidans. See ZoologicalJournal. London, 1825, vol. i. p. 101.412 ANTIQUITY OF ARTICULATED ANIMALS.PL 1, Fig. 49), a large Tanagra, and severalColeoptera.Numerous fossil Insects have recently been discoveredin the Tertiary Gypsum of Fresh-waterformation at Aix, in Provence. M. Marcel deSerres speaks of sixty-two Genera, chiefly of theOrders Litera, Hemiptera, and Coleoptera ;and Mr. Curtis refers all the specimens he hasseen from Aix to European forms, and most ofthem to existing Genera.* Insects occur alsoin the tertiary Brown coal of Osbert on theRhine.General Conclusions.We have seen from the examples cited in the lastfour sections, that all of the four existing greatClasses of the grand Division of Articulatedanimals, viz. Annelidans, Crustaceans, Arach-titans, and Insects, and many of their Orders,had entered on their respective functions in thenatural world, at the early Epoch of the TransitionFormations. We find evidences of changein the Families of these Orders, at several periodsof the Secondary and Tertiary series, very distantfrom one another ; and we further find eachFamily variously represented during differentintervals by Genera, some of which are knownSee Edinburgh New Phil. Mourn. Oct. 1829.GENERAL CONCLUSIONS. 413only in a fossil state, whilst others (and thesechiefly in the lower Classes,) have extendedthrough all geological Eras unto the presenttime.On these facts we may found conclusionswhich are of great importance in the investigationof the physical history of the Earth. Ifthe existing Classes, Orders, and Families ofmarine and terrestrial Articulated animals havethus pervaded various geological epochs, sincelife began upon our planet, we may infer thatthe state of the Land and Waters, and also of theAtmosphere, during all these Epochs, was not sowidely different from their actual condition asmany geologists have supposed. We also learnthat throughout all these epochs and stages ofchange, the correlative Functions of the successiveRepresentatives of the animal and vegetablekingdoms have ever been the same as atthe present moment ; and thus we connect theentire series of past and present forms of organizedbeings, as parts of one stupendously grand,and consistent, and harmonious Whole.414 FOSSIL RADIATED ANIMALS.Chapter XVII.Proofs of Design in the Structure of FossilRadiated Animals, or Zoophytes.The same difficulties which we have felt in selectingfrom other grand Divisions of the animalkingdom, subjects of comparison between the extinctand living forms of their respective Classes,Orders, and Families, embarrass our choice alsofrom the last Division that remains for consideration.Volumes might be filled with descriptionsof fossil species of those beautiful generaof Radiated Animals, whose living representativescrowd the waters of our present seas.The result of all comparisons between the livingand fossil species of these families would be,that the latter differ almost always in species,and often in genus, from those which actuallyexist ; but that all are so similarly constructed onone and the same general Type, and show suchperfect Unity of Design throughout the infinitelyvaried modifications, under which they now perform,and ever have performed the functionsallotted to them, that we can find no explanationof such otherwise mysterious Uniformity, thanby referring it to the agency of one and the sameCreative Intelligence.FOSSIL ECHINODERMS. 415SECTION I.FOSSIL ECHINODERMS.The animals that compose this highest Class inthe grand division of Radiated animals, viz.Echinidans, Stelleridans, and Crinoideans, have,till lately, been considered as made up of manysimilar parts disposed like Rays around a commoncentre.Mr. Agassiz has recently shewn, (London andEdin. Phil. Mag. Nov. 1834, p. 369), that theydo not partake of this character, from which thedivision of radiated animals is named ; but thattheir rays are dissimilar, and not always connectedwith an uniform centre ; and that a bilateralsymmetry, analogous to that of the moreperfect classes of animals, exists throughout thefamilies of Echini, Arteries, and Crinoidea.ECHINIDANS AND STELLERIDANS,The History of the fossil species of Echinidansand Stelleridans has been most beautifully illustrated,in the plates of the Petrefacten of Prof.Goldfuss. Though derived from Strata of variousdegrees of high antiquity, they are for the mostpart referred by him to existing Genera.The family of Echinidans appears to have CRINOIDEANS.tended through all Formations, from the Epochof the Transition series to the present time.*No fossil Stelleridans have yet been noticed instrata more ancient than the Muschel-kalk.As the structure of the fossil species of boththese families is so nearly identical with that ofexisting Echini, and Star-fishes, I shall confinemy observations respecting fossil animals in theclass of Echinoderms to a family which is of rareoccurrence, excepting in a fossil state, and whichseems to have prevailed most abundantly in themost ancient fossiliferous formations. .CRINOIDEANS.Among the fossil families of the Radiated divisionof animals, the Geologist discovers one whoseliving analogues are seldom seen, and whosevast numerical extent and extraordinary beautyentitle it to peculiar consideration.Successions of strata, each many feet in thickness,and many miles in extent, are often halfmade up of the calcareous skeletons of Encrinites.The Entrochal Marble of Derbyshire,and the Black rock in the cliffs of CarboniferousI found many years ago fossil Echinidans in the Carboniferouslimestone of Ireland, near Donegal, they are however rarein the Transition formation, become more frequent in the and Lias, and abound throughout the Oolitic and Cretaceousformations.PLACE OF CRINOIDEANS. 417limestone near Bristol, are well known examplesof strata thus composed ; and shew how largelythe bodies of Animals have occasionally contributedby their remains, to swell the Volume ofmaterials that now compose the mineral world.The fossil remains of this order have been long-knownby the name of Stone Lilies, or Encrinites,and have lately been classed under a separateorder by the name of Crinoline.This order comprehends many Genera andnumerous Species, and is ranged by Cuvier afterthe Asturias, in the division Zoophytes. Nearlyall these species appear to have been attached tothe bottom of the Sea, or to floating extraneousbodies.*The two most remarkable Genera of this familyhave been long known to Naturalists by theThese animals form the subject of an elaborate and excellentwork, by Mr. Miller, entitled a Natural History of the Crinoline,or Lily-shaped Animals. The representations at PI. 48, and PI.49, Fig. 1. of one of the most characteristic species of thisfamily, being that to which the name of stone-lily was first applied; and the figures of two other species at PI. 47, Fig. 1, 2, 5,will exemplify the following definition given of them by Mr.Miller. " An Animal with a round, oval, or angular column,composed of numerous articulating joints, supporting at itssummit, a series of plates, or joints, which form a cup-like body,containing the viscera, from whose upper rim proceed five articulatedarms, dividing into ejaculated fingers, more or less numerous,surrounding the aperture of the mouth, (PI. 47. Figs. 6, x.7, x) situated in the centre of a plated integument, which extendsover the abdominal cavity, and is capable of being contractedinto a conical or proposal shape."G. E E418 EXISTING CRINOIDEANS.names of Encrinite and Pentacrinite ; the former(see PI. 49, Fig. 1, and PI. 47, Figs. 1. 2. 5.) mostnearly resembling the external form of a Lily,placed on a circular stem ; the latter (see PI. 51,and PI. 52, Fig. 1, 3.) retaining the generalanalogies of structure presented by the Encrinite,but, from the pentagonal form of its stem,denominated Pentacrinite. A third Genus, calledApiocrinites, or Pear Encrinite, (PI. 47. Figs. 1,2.) exhibits, on a large scale, the component partsof bodies of this family ; and has been placed byMr. Miller at the head of his valuable work onthe Crinoidea, from which many of the followingdescriptions and illustrations will be collected.Two existing species of recent animals throwmuch light on the nature of these fossil remains ;viz. the Pentacrinus Caput Medusae from theWest Indies, represented at PI. 52, Fig. 1, andthe Comatula fimbriata,* figured in the firstplate of Miller's Crinoidea.We will proceed to consider the mechanicalprovisions in the structure of two or three of themost important fossil species of this family,viewed in relation to their office as Zoophytes,The Comatula presents a conformity of structure with thatof the Pentacrinite, almost perfect in every essential part, exceptingthat the column is either wanting, or at least reduced to asingle plate. Peron states that the Comatula suspends itself byits side arms from foci, and Polyparies, and in this positionwatches for its prey, and attains it by its spreading arms andfingers. Miller, p. 182.DISTRIBUTION OF FOSSIL CRINOIDEANS. 419destined to find their nourishment by spreadingtheir nets and moving their bodies through alimited space, from a fixed position at the bottomof the sea ; or by employing the same instruments,either when floating singly through thewater, or attached, like the modern Pentelasmisanathema, to floating pieces of wood.Although the representatives of Crinoideansin our modern seas are of rare occurrence,this family was of vast numerical importanceamong the earliest inhabitants of the ancientdeep.* The extensive range which it formerlyoccupied among the earliest inhabitants of ourPlanet, may be estimated from the fact, that theCrinoideans already discovered have been arrangedin four divisions, comprising nine genera,most of them containing several species, and eachindividual exhibiting, in every one of its manythousand component little bones, | a mechanismwhich shows them all to have formed parts of awell-contrived and delicate mechanical instrument; every part acting in due connection withThe monograph of Mr. Miller, exhibiting the minute detailsof every variation in the structure of each component part in theseveral Genera of the family of Crino'idea, affords an admirableexemplification of the regularity, with which the same fundamentaltype is rigidly maintained through all the varied modificationsthat constitute its numerous extinct genera and species.f These so-called Ossicula are not true bones, but partake ofthe nature of the shelly Plates of Echini, and the calcareousjoints of Star-fishes.420 BONY STRUCTURE OF CRINOIDEANS.the rest, and all adjusted to each other with aview to the perfect performance of some peculiarfunction in the economy of each individual.The joints, or little bones, of which the skeletonsof all these animals were composed, resemblethose of the star-fish : their use, like that of thebony skeleton in vertebral animals, was to constitutethe solid support of the whole body, toprotect the viscera, and to form the foundation ofa system of contractile fibres pervading the gelatinousintegument with which all parts of theanimal were invested.*The bony portions formed the great bulk of theanimal, as they do in star-fishes. The calcareousmatter of these little bones was probably secretedby a Periosteum, which in cases of accident, towhich bodies so delicately constructed must havebeen much exposed in an element so stormy asthe sea, seems to have had the power of depositingfresh matter to repair casual injuries. Mr.Miller's work abounds with examples of reparationsof this kind in various fossil species of .Our PL 47, Fig. 2% represents a reparationnear the upper portion of the stem ofApiocrinites Rotunda.As the contractile fibres of radiated animals are not set togetherin the same complex manner as the true muscles of the higherorders of animals, the term Muscle, in its strict acceptation, cannotwith accuracy be applied to Crino'ideans ; but, as most writershave designated by this term the more simple contractilefibres which move their little bones, it will be convenient to retainit in our descriptions of these animals.POWERS OF REPRODUCTION. 421In the recent Pentacrinus (PL 52, Fig. 1), oneof the arms is under the process of being reproduced,as Crabs and Lobsters reproduce theirlost claws and legs, and many lizards their tailsand feet. The arms of star-fishes also, whenbroken off, are in the same manner reproduced.From these examples we see that the power ofreproduction has been always strongest in thelowest orders of animals, and that the applicationof remedial forces has ever been duly proportionedto the liability to injury, resulting from thehabits and condition of the creatures in whichthese forces are most powerfully developed.Encrinites Moniliformis.As the best mode of explaining the generaleconomy of the Crinoidea, will be to examine insome detail the anatomy of a single species, Ishall select, for this purpose, that which hasformed the type of the order, viz. the Encrinitesmoniliformis (see PI. 48, 49, 50). Minute andfull descriptions are given by Parkinson andMiller of this fossil, shewing it to combine in itsvarious organs an union of mechanical contrivances,which adapt each part to its peculiarfunctions in a manner infinitely surpassing themost perfect contrivances of human mechanism.Mr. Parkinson* states that after a careful ex-organicRemains, vol. ii. p. 180.422 LILY ENCRINITE.animation he has ascertained that, independentlyof the number of pieces which may be containedin the vertebral column, and which, from itsprobable length, may be very numerous, thefossil skeleton of the superior part of the LilyEncrinite (Encrinites Moniliformis) consists ofat least 26,000 pieces. See PL 50, Figs. 1, 2,3, 4, &c*Mr. Miller observes that this number wouldincrease most surprisingly, were we to take intoaccount the minute calcareous plates that areinterwoven in the integument covering the abdominalcavity and inner surface of the fingers andtentacula.tBones of the Pelvis 5Ribs 5Clavicles 5Scapula . „ 5Arms. Six bones in each of the ten arms 60Hands. Each hand being formed of two fingers,and each finger consisting of at least 40 ossicula,these in 20 fingers make 800Tentacula. 30 proceeding from each of the 6bones in each of the ten arms, make 180030 proceeding, on the average, fromeach of the 800 bones of the fingersmake 24,000Total 26,680f Although the names here used are borrowed from the skeletonof vertebrated animals, and are not strictly applicable to radiatedEchinoderms, it will be convenient to retain them untilthe comparative anatomy of this order of animals has been arrangedin some other more appropriate manner.LILY ENCRINITE. 423We will first examine the contrivances in thejoints, of the vertebral column, which adapted itfor flexure in every direction, and then proceededconsider the arrangement of other parts of thebody.These joints are piled on each other like themasonry of a slender Gothic shaft, but, as a certaindegree of flexibility was requisite at everyarticulation, and the amount of this flexure variedin different parts of the column, being least atthe base and greatest at the summit, we find proportionatevariations both in the external and internalform and dimensions of each part.* TheThe body (PL 49, Fig. 1) is supported by a long vertebralcolumn attached to the ground by an enlargement of its base (PI.49, Fig. 2). It is composed of many cylindrical thick joints,articulating firmly with each other, and having a central aperture,like the spinal canal in the vertebra of a quadruped, throughwhich a small alimentary cavity descends from the stomach tothe base of the column, PI. 49, Fig. 4, 6, 8, 10. The form ofthe column nearest the base is the strongest possible, viz. cylindrical.This column is interrupted, at intervals, which becomemore frequent as it advances upwards, by joints of wider diameterand of a globular depressed form (PI. 49, Fig. 1. and Figs. 3,4,a, a, a, a.) Near the summit of the column, (PI. 49, Figs. 3, 4,)a series of thin joints, c, c, c, is placed next above and below eachlargest joint, and between these two thin joints, there is introduceda third series, b, b, b, of an intermediate size. The useof these variations in the size of the interpolated joints was to giveincreased flexibility to that part of the column, which being nearestto its summit required the greatest power of flexion.At Plate 49, Figs. 6, 8, 10, are vertical sections of thecolumnar joints 5, 7, 9, taken near the base; and show the internalcavity of the column, to be arranged in a series of double424 LILY ENCRINITE.varieties of form and contrivance which occur inthe column of a single species of Encrinite, mayserve as an example of analogous arrangementsin the columns of other species of the family ofCrinoideans, (see PI. 47. Figs. 1, 2, 5, and PI. 49.Fig. 4 to Fig. 17).*The name of Entrochi, or wheel stones, haswith much propriety been applied to these insulatedvertebrae. The perforations in the centreof these joints affording a facility for stringingthem as beads, has caused them, in ancienttimes, to be used as rosaries. In the northernhollow cones, like the intervertebral cavities in the back of a fish,and to be, like them, subsidiary to the flexion of the column ;they probably also formed a reservoir for containing the nutritiousfluids of the animals.The various kinds of Screw stone so frequent in the chert ofDerbyshire, and generally in the Transition Limestone, are castsof the internal cavities of the columns of other species of Encrinites,in which the cones are usually more compressed than inthe column of the E. moniliformis. ,At PI. 49, Fig. 4 is a vertical section of Fig. 3, being aportion taken from near the summit of the column, where thegreatest strength and flexure were required, and where also therisk of injury and dislocation was the greatest; the arrangementof these vertebrae is therefore more complex than it is towardsthe base, and is disposed in the following manner (see Fig. 4).The vertebrae, a. b. c. are alternately wider and narrower ; theedges of the latter, c. are received into, and included within, theperpendicularly lengthened margin of the wider, a. b. ; the outercrenulated edge of the narrower included vertebra?, articulatewith the inner crenulated edge of the wider vertebrae, which thussurround them with a collar, that admits of more oblique flexionMECHANICAL CONTRIVANCES IN ENCRINITES. 425parts of England they still retain the appellationof St. Cuthbert's beads.On a rock by LindisfarneSaint Cuthbert sits, and toils to frameThe sea-born beads, that bear his name.Marion.Each of these presents a similar series of articulations,varying as we ascend upwards throughthe body of the animal, every joint being exactlyadjusted, to give the requisite amount of flexibilityand strength. From one extremity of thevertebral column to the other, and throughoutthan the plane crenulated surfaces near the base of the column,Figs. 9, 10, and at the same time renders dislocation almost impossible.To these is superadded a third contrivance, which still furtherincreases the flexibility and strength of this portion of the column,viz. that of making the alternate larger joints, b. b. considerablythinner than the largest collar joints, a. a.The Figures numbered from 11 to 26 inclusive, representsingle vertebrae taken from various portions of the column ofEncrinites moniliformis. The joints at Figs. 11, 13, 15, 17, 19,21, 23, 25, are of their natural size and in their natural horizontalposition, and show, at the margin of each, a crenated edge,every tooth of which articulated with a corresponding depressionnear the margin of the adjacent joint. The stellated figures(12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, 24, 26,) placed beneath the horizontaljoints to which they respectively belong, are magnified representationsof the various internal patterns presented by theirarticulating surfaces, variously covered with an alternate seriesof ridges and grooves, that like the cogs of two wheels, articulatewith corresponding depressions and elevations on the surfaces ofthe adjacent vertebrae.426 STRUCTURE OF LILY ENCRINITEthe hands and fingers (see PI. 47, figs. 1, 2, .3.and PI. 50, figs. 1, 2, 3.), the surface of eachbone articulates with that adjacent to it, with themost perfect regularity and nicety of adjustment.So exact, and methodical is this arrangement,even to the extremity of its minutest tentacula,that it is just as improbable, that the metalswhich compose the wheels of a chronometershould for themselves have calculated and arrangedthe form and number of the teeth ofeach respective wheel, and that these wheelsshould have placed themselves in the preciseposition, fitted to attain the end resulting fromthe combined action of them all, as for the successivehundreds and thousands of little bonesthat compose an Encrinite, to have arrangedthemselves, in a position subordinate to the endproduced by the combined effect of their unitedMechanism ; each acting its peculiar part inharmonioussubordination to the rest, and allconjointly producing a result which no singleseries of them acting separately, could possiblyhave effected.In PI. 50 I have selected from Goldfuss,Parkinson, and Miller, details of the structureof the body and upper extremities of EncrinitesMoniliformis, or Lily Encrinite, in which thecomponent parts are indicated by letters, explainedin the annexed note ; and I must refermy readers to these authors for minute descriesBY MILLER. 427tons of the individual forms and uses of eachsuccessive series of plates.*From the subjoined analysis of the componentportions of the body of the E. Moniliformis, wesee that it may be resolved into four series ofplates each composed of five pieces, and bearinga distant analogy to those parts in the organizationof superior animals from which they havebeen denominated. A similar system of plates," On the summit of the vertebral column are placed successiveseries of little bones, see PI. 50, Fig. 4, which from their positionand uses may be termed the Pelvis E, Scapula H, Costal F,forming (with the pectoral and capital plates) a kind of sub-globularbody (see PI. 48. PI. 49. Fig. 1. PI. 50, Figs. 1,2), havingthe mouth in its centre, and containing the viscera and stomachof the animal, from which the nourishing fluids were admitted toan alimentary cavity within the column, and also carried to thearms and ejaculated fingers." From the scapula (H) proceededthe five arms, (PI. 50, Fig. 1, K) which, as they advanced, subdividedinto hands (M) and fingers (N) terminating in minute ten-macula(PI. 50. Figs. 2, 3), the number of which extended to manythousands. These hands and fingers are represented as closed,or nearly closed, in PI. 48. and PI. 49, Fig. 1. and PL 50, Figs.1, 2. In Mr. Miller's restoration of the Pear Encrinite (PI. 47,Fig. 1) they are represented as expanded in search of food. Theseejaculated fingers, when thus expanded, would form a delicatenet, admirably adapted to detain Acalephans, and other minutemolluscous animals that might be floating in the sea, and whichprobably formed part of the food of the Crinoidea. In the centreof these arms was placed the mouth (PL 47, Fig. 1), capableof elongation into a proboscis. PL 47. 6, x. 7, x. represent thebodies of Crinoidea from which the arms have been removed.In PL 50, Fig. 1 represents the superior portion of the animal,with its twenty fingers closed like the petals of a closed lily.Fig. 2 represents the same partially uncovered, with the tentacula428 STRUCTURE OF CRINOIDEANS.varying in number and holding the same placebetween the column and the arms of the animal,may be traced through each species of the familyof Crino'ideans. The details of all these specificvariations are beautifully illustrated by Mr.Miller, to whose excellent work I must againrefer those who are inclined to follow him,through his highly philosophical analysis of thestructure of this curious family of fossil animals.*still folded up. Fig. 3 is a side view of one of the fingers withits tentacula. Fig. 4 represents the interior of the body whichcontained the viscera. Fig. 5 represents the exterior of thesame body, and the surface by which the base articulates withthe first joint of the vertebral column. Figs. 6, 7, 8, 9, representa dissection of the four series of plates that compose thebody, forming successively the scapulae, upper and lower costalplates, and pelvis of the animal. Fig. 10 is the upper extremityof the vertebral column. Fig. 11 represents the upper surfacesof the five scapula, showing their articulations with the inferiorsurfaces of the first bones of the arms. Fig. 12 is the inferiorsurface of the same series of scapular plates, showing their articulationswith the superior surfaces of the upper or second seriesof costal plates, Fig. 13. Fig. 14 is the inferior surface of Fig.13, and articulates with the first or lower series of costal plates,Fig. 15. Fig. 16 is the lower surface of Fig. 15, and articulateswith the upper surface of the bones of the pelvis, Fig. 17. Fig.18 is the inferior surface of the pelvis, Fig. 17, and articulateswith the first or uppermost joint of the vertebral column,Fig. 10.Our PI. 47 gives Mr. Miller's restoration of two othergenera; fig. 1, the Apiocrinites rotunda, or Pear Ecrinite, withits root or base of attachment, and its arms expanded. Fig 2is the same with its arms contracted. Two young individualsand the broken stumps of two other small specimens, are seenfixed by their base to the root of the larger specimens, shewingEXTENT OF CRINOIDEANS. 429From the details I have thus selected fromthe best authorities, with a view to illustrate themost important parts that enter into the organizationof the family of Encrinites, it is obviousthat similar investigations might be carried tothe manner in which these roots are found attached to the uppersurface of the great oolite at Bradford near Bath. When living,their roots were confluent, and formed a thin pavement at this placeover the bottom of the sea, from which their stems and branchesrose into a thick submarine forest, composed of these beautifulZoophytes. The stems and bodies are occasionally found united,as in their living state ; the arms and fingers have almost alwaysbeen separated, but their dislocated fragments still remain, coveringthe pavement of roots that overspreads the surface of thesubjacent Oolitic limestone rock.This bed of beautiful remains has been buried by a thick stratumof clay. Fig. 3 represents the exterior of the body, andthe upper columnar joints of this animal, about two-thirds of thenatural size. Fig. 4 is a longitudinal section of the same, shewingthe cavity for the viscera, and also the large open spaces forthe reception of nourishment between the uppermost enlargedjoints of the column.At fig. 5 we have the Actinocrinites 30-dactylus, from thecarboniferous limestone near Bristol. D. represents the auxiliaryside arms which are attached to the column of this species, andB its base and fibres of attachment. Fig. 6 represents its body,from which the fingers are removed, shewing the pectoral plates,Q, and capital plates, R, which form an integument over theabdominal cavity of the body, and terminate in a mouth (x),capable of being protruded into an elongated proboscis by thecontraction of its plated integument. Fig. 7 represents thebody of an Encrinite in the British Museum, figured by Parkinson,vol. 2, fol. 17, fig. 3, by the name of Nave Encrinite.The mouth of this specimen also is seen at X, and betweenthe mouth and the bases of the arms, the series of plates whichform the upper and exterior integuments of the stomach.430 ENTROCHAL MARBLE.an almost endless extent by examining the peculiaritiesof each part throughout their numerousspecies. We may judge of the degree, to whichthe individuals of these species multiplied amongthe first inhabitants of the sea, from the countlessmyriads of their petrified remains which fill somany Limestone beds of the Transition Formations,and compose vast strata of Entrochalmarble, extending over large tracts of country inNorthern Europe and North America. The substanceof this marble is often almost as entirelymade up of the petrified bones of Encrinites, asacorn-rick is composed of straws. Man appliesit to construct his palace and adorn hissepulchre, but there are few who know, and fewerstill who duly appreciate the surprising fact,that much of this marble is composed of theskeletons of millions of organized beings, onceendowed with life, and susceptible of enjoyment,which after performing the part that wasfor a while assigned to them in living nature,have contributed their remains towards the compositionof the mountain masses of the earth.*Of more than thirty species of Crinoideansthat prevailed to such enormous extent in theTransition period, nearly all became extinct beforethe deposition of the Lias, and only oneFragments of Encrinites are also dispersed irregularlythroughout all the depositions of this period, intermixed with theremains of other cotemporary marine animals.PHYSIOLOGICAL CONSIDERATIONS. 431presents the angular column of the Pentacrinite ;with this one exception, pentangular columnsfirst began to abound among the Crino'ideans atthe commencement of the Lias, and have fromthence extended onwards into our present seas.Their several species and even genera are alsolimited in their extent ; e. g, the great LilyEncrinite (E. moniliformis) is peculiar to theMuscles Talk, and the Pear Encrinite to themiddle region of the Oolitic formation.The Physiological history of the family ofEncrinites is very important ; their species werenumerous among the most ancient orders of createdbeings, and in this early state their constructionexhibits at least an equal if not a higherdegree of perfection than is retained in the existingPentacrinites ; and although the place, which,as Zoophytes, they occupied in the animal kingdom,was low, yet they were constructed with aperfect adaptation to that low estate, and in thisprimeval perfection they afford another exampleat variance with the doctrine of the progressionof animal life from simple rudiments through aseries of gradually improving and more perfectforms, to its fullest development in existing species.Thus, a comparison of one of the earlyforms of the Genus Pentacrinite, viz. the Bri-areaPentacrinite of the Lias, (PL 51 and PL52, Fig. 2, and PL 53) with the fossil species ofmore recent formations, and with the existing432 PENTACRINITES.Pentacrinus Caput Medusae from the CaribbeanSea, PL 52, Fig. 1, shews in the organization ofthis very ancient species an equal degree of perfection,and a more elaborate combination ofanalogous organs, than occurs in any other fossilspecies of more recent date, or in its living representative.Pentacrinite.The history of these fossil bodies, that aboundin the lower strata of the Oolite formation, andespecially in the Lias, has been much illustratedby the discovery of two living forms of thesame Genus, viz. the Pentacrinus Caput Medusae,*(PI. 52, Fig.l,) and Pentacrinus Europe's,PL 52, Figs. 2. 2'. Of the first of these a fewspecimens only have been brought up from thebottom of deep seas in the West Indies ; havingtheir lower extremities broken, as if torn from afirm attachment to the bottom. The PentacrinusEurope's | (see PL 52, Figs. 2. 2',) is found attachedto various kinds of Sertularia and Frustratein the Cove of Cork, and other parts ofthe coast of Ireland.It appears that Pentacrinites are allied toSee Miller's Crino'idea, p. 45.f See Memoir on Pentacrinus Europe's by T. V. Thompson,Esq. Cork, 1827. He has subsequently ascertained that thisanimal is the young of the Comatula.LIVING SPECIES. 433the existing family of star-fishes, and approachmost nearly to the Comatula ; (see Miller's Crino'idea,PI. 1, and p. 127): the bony skeletonconstitutes by far the largest portion of theseanimals. In the living species this bony frameworkis invested with a gelatinous membrane,accompanied by a muscular system, regulatingthe movements of every bone. Although, in thefossil species, these softer parts have perished,yet an apparatus for muscular attachment existson each individual bone.*The calcareous joints which compose the fingersof the P. Europeans, together with their ten taenia,are capable of contraction and expansion inevery direction; at one time spreading outwards,like the Petals of an open flower (PI. 52, Fig. 2),and at another rolled inwards over the mouth,like an unexpanded bud ; the office of theseorgans is to seize and convey to the mouth itsdestined food. Thus the habits of living animalsillustrate the movements and manner of lifeof the numerous extinct fossil members of thisgreat family, and afford an example of the validityof the mode of argument, to which we areobliged to have recourse in the consideration ofextinct species of organic remains. In this processwe argue backwards, and from the mechanicalarrangements that pervade the solid portionsSee the tubercles and corrugations on the surfaces of thebones engraved at PI. 52, Figs. 7, 9, 11, 13, 14, \5, 16, 17.G. F F434 Briareus PENTACRINITE.of fossil skeletons, infer the nature and functionsof the muscles by which motion was imparted toeach bone.I shall select from the many fossil species ofthe Genus Pentacrinite, that, which from theextraordinary number of auxiliary side arms,placed along its column, has been called theJBriarean Pentacrinite, and of which our figures(PL 51. Figs. 1, 2. ; PL 52. Fig. 3. ; and PL 53.)will give a more accurate idea than can be conveyedby verbal descriptions.*PI. 51 represents a single specimen of Briarean Pentacrinite,which stands in high relief upon the surface of a slab of Lias,from Lyme Regis, almost entirely made up of a mass of otherindividuals of the same species. The arms and fingers are considerablyexpanded towards the position they would assume insearching for food. The side arms remain attached to the upperportion only of the vertebral column.At PI. 53. Fig. 1 and 2 represent two other specimens of thesame species, rising in beautiful relief from a slab, which is composedof a congeries of fragments of similar individuals. Thecolumns of these specimens, Fig. 2, a, shew the side arms risingin their natural position from the grooves between the angulara bprojections of the Pentagonal stem. At PI. 52. Fig. 1. F. F.are seen the costal plates surrounding the cavity of the body ;at H, the Scapulae, with the arms and fingers proceeding fromthem to the extremities of the lenticularPI. 53. Fig. 3. exhibits the side arms rising from the lowerpart of a vertebral column, and entirely covering it. Fig. 4. isanother column, on which, the side arms being removed, we seethegrooves wherein they articulated with the alternate vertebrae.Fig. 5. exhibits a portion of another column slightly contorted.VERTEBRAL COLUMN. 435Vertebral Column.The upper part of the vertebral column ofPentacrinites is constructed on principles analogousto those already described in the upper partof the column of the Encrinite.*All the joints of the column, when seen transversely,present various modifications of pentagonalstar-like forms ; hence their name of As-terse,or star-stones.These transverse surfaces are variously coveredwith a succession of teeth, set at minute intervalsfrom one another, and locking into the intersticesbetween corresponding teeth on the surface ofthe next vertebrae, they are so disposed as to admitof flexure in all directions, without risk ofdislocation. |As the base or root of Pentacrinites was ususcolumnar joints of the Briarean Pentacrinite are disposedin pieces alternately thicker and thinner, with a third andstill thinner joint interposed between every one of them. PI. 53.Figs. 8, and 8 a , a. b. c. The edges of this thinnest joint appearexternally only at the angles of the column ; internally they enlargethemselves into a kind of intervertebral collar, c. c. c.A similar alternation in the joints of the Pentacrinite's sub-angularis represented in PI. 52. Figs. 4 and 5.f The ranges of tubercles upon the exterior surface of eachjoint in the fragments of columns, PI. 52. Figs. 7. 9. 11. markthe origin and insertion of muscular fibres, by which the movementof every joint was regulated. At every articulation of thevertebrse,we see also the mode in which the crenated edges lockinto one another, combining strength with flexibility. In PI. 52,436 ROOT OF PENTACRINITE.ally fixed to the bottom of the sea, or to someextraneous floating body, the flexibility of thejointed column, which forms the stem, was subservientto the double office, first, of varying, inevery direction, the position of the body and armsin search of food, and secondly, of yielding, withfacility, to the course of the current, or fury ofthe storm, swinging, like a vessel held by hercable, with equal ease in all directions aroundher moorings.The Root of the Briarean Pentacrinite wasprobably slight, and capable of being withdrawnfrom its attachment.* The absence of any largeFigs. 11. and 13, the Vertebrae (d.) present five lateral surfacesof articulation, whereby their side arms were attached to thevertebral column at distant intervals, as in the PentacrinusCaput Medusa, PL 52. Fig. 1.The double series of crenated surfaces, which pass from thecentre to the points of each of the five radii of these star-shapedvertebrae, PI. 52. Figs. 6. to 17. ; and PI. 53. Figs. 9. to 13,present a beautiful variety of arrangements, not only in eachspecies, but in different parts of the column of the same species,according to the degree of flexion which each individual partrequired.Mr. Miller describes a recent specimen of Pentacrinus CaputMedusae, as having the joints next the base partially consolidated,and admitting but little motion, where little is required ;but higher up, the joints become thinner, and are disposedalternately, a smaller and thinner joint succeeding a larger andthicker, to allow a greater freedom of motion, till near the apexthis change is so conspicuous, that the small ones resemble thinleather-like interpositions. He also observed traces of the actionof contractile muscular fibres on the internal surfaces of eachvertebra.ATTACHMENT TO EXTRANEOUS BODIES. 437solid Secretions, like those of the Pear Encrinite,by which this Pentacrinite could have been fixedpermanently to the bottom, and the further factof its being frequently found in contact withmasses of drifted wood converted into jet (PI. 52,Fig. 3.), leads us to infer that the Briarean was a locomotive animal, having thepower of attaching itself temporarily either toextraneous floating bodies, or to rocks at thebottom of the sea, either by its side arms, or bya moveable articulated small root.*The specimen of Briarean Pentacrinite at PI. 52, Fig - . 3. fromthe Lias at Lyme Regis, adheres laterally to a portion of imperfectjet, which forms part of a thin bed of Lignite, in the Lias marl,between Lyme and Charmouth.Throughout nearly its whole extent, Miss Arming has constantlyobserved in this Lignite the following curious appearances : Thelower surface only is covered by a stratum, entirely composed ofPentacrinites, and varying from one to three inches in thickness; they lie nearly in a horizontal position, with the foot stalksuppermost, next to the lignite. The greater number of thesePentacrinites are preserved in such high perfection, that theymust have been buried in the clay that now invests them beforedecomposition of their bodies had taken place. It is not uncommonto find large slabs several feet long, whose lower surfaceonly presents the arms and fingers of these fossil animals,expanded like plants in a Hortus Siccus; whilst the upper surfaceexhibits only a congeries of stems in contact with the undersurface of the lignite. The greater number of these stems areusually parallel to one another, as if drifted in the same directionby the current in which they last floated.The mode in which these animal remains are thus collected immediatelybeneath the Lignite, and never on its upper surface,seems to shew that the creatures had attached themselves, in large438 MECHANISM OF SIDE ARMS.Side Arms.The Side Arms become gradually smaller towardsthe upper extremity of the column. Inthe P, Briareus (PL 52, Fig. 3. and PL 53, Fig.1. and 3.) these amount to nearly a thousand innumber.* The numerous side arms of the BriareusPentacrinite, when expanded, would act asauxiliary nets to retain the prey of the animal,and also serve as hold-fasts to assist it in adheringto the bottom, or to extraneous bodies.In agitated water they would close and foldthemselves along the column, in a position whichwould expose the least possible surface to thegroups, (like modern barnacles), to the masses of floating wood,which, together with them, were suddenly buried in the mud,whose accumulation gave origin to the marl, wherein this curiouscompound stratum of animal and vegetable remains is imbedded.Fragments of petrified wood occur also in the Lias, having largegroups of Mytili, in the position that is usually assumed by recentmytili, attached to floating wood.If we suppose the lower portion of the specimen, PI. 53, Fig.2. a. to be united to the upper portion of the fractured stem, Fig.3. we shall form a correct idea of the manner in which the columnof this animal was surrounded with its thousand side-arms, eachhaving from fifty to a hundred joints, PL 53, Fig. 14. Thenumber of joints iu the side-arms gradually diminishes towardsthe top of the vertebral column ; but as one of the lowest andlargest (PI. 53, Fig. 14.) contains more than a hundred, we shallbe much below the reality in reckoning fifty as their averagenumber.Each of these joints articulates with the adjacent joint, byprocesses resembling a mortise and tendon ; and the form both ofSTOMACH OF PENTACRINITE. 439element, and, together with the column andarms, would yield to the direction of the current.Stomach.The abdominal cavity, or stomach, of thePen-tacrinite, (PI. 51. Fig. 2.), is rarely preserved inafossil state ; it formed a funnel-shaped pouch,of considerable size, composed of a contractilemembrane, covered externally with many hundredminute calcareous angular plates. At the apex ofthis funnel was a small aperture, forming themouth, susceptible of elongation into a proboscisfor taking in food. # The place of this organ is inthe centre of the body, surrounded by the arms.the articulating surfaces and of the bone itself, varies so as to givemore universal motion as they advance towards the small extremityof the arm. See PI. 53, Fig. 13. a. b.In all this delicate mechanism which pervades every individualside-arm, we see provision for the double purpose of attachingitself to extraneous bodies, and apprehending its prey. Fiveof these arms are set off from each of the largest joints of thevertebral column. At PI. 53. Fig. 7. a. we see the bases, or firstjoints of these side-arms articulating with the larger vertebrae,and inclined alternately to the right and left, for the purpose ofoccupying their position most advantageously for motion, withoutinterfering with each other, or with the flexure of the vertebralcolumn.In the recent Pentacrinus Caput Medusae (PI. 52, Fig. 1.)the side-arms (D.) are dispersed at distant intervals along thecolumn.This unique specimen forms part of the splendid collection ofJames Johnson, Esq. of Bristol.410 BODY, ARMS, AND FINGERS.Body, Arms, and Fingers.The body of the Pentacrinite, between thesummit of the column and the base of the arms,is small, and composed of the pelvis, and thecostal, and scapular plates, (see PI. 51. PI. 52.Fig. 1. 3. and PI. 53. Fig. 2. 6. E. F. H.). Thearms and lingers are long and spreading, andhave numerous joints, or tentacula ; each jointis armed at its margin with a small tubercle, orhook, (PI. 53. Fig. 17.), the form of which variesin every joint, to act as an organ of prehension ;these arms and fingers, when expanded, musthave formed a net of greater capacity than thatof the Encrinites.*We have seen that Parkinson calculates thenumber of bones in the Lily Encrinite to exceedtwenty-six thousand. The number of bones inthe fingers and tentacula of the Briarean amounts at least to a hundred thousand ;if to these we add fifty thousand more for theossicula of the side-arms, which is much tooThe place of the Pentacrinites in the family Echinoderms,would lead us to expect to find minute pores on the internal surfaceof the fingers, analogous to those of the more obvious simulacraof Echini ; they were probably observed by Guettard,who speaks of orifices at the terminating points of the fingersand tentacula.Lamarck also, describing his generic character of Encrinus,says : "The branches of the Umbel are furnished with Polypes,or suckers, disposed in rows."CONCLUSION. 441little, the total number of bones will exceed ahundred and fifty thousand. As each bone wasfurnished with at least two fasciculi of fibres,one for contraction, the other for expansion, wehave a hundred and fifty thousand bones, andthree hundred thousand fasciculi of fibres equivalentto muscles, in the body of a single — an amount of muscular apparatus concernedin regulating the ossicula of the skeleton,infinitely exceeding any that has been yet observedthroughout the entire animal creation.*When we consider the profusion of care, andexquisite contrivance, that pervades the frame ofevery individual in this species of Pentacrinite,forming but one of many members, of the almostextinct family of Crino id cans — and when we addto this the amount of analogous mechanisms thatcharacterize the other genera and species of thiscurious family, — we are almost lost in astonishment,at the microscopic attention that has beenpaid to the welfare of creatures, holding so lowa place among the inhabitants of the ancientdeep ;| and we feel a no less irresistible convictionof the universal presence and eternal agencyTiedemann, in a monograph on Holothuria, Echini, andBasternae, states that the common Star-fish has more than threethousand little bones.t A frequent repetition of the same parts is proof of the lowplace and comparative imperfection of the animal in which itoccurs. The number of bones in the human body is but twohundred and forty-one, and that of the muscles two hundred andthirty-two pairs. South's Dissector's Manual.442 FOSSIL CORALLINE BODIES.of Creative care, in the lower regions of organiclife, than is forced upon us by the contemplationof those highest combinations of animal mechanism,which occur in that paragon of animalorganization, the corporeal frame of Man.SECTION II.FOSSIL REMAINS OF POLYPES.It was stated in our Chapter on Strata of theTransition Series, that some of their most abundantanimal remains are fossil Corals or Poly-paris.These were derived from an order ofanimals long considered to be allied to marineplants, and designated by the name of Zoophytes ;they are usually fixed, like plants, to all partsof the bottom of the sea in warm climates whichare not too deep to be below the influence ofsolar heat and light, and in many species, sendforth branches, assuming in some degree the formand aspect of vegetables. These coralline bodiesare the production of Polypes, nearly allied tothe common Actinia, or Sea Anemone of our ownshores. See PI. 54. Fig. 4. Some of them, e. g.the Caryophyllia, see PI. 54. Figs. 9, 10. are solitary,each forming its own independent stem andsupport ; others are gregarious, or confluent ; livingtogether on the same common base or Poly-habitsOF LIVING POLYPES. 443part, which is covered by a thin gelatinous substance,on the surface of which are scatteredtentacula, corresponding with the stars on thesurface of the coral, (see PI. o4. Fig. 5).Le Sueur, who observed them in the WestIndies, describes these Polypes, when expandedin calm weather at the bottom of the sea, as coveringtheir stony receptacles with a continuoussheet of most brilliant colours.The gelatinous bodies of these Polypes arefurnished with the power of secreting carbonateof Lime, with which they form a basis of attachment,and cell of retreat. These calcareous cellsnot only endure beyond the life of the Polypesthat secreted them, but approach so nearly toLimestone in their chemical composition, thatat the death of the Polype they remain permanentlyattached to the bottom. Thus one generationestablishes the basis whereon the nextfixes its habitation, which is destined to formthe foundation of a further and continual successionof similar constructions, until the mass,being at length raised to the surface of the sea,,a limit is thereby put to its further accumulation.The tendency of Polypes to multiply in thewaters of warm climates is so great, that the bottomof our tropical seas swarms with countlessmyriads of these little creatures, ever activelyengaged in constructing their small but enduringhabitations. Almost every submarine rock, andsubmarine volcanic cone, and ridge, within these444 CORAL REEFS.latitudes, has become the nucleus and foundationof a colony of Polypes, chiefly belonging to thegenera Madrepora, Astrea, Caryophyllia, Mean-drink,and Millepora. The calcareous secretionsof these Polypes are accumulated into enormousbanks or reefs of coral, sometimes extending to alength of many hundred miles; these continuallyrising to the surface in spots where they wereunknown before, endanger the navigation ofmany parts of the tropical seas.*If we look to the office these Polypes performin the present economy of nature, we find themacting as scavengers of the lowest class, perpetuallyemployed in cleansing the waters of the seafrom the impurities which escape even the smallerCrustacea ; in the same manner as the InsectTribes, in their various stages, are destined to findtheir food by devouring impurities caused bydead animal and vegetable matter upon the landsInteresting accounts of the extent and mode of formationof these Coral Reefs may be found in the voyages of Peron,Flinders, Kotzebue, and Beechy ; and an admirable applicationof the facts connected with modern Corals to the illustration ofgeological phenomena has been made by Dr. Kidd in his GeologicalEssay, and by Mr. Lyell, in his Principles of Geology,3rd edit. vol. iii.f Mr. De la Beche observed that the Polypes of the CarlosSmith (PI. 54, Figs. 9, 10, 11,) devoured portions ofthe flesh of fishes, and also small Crustacea, with which he fedseveral individuals at Torquay, seizing them with their tentacula,and digesting them within the central sac which forms theirstomach.EFFECT OF POLYPES ON MINERAL STRATA. 445The same system appears to have prevailed fromthe first commencement of life in the most ancientseas, throughout that long series of ageswhose duration is attested by the varied successionof animal and vegetable exuviae, which areburied in the strata of the earth. In all thesestrata the calcareous habitations of such minuteand apparently unimportant creatures as Polypes,have formed large and permanent additions tothe solid materials of the globe, and afford a strikingexample of the influence of animal life uponthe mineral condition of the earth.*If there be one thing more surprising than anotherin the investigation of natural phenomena,it is perhaps the infinite extent and vast importanceof things apparently little and insignificant.Among the Corals of the Transition Series are many existinggenera, and Mr. de la Beche has justly remarked (Manual ofGeology, p. 454) that wherever there is an accumulation ofPolynices such as would justify the appellation of coral banksor reefs, the genera Astrea and Caryophyllia are present ; generawhich are among architects of coral reefs in the present seas.A large part of the Limestone called Coral Rag, which formsthe elevated plains of Burlington and Gunner, and the hills ofWytham, on three sides of the valley of Oxford, is filled withcontinuous beds and ledges of petrified corals of many species,still retaining the position in which they grew at the bottom of anancient sea ; as coral banks, are now forming in the intertropicalregions of the present ocean.The same fossil coralline strata extend through the calcareoushills of the New. of Berkshire, and N. of Wilts; and again recurin equal or still greater force in Yorkshire, in the lofty summitson the W. and S. W. of Scarborough.446 IMPORTANCE OF THINGS MINUTE.When we descry an insect, smaller than a mite,moving with agility across the paper on which wewrite, we feel as incapable of forming any distinctconception of the minutiae of the muscular fibres,which effect these movements, and of the stillsmaller vessels by which they are nourished, aswe are of fully apprehending the magnitude ofthe universe. We are more perplexed in attemptingto comprehend the organization of theminutest Infusoria,* than that of a whale ; and oneEhrenberg has ascertained that the Infusoria, which haveheretofore been considered as scarcely organized, have an internalstructure resembling that of the higher animals. He has discoveredin them muscles, intestines, teeth, different kinds of glands,eyes, nerves, and male and female organs of reproduction. Hefinds that some are born alive, others produced by eggs, andsome multiplied by spontaneous divisions of their bodies into twoor more distinct animals. Their powers of reproduction are sogreat, that from one individual (Hydatina sent) a million wereproduced in ten days ; on the eleventh day four millions, and onthe twelfth sixteen millions. The most astonishing result of hisobservations is, that the size of the smallest coloured spots on thebody of Monas Terms, (the diameter of which is only-^^.g- of a line)is ^-g-^^ra- of a line, and that the thickness of the skin of the stomachmay be calculated at from 7 S . j 6oii to ^^^^ of a line.This skin must also have vessels of a still smaller size, the dimensionsof which are too minute to be ascertained. Abhandlungender Academie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin, 1831.Ehrenberg has described and figured more than 500 species ofthese Animalcules ; many of them are limited to a certain numberof vegetable infusions ; a few are found in almost every infusion.Many vegetables produce several species, some of which are propagatedmore readily than others in each particular infusion.The familiar case of the rapid appearance and propagation ofanimalcules in pepper water will suffice to illustrate the rest.CONCLUSION. 447of the last conclusions at which we arrive, is aconviction that the greatest and most importantoperations of nature are conducted by the agencyof atoms too minute to be either perceptible bythe human eye, or comprehensible by the humanunderstanding.We cannot better conclude this brief outlineof the history of fossil Polyparies, extending asthey do, from the most early transition rocks tothe present seas, than in the words with whichThese most curious observations throw important light on theobscure and long-disputed question of equivocal generation ; thewell-known fact that animalcules of definite characters appear ininfusions of vegetable and animal matter, even when preparedwith distilled water, receives a probable explanation, and the caseof Infusoria no longer appears to differ from that of other animalsas to the principle on which their propagation is conducted. Thechief peculiarity seems to consist in this, that their increase takesplace both by the oviparous and viviparous manner of descent fromparent animals, and also by division of the bodies of individuals.The great difficulty is, to explain the manner in which the eggsor bodies of preceding individuals can find access to each particularinfusion. This explanation is facilitated by the analogouscases of various fungi which start into life, without any apparentcause, wherever decaying vegetable matter is exposed to certainconditions of temperature, humidity, and medium. Fries explainsthe sudden production of these plants, by supposing the light andalmost invisible sparkles of preceding plants, of which he hascounted above 10,000,000 in a single individual, to be continuallyfloating in the air, and falling every where. The greaterpart of these never germinate, from not falling on a proper matrix ;those which find such matrix start rapidly into life, and beginto propagate.A similar explanation seems applicable to the case of Infusoria ;the extreme minuteness of the eggs and bodies of these animalsIMPORTANCE OF THINGS MINUTE.Mr. Ellis expresses the feelings excited in hisown mind by his elaborate and beautiful investigationsof the history of living Corallines.And now, should it be asked, granting allthis to be true, to what end has so much labourbeen bestowed in the demonstration ? I can onlyanswer, that as to me these disquisitions haveopened new scenes of wonder and astonishment,in contemplating how variously, how extensively,life is distributed through the universe of things,rules probably allows them to float in the air, like the invisiblesparkles of fungi; they may be raised from the surface of fluidsby various causes of attraction, perhaps even by evaporation.From every pond or ditch that dries up in summer, these dedicatedeggs and bodies may be raised by every gust of wind, anddissipated through the atmosphere like smoke, ready to start intolife whenever they fall into any medium admitting of their resuscitation; Ehrenberg has found them in fog, in rain, and snow.If the great aerial ocean which surrounds the earth be thuscharged with the rudiments of life, floating continually amidst theatoms of dust we see twinkling in a sun-beam, and ever ready toreturn to life as soon as they find a matrix adapted to their development,we have in these conditions of the very air we breathea system of provisions for the almost infinite dissemination of lifethroughout the fluids of the present Earth ; and these provisionsare in harmony with the crowded condition of the waters of theancient world, which is manifested by the multitudes of fossilmicroscopic remains, to which we have before alluded. (SeeSect. viii. page 384.)Mr. Lonsdale has recently discovered that the Chalk atBrighton, Gravesend, and near Cambridge, is crowded withmicroscopic shells ; thousands of these may be extracted from asmall lump, by scrubbing it with a nail brush in water; amongthese he has recognized vast numbers of the Valves of a marineCypris (Catherine) and sixteen species of Foraminifers.CONCLUSION. 449so it is possible, that the facts here related, andthese instances of nature animated in a parthitherto unsuspected, may excite the like pleasingideas in others ; and, in minds more capaciousand penetrating, lead to farther discoveries,farther proofs, (should such yet be wanting,) thatOne infinitely wise, good, all-powerful Being hasmade, and still upholds, the Whole of what isgood and perfect ; and hence we may learn, that,if creatures of so low an order in the great scaleof Nature, are endued with faculties that enablethem to fill up their sphere of action with suchPropriety, we likewise, who are advanced somany gradations above them, owe to ourselves,and to Him who made us and all things, aconstant application to acquire that degree ofRectitude and Perfection, to which we also areendued with faculties of attaining." — Ellis onCorallines, p. 103.G, G C4 50Chapter XVIII.Proofs of Design in the Structure of FossilVegetables.SECTION I.GENERAL HISTORY OF FOSSIL VEGETABLES.The history of Fossil Vegetables has a twofoldclaim upon our consideration, in relation to theobject of our present enquiry. The first regardsthe influence exerted on the actual condition ofMankind, by the fossil carbonaceous remains ofPlants, which clothed the former surface of theEarth, and has been briefly considered in aformer chapter ; (Chap. VII. P. 63.) the seconddirects our attention to the history and structureof the ancient members of the vegetable kingdom.It appears that nearly at the same points inthe progress of stratification, where the moststriking changes take place in the remains ofAnimal life, there are found also concurrentchanges in the character of fossil Vegetables.A large and new field of investigation is thuslaid open to our enquiry, wherein we may comparethe laws which regulated the varying sys-seaWEEDS. 451terns of vegetation, on the earlier surfaces of ourearth, with those which actually prevail. Shouldit result from this enquiry, that the families whichmake up our fossil Flora were formed on principles,either identical with those that regulate thedevelopment of existing plants, or so closelyallied to them, as to form connected parts ofone and the same great system of laws, for theuniversal regulation of organic life, we shalladd another link to the chain of argumentswhich we extract from the interior of the Earth,in proof of the Unity of the Intelligence and ofthe Power, which have presided over the entireconstruction of the material world.We have seen that the first remains of Animallife yet noticed are marine, and as the existenceof any kind of animals implies the prior, or at leastthe contemporaneous existence of Vegetables, toafford them sustenance, the presence of sea heedsin strata coeval with these most ancient animals,and their continuance onwards throughout allformations of marine origin, is a matter of a prioriprobability, which has been confirmed by theresults of actual observation. M. Adolph Bringsin his admirable History of Fossil Vegetables,*has shewn, that the existing submarinevegetation seems to admit of three great divisionswhich characterize, to a certain degree, the Plantsof the frigid, temperate, and torrid zones ; andHistoire des Vegetate Fossiles, to. Pari?, 1828.A-s'l DISTRIBUTION OFthat an analogous distribution of the fossil submergedAlgae appears to have placed in thelowest and most ancient formations, genera alliedto those which now grow in regions of the greatestheat, whilst the forms of marine vegetation thatsucceed each other in the Secondary and Tertiaryperiods, seem to approximate nearer to thoseof our present climate, as they are respectivelyenclosed in strata of more recent formation.*If we take a general review of the remains ofterrestrial Vegetables, that are distributed throughthe three great periods of geological history, wefind a similar division of them into groups, eachrespectively indicating the same successive demiseAd. Brongniart's Hist, de Veg. Foss. I Liv. p. 47. —Dr. Harlan in the Journal of the Academy of Nat. Sc. of Philadelphia,1831, and Mr. R. C. Taylor in London's Mag. Nat.Hist. Jan. 1834, have published accounts of numerous depositsof fucoids, as occurring in repeated thin layers among the Transitionstrata of N. America, and extending over a long tract on theE. flank of the Allegheny chain. The most abundant of these isthe Fucoides Alleghaniensis of Dr. Harlan. Mr. R. C. Taylor hasfound extensive deposits of fossil Foci in the Grauwacke of centralPennsylvania; in one place seven courses of Plants are laid barein the thickness of four feet, in another, one hundred courseswithin a thickness of twenty feet. (Jameson s Journal, July,1835, p. 185.) I have also seen Fucoids in great abundance inthe Grauwacke-slate of the Maritime Alps, in many parts of thenew road between Nice and Genoa. I once found small Fucoidsdispersed abundantly through shale of the Lias formation, froma well at Cheltenham. The Fucoides granulated occurs in Liasat Lyme Regis, and at Boll in Nuremberg ; and F. Targionii inthe Upper Green-sand near Signor in Sussex.FOSSIL VEGETABLES. 453nations of Temperature upon the Land, whichhave been inferred from the remains of the vegetationof the Sea. Thus, in strata of the Transitionseries, we have an association of a few existingfamilies of Endogenous Plants,* chiefly Fernsand Equisetacese, with extinct families both Endogenousand Exogenous, which some modernbotanists have considered to indicate a Climatehotter than that of the Tropics of the present day.In the Secondary formations, the species ofthese most early families become much less numerous,and many of their genera, and even ofthe families themselves entirely cease ; and alarge increase takes place in two families, thatcomprehend many existing forms of vegetables,and are rare in the Coal formation, viz. Cycadeceand Conifer a. The united characters of the groupsassociated in this series, indicate a Climate,whose temperature was nearly similar to thatwhich prevails within the present Tropics.In the Tertiary deposits, the greater number ofthe families of the first series, and many of thoseof the second, disappear ; and a more complicateddicotyledonous ~\ Vegetation takes place ofEndogenous Plants are those, the growth of whose stems takesplace by addition from within. Exogenous are those in whichthe growth takes place by addition from without.f Monocotyledonous Plants are those, the embryo of whoseseed is made up of one cotyledon or lobe, like the seed of a Lilyor an Onion. Dicotyledonous Plants are those, the embryo of(■454 VEGETABLE ORIGINthe simpler forms which predominated throughthe two preceding periods. Smaller Equisetaceaealso succeed to the gigantic Calamites ; Ferns arereduced in size and number to the scanty proportionsthey bear on the southern verge of oar temperateclimates ; the presence of Palms atteststhe absence of any severe degree of cold, andthe general character marks a Climate nearlyapproaching to that of the Mediterranean.We owe to the labours of Schlotheim, Sternbergand Ad. Brongniart the foundation of such asystematic arrangement of fossil plants, as enablesus to enter, by means of the analogies ofrecent plants, into the difficult question of theAncient Vegetation of the Earth, during thoseperiods when the strata were under the processof formation.Few persons are aware of the nature of theevidence, upon which we have at length arrivedat a certain and satisfactory conclusion, respectingthe long disputed question as to the vegetableorigin of Coal. It is not unfrequent to find amongwhose seed is made up of two lobes, as in the Bean and Coffeeseed. The stems of Monocotyledonous Plants are all Endogenous,i. e. increase from within by the addition of bundles of vesselsset in cellular substance, and enlarge their bulk by additionfrom the centre outwards, e. g. Palms, Canes, and Liliaceousplants. The stems of Dicotyledonous Plants are all Exogenous,i. e. increase externally by the addition of concentric layers fromwithout; these form the rings, which mark the amount of annualgrowth in the Oak and other forest trees in our climate.OF COAL. 455the cinders beneath our grates, traces of fossilplants, whose cavities, having been filled withsilt, at the time of their deposition in the vegetablemass, that gave origin to the Coal, haveleft the impression of their forms upon clay andsand enclosed within them, sharp as those receivedby a cast from the interior of a mould.A still more decisive proof of the vegetableorigin, even of the most perfect bituminous Coalhas recently been discovered by Mr. Mutton;he has ascertained that if any of the three varietiesof Coal found near Newcastle be cut intovery thin slices and submitted to the microscope,more or less of vegetable structure can be recognized.*" In these varieties of coal," says Mr. Hutton, " even insamples taken indiscriminately, more or less of Vegetable Texturecould always be discovered, thus affording the fullest evidence, ifany such proof were wanting, of the Vegetable Origin of Coal.Each of these three kinds of coal, besides the fine distinctreticulation of the original vegetable texture, exhibits other cells,which are filled with a light wine-yellow-coloured matter, apparentlyof a bituminous nature, and which is so volatile as to beentirely expelled by heat, before any change is effected in theother constituents of the coal. The number and appearance ofthese cells vary with each variety of coal. In caking coal, thecells are comparatively few, and are highly elongated. — In thefinest portions of this coal, where the crystalline structure, as indicatedby the rhomboidal form of its fragments, is most developed,the cells are completely obliterated."The slate-coal, contains two kinds of cells, both of which arefilled with yellow bituminous matter. One kind is that alreadynoticed in caking coal ; while the other kind of cells constitutesgroups of smaller cells, of an elongated circular figure.456 STATE OF FOSSIL PLANTSWe shall further illustrate this point, by a briefdescription of the manner in which the remainsof vegetables are disposed in the Carboniferousstrata of two important Coal fields, namely, thoseof Newcastle in the north of England, and ofSwine in Bohemia, on the N. W. of Prague.The Newcastle Coal field is at the presenttime supplying rich materials to the Fossil Floraof Great Britain, now under publication by ProfessorLindley and Mr. Hutton. The plants ofthe Bohemian Coal field laid the foundation ofCount Sternberg's Flore du monde primitif, thepublication of which commenced at Leipsic andPrague in 1820.In those varieties which go under the name of Cannel, Parrot,and Splent Coal, the crystalline structure, so conspicuous in finecaking coal, is wholly wanting; the first kind of cells are rarelyseen, and the whole surface displays an almost uniform series ofthe second class of cells, filled with bituminous matter, and separatedfrom each other by thin fibrous divisions. Mr. Huttonconsiders it highly probable that these cells are derived from thereticular texture of the parent plant, rounded and confused bythe enormous pressure, to which the vegetable matter has beensubject."The author next states that though the crystalline and crystalline,or, in other terms, perfectly and imperfectly developedvarieties of coal generally occur in distinct strata, yet it is easyto find specimens which in the compass of a single square inch,contain both varieties. From this fact, as also from the exactsimilarity of position which they occupy in the mine, the differencesin different varieties of coal are ascribed to original differencein the plants from which they were derived. Proceedingsof Geological Society. Lond. and Edin. Phil. Mag. 3rd Series,Vol. 2. p. 302, April, 1833.IN NEWCASTLE COAL PITS. 457Lindley and Hutton state (Fossil Flora, Vol.I. page 16) that " It is the beds of shale, orargillaceous schists, which afford the most abundantsupply of these curious relics of a formerWorld ; the fine particles of which they are composedhaving sealed up and retained in wonderfulperfection, and beauty, the most delicate forms ofthe vegetable organic structure. Where shaleforms the roof of the workable seams of coal, asit generally does, we have the most abundantdisplay of fossils, and this, not perhaps arisingso much from any peculiarity in these beds, asfrom their being more extensively known andexamined than any others. The principal depositis not in immediate contact with the coal,but about from twelve to twenty inches above it ;and such is the immense profusion in this situation,that they are not unfrequently the cause ofvery serious accidents, by breaking the adhesionof the shale bed, and causing it to separate andfall, when by the operation of the miner the coalwhich supported it is removed. After an extensivefall of this kind has taken place, it is a curioussight to see the roof of the mine coveredwith these vegetable forms, some of them of greatbeauty and delicacy ; and the observer cannotfail to be struck with the extraordinary confusion,and the numerous marks of strong mechanicalaction exhibited by their broken and disjointedremains."408 COAL MINE IN BOHEMIA.A similar abundance of distinctly preservedvegetable remains, occurs throughout the otherCoal fields of Great Britain. But the finestexample I have ever witnessed, is that of thecoal mines of Bohemia just mentioned. The mostelaborate imitations of living foliage upon thepainted ceilings of Italian palaces, bear no comparisonwith the beauteous profusion of extinctvegetable forms, with which the galleries of theseinstructive coal mines are overhung. The roofis covered as with a canopy of gorgeous tapestry,enriched with festoons of most graceful foliage,flung in wild, irregular profusion over every portionof its surface. The effect is heightened bythe contrast of the coal-black colour of thesevegetables, with the light ground work of therock to which they are attached. The spectatorfeels himself transported, as if by enchantment,into the forests of another world ; he beholdsTrees, of forms and characters now unknownupon the surface of the earth, presented to hissenses almost in the beauty and vigour of theirprimeval life ; their scaly stems, and bendingbranches, with their delicate apparatus of foliage,are all spread forth before him ; little impairedby the lapse of countless Ages, and bearing-faithfulrecords of extinct systems of vegetation,which began and terminated in times of whichthese relics are the infallible Historians.Such are the grand natural Herbaria whereinPLANTS IN THE COAL FORMATION. 459these most ancient remains of the vegetable kingdomare preserved, in a state of integrity, littleshort of their living perfection, under conditionsof our Planet which exist no more.SECTION II.VEGETABLES IN STRATA OF THE TRANSITION SERIES.The remains of plants of the Transition periodare most abundant in that newest portion of thedeposits of this era, which constitutes the CoalFormation, and afford decisive evidence as tothe condition of the vegetable kingdom at thisearly epoch in the history of Organic Life.The Nature of our Evidence will be best illustrated,by selecting a few examples of the manygenera of fossil plants that are preserved in theStrata of the Carboniferous Order, beginningwith those which are common both to the ancientand existing states of Vegetable Life.Equisetacece .fAmong existing vegetables, the Equisetaceseare well known in this climate in the commonHorse-tail of our swamps and ditches. The extentof this family reaches from Lapland to theSee PI. 1. Figs. 1, to 13.t See PI. 1. Fig. 2.400 Calamities.Torrid Zone, its species are most abundant inthe temperate zone, decrease in size and numberas we approach the regions of cold, andarrive at their greatest magnitude in the warmand humid regions of the Tropics, where theirnumbers are few.M. Ad. Brongniart* has divided fossil Equitesinto two Genera ; the one exhibits the charactersof living Equiseta, and is of rare occurrencein a fossil state ; the other is very abundant,and presents forms that differ materiallyfrom them, and often attain a size unknownamong living Equisetaceae ; these have beenarranged under the distinct genus Catamites,^they abound universally in the most ancient Coalformation, occur but. sparingly in the lower strataof the Secondary series, and are entirely wantingin the Tertiary formations, and also on the actualsurface of the earth.The same increased development of size, whichin recent Equisetacese accompanies their grogramdes Vegetate Fossiles, 2nd Liaison.f Calamites are characterized by large and simple cylindricalstems, articulated at intervals, but either without sheaths,or presenting them under forms unknown among existing Equi-sea; they have sometimes marks of verticillated Branches aroundtheir articulations, the leaves also are without joints. But themost obvious feature wherein they differ from Equiseta, is theirbulk and height, sometimes exceeding six or seven inches in diameter,whilst the diameter of a living Equisetum rarely exceedshalf an inch. A Calamity fourteen inches in diameter has latelybeen placed in the Museum at Leeds.FERNS. 4(31phial approximation to the Equator, is foundin the fossil species of this order to accompanythe higher degrees of Antiquity of the strata inwhich they occur ; and this without respect tothe latitude, in which these formations may beplaced. M. Ad. Brongniart (Prodrome, p. 167)enumerates twelve species of Calamites and twoof Equiseta in his list of plants found in strataof the Carboniferous order.Ferns*The family of Ferns, both in the living andfossil Flora, is the most numerous of vascularCryptogamous plants. % Our knowledge of thegeographical distribution of existing Ferns, asconnected with Temperature, enables us in somedegree to appreciate the information to be derivedfrom the character of fossil Ferns, in regardto the early conditions and Climate of our globe.See PI. I. No. 6. 7. 8. 37. 38. 39.t Ferns are distinguished from all other vegetables by thepeculiar division and distribution of the veins of the leaves ; andin arborescent species, by their cylindrical stems without branches,and by the regular disposition and shape of the scars left uponthe stem, at the point from which the Petioles, or leaf stalks,have fallen off. Upon the former of these characters M. Ad.Brongniart has chiefly founded his classification of fossil Ferns,it being impossible to apply to them the system adopted in thearrangement of living Genera, founded on the varied dispositionof the fructification, which is rarely. preserved in a fossil state.i(}'2 DISTRIBUTION OF RECENT FERNS.The total known number of existing species ofFerns is about 1500. These admit of a threefoldgeographical distribution :1. Those of the temperate and frigid zone ofthe northern hemisphere, containing 144 species.2. Those of the southern temperate zone, includingthe Cape of Good Hope, parts of SouthAmerica, and the extra-tropical part of New Holland,and New Zealand, 140 species.3. Those which grow within 30 or 35 degreeson each side of the Equator, 1200 species.If we compare the amount of Ferns with theunited numbers of other tribes of plants, we mayform some idea of the relative importance of thisfamily in the vegetation of the district, or periodto which we apply such comparison. Thus, inthe entire number of known species of plantsnow existing on the globe, we have 1 500 Fernsand 45,000 Phanerogamise, being in the proportionof 1 to 30. In Europe this proportion variesfrom 1 :35 to 1 :80, and may average 1 :60. Betweenthe Tropics, Humboldt estimates the number inEquinoctial America at 1:36, and Mr. Browngives 1:20 as the proportion in those parts ofintertropical Continents which are most favourable*to Ferns.Mr. Brown (Appendix to Turkey's CongoExpedition) states that the circumstances mostBotany of Congo, p. 42.ARBORESCENT FERNS. 463favourable to the growth of Ferns are humidity,shade, and heat. These circumstances are mostfrequently combined in the highest degree insmall and lofty tropical islands, where the air ischarged with humidity, which it is continuallydepositing on the mountains, and thereby impartingfreshness to the soil. Thus in JamaicaFerns are to the Phanerogamise nearly in theproportion of 1 to 10 ; in New Zealand as 1 to 6 ;in Tait as 1 to 4 ; in Norfolk Island as 1 to 3 ; inSt. Helena as 1 to 2 ; in Tristan d'Acunha (extra-tropical)as 2 to 3. Ferns are also the most abundantPlants in the Islands of the Indian Archipelago.It appears still further, that not only are certainGenera and Tribes of Ferns peculiar to certainclimates, but that the enlarged size of the arborescentspecies depends in a great degree on Temperature,since Arborescent Ferns are now foundchiefly within, or near the limit of the Tropics.*From the above considerations as to the charactersand distribution of living Ferns, M. Ad.Brongniart has applied himself with much ingenuity,to illustrate the varying condition and climateof our Globe, during the successive periodsof geological formations. Finding that the fossilThe few exceptions to this rule appear to be confined to thesouthern hemisphere, and one species is found in New Zealandas far south as lat. 46°. See Brown in Appendix to Flinders 'sVoyage.46*4 DISTRIBUTION OF FOSSIL FERNS.remains of Ferns decrease continually in number,as we ascend from the most ancient to themost recent strata, he founds upon this fact animportant conjecture, with respect to the successivediminutions of temperature, and changes ofclimate, which the earth has undergone. Thus,in the great Coal formation there are about 120known species of Ferns, forming almost one halfof the entire known Flora of this formation ;these species represent but a small number ofthe forms which occur among living Ferns, andnearly all belong to the Tribe of Polypodiaceae,in which Tribe we find the greater number ofexisting arborescent species.* Fragments of thestems of arborescent Ferns occur occasionally inthe same formation. M. Brongniart considersthese circumstances as indicating a vegetation,analogous to that of the Islands in the equinoctialregions of the present Earth ; and infers thatthe same conditions of Heat and Humidity whichfavour the existing vegetation of these islands,prevailed in still greater degree during the fortinplate 1, figs. 7, and 37, represent two of the gracefulforms of arborescent Ferns which adorn our modern tropics, wherethey attain the height of forty and fifty feet.An arborescent Fern forty-five feet high] (Alsophila bruno-nana),from Silent in Bengal, may be seen in the staircase of theBritish Museum. The stems of these Ferns are distinguishedfrom those of all arborescent Monocotyledonous plants, by thepeculiar form and disposition of the scars, from which the PetiolesDISTRIBUTION OF FOSSIL FERNS. 405nation of the Carboniferous strata of the TransitionSeries.In strata of the Secondary Series, the absoluteand relative numbers of species of Ferns considerablydiminishes, forming scarcely one thirdof the known Flora of these midway periods ofgeological history. (See PI. 1. Figs. 37. 38. 39.)In the Tertiary Strata, Ferns appear to bear toother vegetables nearly the same proportion asin the temperate regions of the present Earth.or leaf stalks have fallen off. In Palms and other arborescentMonocotyledons, the leaves, or Petioles, embrace the stem andleave broad transverse scars, or rings, whose longer diameter ishorizontal. In the case of Ferns alone, with the single exceptionof Angiopteris, the scars are either elliptic or rhomboidal, andhave their longer diameter vertical.M. Ad. Brongniart (Hist, des Veg. Foss. p. 261, PI. 79. 80.)has described and figured the leaf and stem of an arborescentfern (Anomopteris, Mougeottii) from the variegated sand-stoneof Heilegenberg in the Vosges. Beautiful leaves of this species,with their capsules of fructification sometimes adhering to thepinnules, abound in the New red sand-stone formation of thisdistrict.M. Cotta has published an interesting Work on fossil Remainsof arborescent ferns, which occur abundantly in the New red sandstoneof Saxony near Chemnitz. (Dendrolithen. Dresden andLeipsic, 1832.) These consist chiefly of sections of the Trunksof many extinct species, sufficiently allied in structure to that ofexisting arborescent Ferns, to leave little doubt that they are theremains of extinct species of arborescent Plants of this family,that grew in Europe at this Period of the Secondary formation.G. H H466 lycopodiacejE.Lepidodendron*The genus Lepidodendron comprehends manyspecies of fossil plants, which are of large size,and of very frequent occurrence in the Coal formation.In some points of their structure theyhave been compared to Coniferae, but in otherrespects and in their general appearance, withthe exception of their great size, they very muchresemble the Lycopodiacece, or Club Moss Tribe.(See PL 1. Figs. 9. 10.). This tribe at the presentday, contains no species more than threefeet high, but the greater part of them are weak,or creeping plants, while their earliest fossil representativesappear to have attained the dimensionsof Forest Trees-tExisting Lycopodiaceee follow nearly the samelaw as ferns and Equisetacese, in respect of geographicaldistribution ; being largest and mostabundant in hot and humid situations within theTropics, especially in small islands. The beliefthat Lepidodendra were allied to the Lycopo-PI. 1. Figs. 11. 12. and PL 55, Figs. 1. 2. 3.f Prof. Lindley states that the affinities of existing Lycopo-diocese are intermediate between Ferns and Coniferse on the onehand, and Ferns and Mosses on the other ; They are related toFerns in the want of sexual apparatus, and in the abundance ofannular ducts contained in their axis ; to Coniferse, in the aspectof the stems of some of the larger kinds ; and to Mosses in theirwhole appearance.LEPIDODENDRON. 467diocese, and their size, and abundant occurrenceamong the fossils of the Coal Formation haveled writers on fossil plants to infer that greatheat, and moisture, and an insular Position werethe conditions, under which the first forms of thisfamily attained that gigantic stature, which theyexhibit in deposits of the Transition period ;thus corroborating the conclusion they had derivedfrom the Calamites associated with them,as already mentioned.*Lindley and Hutton state, that Lepidodendraare, after Calamites, the most abundant classof fossils in the Coal formation of the North ofEngland; they are sometimes of enormous size,fragments of stems occurring from twenty to fortyfivefeet long ; in the Jarrow colliery a compressedtree of this class measured four feet twoinches in breadth. Thirty-four species of Lepi-The leaves of existing Lycopodiaceae are simple, and arrangedin spiral lines around the stem, and impress on its surfacescars of rhomboidal, or lanceolate form, marked with printsof the insertions of vessels. In the fossil Lepidodendra, we finda large and beautiful variety of similar scars, arranged like scalesin spiral order, over the entire surface of the stems. A largedivision of these are arborescent and dichotomous, and have theirbranches covered with simple lanceolate leaves. Our figure ofLepidodendron Sternbergii (PI. 55. Figs. 1. 2. 3.) represents allthese characters in a single Tree from the Coal mines of Swinein Bohemia.The form of the scales varies at different parts of the samestem, those nearest the base are elongated in the vertical direction.468 LEPIDODENDRON.dodendron are enumerated in M. Ad. Brongniart'sCatalogue of fossil plants of the coal formation.The internal structure of theLepidodendron hasbeen shewn to be intermediate between Lycopo-diocese and Coniferae,* and the conclusions whichProf. Lindley draws from the intermediate conditionof this curious extinct genus of fossil plants,are in perfect accordance with the inferenceswhich we have had occasion to derive from analogousconditions in extinct genera of fossil animals." To Botanists, this discovery is of veryhigh interest, as it proves that those systematicare right, who contend for the possibility of certainchasms now existing between the gradationsof organization, being caused by the extinctionof genera, or even of whole orders ; the existenceof which was necessary to complete the harmonywhich it is believed originally existedin the structure of all parts of the Vegetablekingdom. By means of Lepidodendron, a betterpassage is established from Flowering to FlowerlessPlants, than by either Equisetum or Cycas,or any other known genus." Lindley and Hut-tonsFossil Flora, vol. ii. page 53.See annual Report of the Yorkshire Phil. Society for 1832.Witham's Fossil Vegetables, 1833, PI. 12. 13. and Lindley andHutton's Fossil Flora. PI. 98 and 99.SIGILLARIA. 469Sigillaria,*Besides the above plants of the Coal formationwhich are connected with existing Families orGenera, there occur many others which can bereferred to no known type in the vegetablekingdom. We have seen that the Calamitestake their place in the existing family of ; that many fossil Ferns are referableto living genera of this extensive family ; andthat Lepidodendra approximate to living Lyco-podiaceee and Coniferse. Together with these,there occur other groups of Plants unknown inmodern vegetation, and of which the durationseems to have been limited to the Epochs of theTransition Period. Among the largest and tallestof these unknown forms of Plants, we findcolossal Trunks of many species, which M. Ad.Brongniart has designated by the name ofSigillaria. These are dispersed throughout thesand-stones and shales that accompany the Coal,and can occasionally be detected in the Coalitself, to the substance of which they havelargely contributed by their remains. Theyare sometimes seen in an erect position, whereviews of the strata are afforded by cliffs on thePI. 56, Figs. 1. 2.470 ERECT POSITION OF FOSSIL TREES.sea shore, or by inland sections of quarries,banks of rivers, &c*The vertical position of these trunks, however,is only occasional and accidental ; they lie inclinedat all degrees throughout all the strata ofthe carboniferous series ; but are most frequentlyprostrate, and parallel to the lines of stratification,and, in this position are usually compressed.When erect, or highly inclined, they retaintheir natural shape, and their interior is filledwith sand or clay, often different from that ofthe stratum in which their lower parts are fixed,and mixed with small fragments of various otherplants. As this foreign matter has thus entirelyOn the coast of Northumberland, at Greswell hall, andNewbiggin, near Worketh, many stems of Sigillaria may be seen,standing erect at right angles to the planes of alternating strataof shale and sand-stone; they vary from ten to twenty feet inheight, and from one to three feet in diameter, and are usuallytruncated at their upper end ; many terminate downwards in abulb-shaped enlargement, near the commencement of the roots,but no roots remain attached to any of them. Mr. W". C. Trevelyancounted twenty portions of such Trees, within the lengthof half a mile ; all but four or five of these were upright ; thebark, which was seen when they were first uncovered, but soonfell off, was about half an inch in thickness, and entirely convertedinto coal. Mr. Trevelyan observed four varieties of thesestems, and engraved a sketch of one of them in 1816, which iscopied in our PI. 56. fig. 1.In September, 1834, I saw in one of the Coal Mines of EarlFitzwilliam, at Elsecar, near Rotherham, many large Trunks ofSigillaria, in the sides of a gallery by which you walk into themine, from the outcrop of a bed of Coal about six feet thick.These stems were inclined in all directions, and some of themINTERIOR OF TRUNKS. 471filled the interior of these trunks, it follows thatthey must have been without any transverse dis-sediments,and hollow throughout, at the timewhen the sand, and mud, and fragments of otherplants, found admission to their interior. Thebark, which alone remains, and has been convertedinto coal, probably surrounded an axiscomposed of soft and perishable pulpy matter,like the fleshy interior of the stems of livingCates ; and the decay of this soft internaltrunk, whilst the stems were floating in thewater, probably made room for the introductionof the sand and clay.These trunks usually vary from half a foot tothree feet in diameter. When perfect, the heightnearly vertical. The interior of those whose inclination exceeded45° was filled with an indurated mixture of clay and sand ; thelower extremity of several rested on the upper surface of the bedof Coal. None had any traces of Roots, nor could any one ofthem have grown in its present place.M. Alex. Brongniart has engraved a section at St. Guienne, inwhich many similar stems are seen in an erect position, in sandstoneof the Coal formation, and infers from this fact that theygrew on the spot where they are now found. M. ConstantProvost justly objects to this inference, that, had they grown onthe spot, they would all have been rooted in the same stratum,and not have had their bases in different strata. When I visitedthese quarries in 1826, there were other trunks, more numerousthan the upright ones, inclined in various directions.I have seen but one example, viz. that of Balgray quarry, threemiles N. of Glasgow, of erect stumps of large trees fixed by theirroots in sand-stone of the coal formation, in which, when soft,they appear to have grown, close to one another. See Lond.and Edin. Phil. Mag. Dec. 1835, p. 487.472 SYR1NGODENDRON.of many of them must have been fifty or sixtyfeet, at least.*Count Sternberg has applied the name Springto many species of Sigillaria, from theparallel pipe-shaped flutings that extend fromthe top to the bottom of their trunks. Thesetrunks are without joints, and many of themattain the size of forest trees. The flutings ontheir surface bear dot-like, or linear impressions,of various figures, marking the points at whichthe leaves were inserted into the stem. Thisfluted portion of the Sigillarise, formed their externalcovering, separable like true bark fromthe soft internal axis, or pulpy trunk ; it variedin thickness from an inch to one-eighth of aninch, and is usually converted into pure coal.(See PI. 56, Fig. 2. a, b, c.)A fleshy trunk surrounded and strengthenedonly by such thin bark, must have been incapableof supporting large and heavy branchesat its summit. It therefore probably terminatedabruptly at the top, like many of the largerspecies of living Cactus, and the abundant dispositionof small leaves around the entire extentof the trunk seems to favour this hypothesis.M. Ad. Brongniart found in a coal mine in Westphalia nearEssen, the compressed stem of a Sigillaria laid horizontally, tothe length of forty feet ; it was about twelve inches in diameterat its lower, and six inches at its upper extremity, where it dividedinto two parts, each four inches in diameter. The lowerend was broken off abruptly. Lindley and Mutton's Foss. Flora,vol. i. p. 153.BARK FLUTED AND SCARRED. 473The impressions, or scars, which formed thearticulations of leaves on the longitudinal flutingsof the trunks of Sigillarise, are disposed in verticalrows on the centre of each fluting from thetop to the bottom of the trunk. Each of thesescars marks the place from which a leaf hasfallen off, and exhibits usually two apertures, bywhich bundles of vessels passed through thebark to connect the leaves with the axis of thetree. No leaf has yet been found attached toany of these trunks ; we are therefore left entirelyto conjecture as to what their nature may havebeen. This non-occurrence of a single leaf uponany one of the many thousand trunks that havecome under observation, leads us to infer thatevery leaf was separated from its articulation,and that many of them perhaps, like the fleshyinterior of the stems, had undergone decomposition,during the interval in which they werefloating between their place of growth, and thatof their final submersion.M. Ad. Brongniart enumerates forty-two speciesof Sigillaria, and considers them to have beennearly allied to arborescent Ferns, with leavesvery small in proportion to the size of the stems,and differently disposed from those of any livingFerns. He would refer to these stems many ofthe numerous fern leaves of unknown species,which resemble those of existing arborescentgenera of this family. Lindley and Hutton shewstrong reasons for considering that Sigillarise474 EXTINCT GENERA OF Conserve.were Dicotyledonous plants, entirely distinctfrom Ferns, and different from any thing thatoccurs in the existing system of vegetation.*Favularia. Megaphyton. Bothrodendron.Ulodendron.^The same group of fossil plants to which Lindleyand Hutton have referred the genus Sigil-maria,contains four other extinct genera, all ofwhich exhibit a similar disposition of scars arrangedin vertical rows, and indicating the placesat which leaves, or cones, were attached to thetrunk. The names of these are Favularia, ,Bothrodendron, Ulodendron.| Ourfigures PI. 56, Figs. 3, 4, 5, 6, represent portions of" There can be no doubt," say they, (Foss. Flora, vol. i. p.155) that as far as external characters go, Sigillaria approachedEuphorbia and Cates more nearly than any other plants nowknown, particularly in its soft texture, in its deeply channelledstems, and what is of more consequence in its scars, placed inperpendicular rows between the furrows. It is also well knownthat both these modern tribes, particularly the latter, arrive evennow at great stature ; further, it is extremely probable, indeedalmost certain, that Sigillaria was a dicotyledonous plant, for noothers at the present day have a true separable bark. Nevertheless,in the total absence of all knowledge of the leaves andflowers of these ancient trees, we think it better to place the genusamong other species, the affinity of which is at present doubtful."f PI. 56, Figs. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7.X The genera composing this group are thus described, Foss.Flora, vol. ii. p. 96.1. Sigillaria. Stem furrowed. Scars of leaves small, round,much narrower than the ridges of the stem.LEAVES AND CONES IN VERTICAL ROWS. 475the trunk and scars of some of these extraordinaryConiferae.Among existing vegetables, there are only afew succulent plants which present a similar dispositionof leaves, one exactly above another inparallel rows ; but in the fossil Flora of the Coal2. Favularia. Stem furrowed. Scars of leaves small, square,as broad as the ridges of the stem.3. Megaphyton. Stem not furrowed, dotted. Scars of leavesvery large, of a horse shoe figure, much narrower than theridges.4. Bothrodendron. Stem not furrowed, covered with dots.Scars of cones, obliquely oval.5. Ulodendron. Stem not furrowed, covered with rhomboidalmarks. Scars of cones circular.In the three first genera of this group, the scars appear to havegiven origin to leaves ; in the two latter they indicate the insertionof large cones.In the genus Favularia (PI. 56, Fig. 7) the trunk was entirelycovered with a mass of densely imbricated foliage, the bases ofthe leaves are nearly square, and the rows of leaves separated byintermediate grooves ; whilst in Sigillaria the leaves were placedmore loosely, and at various intervals in various species. (Foss.Flora, PI. 73. 74. 75).In the genus Megaphyton the stem is not furrowed, and theleaf scars are very large, and resemble the form of horse shoesdisposed in two vertical rows, one on each side of the trunk.The minor impressions resembling horse shoes, in the middle ofthese scars, appear to indicate the figure of the woody system ofthe leaf stalk. (Foss. Flora, PI. 116, 117.)In the genus Bothrodendron (Foss. Flora, PI. 80, 81) andthe genus Ulodendron, (Foss. Flora, PI. 5. 6.) the stems aremarked with deep oval or circular concavities, which appearto have been made by the bases of large cones. These cavitiesare ranged in two vertical rows, on opposite sides of the trunk,and in some species are nearly five inches in diameter. (PI. 56.figs. 3. 4. 5. 6.)476 Stigmata.formation, nearly one half, out of eighty knownspecies of Arborescent plants, have their leavesgrowing in parallel series. The remaining halfare Lepidodendra, or extinct Coniferae. (SeeLindley and Hutton, Foss. Flora, vol. ii. p. 93.)Stigmaria*The recent discoveries of Lindley and Huttonhave thrown much light upon this very extraordinaryfamily of extinct fossil plants. Ourfigure, PL 56, Fig. 8, copied from their engravingof Stigmaria ficoides, (Foss. Flora, PI. 31, Fig. 1)represents one of the best known examples of thegenusThe centre of the plant presents a dome-shapedtrunk or stem, three or four feet in diameter, thesubstance of which was probably yielding andfleshy ; both its surfaces were slightly corrugated,and covered with indistinct circular spots.(PL 56, Fig. 8. 9.)From the margin of this dome there proceedmany horizontal branches, varying in number indifferentindividuals from nine to fifteen ; someof these branches become forked at unequal distancesfrom the dome ; they are all broken offPI. 56, Fig. 8. 9. 10. 11,f Seventeen specimens of this kind have been found withinthe space of 600 square yards, in the shale covering the Benthamseam of coal at Jarrow Colliery near Newcastle, at the depth of1200 feet.A GIGANTIC FLOATING PLANT. 477short, the longest yet found attached to the stem,was four feet and a half in length. The extent ofthese branches, when outstretched and perfect,was probably from twenty to thirty feet.* Thesurface of each branch is covered with spirallydisposed tubercles, resembling the papillae at thebase of the spines of Echini. From each tuberclethere proceeded a cylindrical and probablysucculent leaf; these extended to the length ofseveral feet from all sides of the branches. (PI.56, Figs. 10. 11.) The leaves, usually in a compressedstate, are found penetrating in all directionsinto the sand-stone or shale which formsthe surrounding matrix ; they have been tracedto the length of three feet, and have been said tobe much longer. rfIt appears from sections of a branch of Stigmaria, engravedby Lindley and Hutton, (Foss. Flora, Pl. w 166), that its interiorwas a hollow cylinder composed exclusively of spiral vessels,and containing a thick pith, and that the transverse sectionexhibits a structure something like that of Coniferae, but withoutconcentric circles, and with open spaces instead of the uniformtissue of medullary rays. No such structure is known amongliving plants.These cylindrical branches are usually depressed on one side,probably the inferior side (PL 56, Figs. 8. ab. and 10. b.); adjacentto this depression there is found a loose internal eccentric axis, orwoody core, (PI. 56. Fig. 10. a.) surrounded with vascular fasciculithat communicated with the external tubercles, and resembledthe internal axis within the stems of certain species of Cactus.t All these are conditions, which a Plant habitually floatingwith the leaves distended in every direction, would not cease tomaintain, when drifted to the bottom of an Estuary, and theregradually surrounded by sediments of mud and silt. •478 DOME-SHAPED STEM.In many of the strata that accompany the coal,fragments of these plants occur in vast abundance; they have been long noticed in the sandstonecalled Cannister and Ironstone, in theYorkshire and Derbyshire coal fields, and havebeen incorrectly considered to be fragments ofthe stems of Cacti.The discovery of the dome-shaped centresabove described, and the length and forms of theleaves and branches render it highly probablethat the Stigmatise were aquatic plants, trailingin swamps, or floating in still and shallow lakes,like the modern Statutes and Islets. Fromsuch situations they may have been drifted bythe same inundations, that transported the Fernsand other land vegetables, with which they areassociated in the coal formation. The form ofthe trunk and branches shews that they couldnot have risen upwards into the air ; they musttherefore either have trailed on the ground, orhave floated in water.* The Stigmaria was probablydicotyledonous, and its internal structureseems to have borne some analogies to that ofthe Euphorbiacese.The place and form of the leaves, supposing them to havegrown on all sides of branches suspended horizontally in water,would have been but little changed by being drifted into, andsinking to the bottom of, an estuary or sea, and there becomingsurrounded by sediments of mud or sand. This hypothesis seemssupported by the observations made at Jarrow, that the extremitiesof the branches descend from the dome towards the adjacentbed of coal.PLANTS IN THE COAL FORMATION. 479Conclusion.Besides these Genera which have been enumerated,there are many others whose nature isstill more obscure, and of which no traces havebeen found among existing vegetables, nor inany strata more recent than the Carboniferousseries.* Many years must elapse before thecharacter of these various remains of the primevalvegetation of the Globe can be fully understood.The plants which have contributedmost largely to the highly-interesting and importantformation of Coal, are referable principallyto the Genera whose history we have attemptedbriefly to elucidate : viz. Calamites, Ferns, LysSigillariae, and Stigmatise. Thesematerials have been collected chiefly from thecarboniferous strata of Europe. The same kindof fossil plants are found in the coal mines ofN. America, and we have reason to believethat similar remains occur in Coal formations ofthe same Epoch, under very different Latitudes,and in very distant quarters of the Globe, e. g.in India, and New Holland, in Melville Island,and Baffin's Bay.The most striking conclusions to which thepresent state of our knowledge has led, respect-someof the most abundant of these have been classed underthe names of Asterophyllites, (see PI. 1, Figs. 4. 5.) from thestellated disposition of the leaves around the branches.480 RELATIONS TO EXISTING VEGETABLES.ing the vegetables which gave origin to coal are,1st, that a large proportion of these plants werevascular Cryptogamia, and especially Ferns ;2dly, that among these Cryptogamic plants, theEquisetacese attained a gigantic size; sadly, thatDicotyledonous plants, which compose nearlytwo-thirds of living Vegetables, formed but a smallproportion of the Flora of these early periods.*4thly, that although many extinct genera, andcertain families have no living representatives,and even ceased to exist after the depositionof the Coal formation, yet are they connectedwith modern vegetables by common principlesThe value to be attached to numerical proportions of fossilPlants, in estimating the entire condition of the Flora of theseearly periods, has been diminished by the result of a recent interestingexperiment made by Prof. Lindley, on the durability ofPlants immersed in water. (See Fossil Flora, No. xvii. vol. iii.p. 4.) Having immersed in a tank of fresh water, during morethan two years, 177 species of plants, including representativesof all those which are either constantly present in the coal measuresor universally absent, he found :1. That the leaves and bark of most dicotyledonous Plants arewholly decomposed in 2 years, and that of those which do resistit, the greater part are Coniferce and Cycadece.2. That Monocotyledons are more capable of resisting theaction of water, particularly Palms and Scitamineous Plants ;but that Grasses and Sedges perish.3. That Fungi, Mosses, and all the lowest forms of Vegetationdisappear.4. That Ferns have a great Power of resisting water if gatheredin a green state, not one of those submitted to the experimenthaving disappeared, but that their fructification perished.Although the Results of this experiment in some degree in-COMPLEX HISTORY OF COAL. 481of structure, and by details of organization, whichshew them all to be parts of One grand, andconsistent, and harmonious Design.We may end our account of the Plants towhich we have traced the origin of Coal, with asummary view of the various Natural changes,and processes in Art and Industry, through whichwe can follow the progress of this curious andmost important vegetable production .Few persons are aware of the remote and wonderfulEvents in the economy of our Planet, andof the complicated applications of human Industryand Science, which are involved in theproduction of the Coal that supplies with fuelvalidate the certainty of our knowledge of the entire Flora ofeach of the consecutive Periods of Geological History, it doesnot affect our information as to the number of the enduringPlants which have contributed to make up the Coal formation ;nor as to the varying proportions, and changes in the species ofFerns and other plants, in the successive systems of vegetationthat have clothed our globe.It may be further noticed, that as both trunks and leaves ofAngiospermous dycotyledonous Plants have been preserved abundantlyin the Tertiary formations, there appears to be no reasonwhy, if Plants of this Tribe had existed during the Secondary andTransition Periods, they should not also occasionally have escapeddestruction in the sedimentary deposits of these earlier epochs.In London's Mag. Nat. Hist. Jan. 1834, p. 34, is an accountof some interesting experiments by Mr. Luis, on successivechanges in the form of the cortical and internal parts of the stemsof succulent plants, (e. g. Sempervivum arboreum) during variousstages of decay, which may illustrate analogous appearances inmany fossil plants of the coal formation,G. I I482 STAGES IN THE PRODUCTION OF COAL.the Metropolis of England. The most earlystage to which we can carry back its origin, wasamong the swamps and forests of the primevalearth, where it flourished in the form of giganticCalamites, and stately Lepidodendra, and Sigil-arise.From their native bed, these plants weretorn away, by the storms and inundations of ahot and humid climate, and transported intosome adjacent Lake, or Estuary, or Sea. Herethey floated on the waters, until they sank saturatedto the bottom, and being buried in thedetritus of adjacent lands, became transferredto a new estate among the members of themineral kingdom. A long interment followed,during which a course of Chemical changes, andnew combinations of their vegetable elements,have converted them to the mineral condition ofCoal. By the elevating force of subterraneanFires, these beds of Coal have been uplifted frombeneath the waters, to a new position in the hillsand mountains, where they are accessible tothe industry of man. From this fourth stage inits adventures, our Coal has again been movedby the labours of the miner, assisted by the Artsand Sciences, that have co-operated to producethe Steam Engine and the Safety Lamp. Returnedonce more to the light of day, and asecond time committed to the waters, it has, bythe aid of navigation, been conveyed to the sceneof its next and most considerable change byFOSSIL CONIFERS. 4815fire ; a change during which it becomes subservientto the most important wants and conveniencesof Man. In this seventh stage of itslong eventful history, it seems to the vulgar eyeto undergo annihilation ; its Elements are indeedreleased from the mineral combinationsthey have maintained for ages, but their apparentdestruction is only the commencement ofnew successions of change and of activity. Setfree from their long imprisonment, they returnto their native Atmosphere, from which theywere absorbed to take part in the primeval vegetationof the Earth. To-morrow, they may contributeto the substance of timber, in the Treesof our existing forests ; and having for a whileresumed their place in the living vegetable kingdom,may, ere long be applied a second timeto the use and benefit of man. And whendecay or fire shall once more consign them to theearth, or to the atmosphere, the same Elementswill enter on some further department, of theirperpetual ministration, in the economy of thematerial world.Fossil Conifer a*The Coniferae form a large and very importanttribe among living plants, which are characterPI. 1. Fits. I. 31. 32. 69484 FOSSIL CONIFERS.seized, not only by peculiarities in their fructification(as Gymnospermous phanerogamic?),* butalso by certain remarkable arrangements in thestructure of their wood, whereby the smallestfragment may be identified.Recent microscopic examinations of fossilwoods have led to the recognition of an internalstructure, resembling that of existing Coniferae,in the trunks of large trees, both in the Carboniferousseries and throughout the Secondaryformations ;| and M. Ad. Brongniart has enu-We owe to Mr. Brown, the important discovery, that Coni-fraeand Cycadeee are the only two families of plants that havetheir seeds originally naked, and not enclosed within an Ovary,(see Appendix to Captain King's Voyage to Australia). Theyhave for this reason been arranged in a distinct order, as Gym-prosperousPhanerogamic. This peculiarity in the Ovulum isaccompanied throughout both these families, by peculiarities inthe internal structure of their stems, in which they differ fromalmost all dicotyledonous plants, and in some respects also fromeach other.The recognition of these peculiar characters in the structure ofthe stem, is especially important to the Geological Botanist, becausethe stems of plants are often the only parts which are foundpreserved in a fossil state.f The occurrence of large coniferous trees in strata of thegreat Coal formation, was first announced in Mr. Witham's FossilVegetables, 1831. It was here stated that the higher and morecomplex organizations of Coniferse exist in the Coal fields ofEdinburgh and Newcastle, in strata which till lately have beensupposed to contain only the simpler forms. of vegetable structure.X In the lower region of the Secondary strata, M. Ad. Bringshas enumerated, among the fossil plants of the New redLARGEST AND TALLEST LIVING CONIFERyE. 485merited twenty species of fossil Coniferee instrata of the Tertiary series. Many of these lastapproach more closely to existing Genera thanthose in the Secondary strata, and some are re-terrible to them.It has been further shewn by Mr. Nicol,(Edin. New. Phil. Journal, January, 1834) thatsome of the most ancient fossil Coniferse may bereferred to the existing genus Pinus, and othersto that of Araucaria ; the latter of these comprehendssome of the tallest among living trees, (seePI. I, Fig. 1) and is best known in the Araucariaexcels, or Norfolk Island Pine.These discoveries are highly important, asthey afford examples among the earliest remainsof vegetable life, of identity in minute details ofinternal organization, between the most ancientsandstone of the Vosges, four species of Volta, a new genus ofConiferse, having near affinities to the Araucaria and cunningham.Branches, leaves, and cones of this genus are mostabundant at Sultz les Bains, near Strasbourg.Mr. Witham reckons eight species of Coniferse among thefossil woods of the Lias ; and five species, of which four areallied to the existing genus Thuia, occur in the Oolite formationof Stonesfield. (See Ad. Brongniart's Prod, page 200). Forfigures of Cones from the Lias and Green-sand near LymeRegis, and the Inferior oolite of Northamptonshire, see Lindleyand Hutton's Fossil Flora, Plates 89, 135, 137.Dr. Fitton has described and figured two very beautiful andperfect cones, one from Purbeck ? and one from the Hastingssand. Geol. Trans. 2nd Series, Vol. iv. PI. 22, Figs. 9, 10. p s181 and 230.486 ARAUCARIA AND PINUS IN COAL FORMATION.trees of the primeval forests of our globe, andsome of the largest living Coniferse.*The structure of Araucarias alone has been asyet identified in trees from the Carboniferousseries of Britain. t That of ordinary Pines oc-thetransverse section of any coniferous wood in additionto the radiating and concentric lines represented PI. 56% Fig. 7,exhibits under the microscope a system of gesticulations by whichConiferse are distinguishable from other plants. The form ofthese gesticulations magnified 400 times is given in PI. 56% Figs.2, 4, 6. These apertures are transverse sections of the samevessels, which are seen in a longitudinal section at PI. 56*, Fig.8, cut from the centre towards the bark, and parallel to the medullaryrays. These vessels exhibit a characteristic and beautifulstructure, whereby a distinction is marked between true Pinesand Araucarias. In such a section the small and uniform longitudinalvessels, (PI. 56% Fig. 8) which constitute the woody fibre,present at intervals a remarkable appearance of small, nearlycircular figures disposed in vertical rows (See PL 56*, Figs. 1,3, 5). These objects under the name of glands or discs, are differentlyarranged in different species ; they are generally circular,but sometimes elliptical, and when near each other, become angular.Each of these discs has near its centre a smaller circularareola. PI. 56 & , Fig. 1, represents their appearance in thePinusstrokes of North America.In some Coniferae, the discs are in single rows ; in others, indouble as well as single rows, e. g. in Pinus strokes, PI. 56 a ,Fig. 1.Throughout the entire genus of living Pines, when double rowsof discs occur in one vessel, the discs of both rows are placedside by side, and never alternate, and the number of the rows ofdiscs is never more than two.In the Araucarias the groups of discs are arranged in single,double, triple and sometimes quadruple rows, see PI. 56 , Fig.3. 5. They are much smaller than those in the true Pines, scarcelyhalf their size, and in the double rows they always alternate withPINUS AND ARAUCARIA IN LIAS. 487curs in wood from the Coal formation of NovaScotia and New Holland.The same ordinary structure of Pines predominatesin the fossil wood of the Lias at Whitby ;trunks of Araucarias also are found there in thesame Lias ; and branches, with the leaves stilladhering to them, in the Lias at Lyme RegisProfessor Lindley justly remarks that it is animportant fact, that at the period of the depositof the Lias, the vegetation was similar to that ofthe Southern Hemisphere, not alone in thesingle fact of the presence of Cycadeae, but thatthe Pines were also of the nature of speciesnow found only to the south of the Equator. Ofeach other, and are sometimes circular, but mostly polygonal.Mr. Nicol has counted a row of not less than fifty discs in alength of the twentieth part of an inch, the diameter of each discnot exceeding the thousandth part of an inch ; but even thesmallest of these are of enormous size, when compared with thefibres of the partitions bounding the vessels in which they occur.t A trunk of Araucaria forty-seven feet long was found inCragleith Quarry near Edinburgh, 1830. (See Witham's FossilVegetables, 1833, PI. 5). Another, three feet in diameter, andmore than twenty four feet long, was discovered in the samequarries in 1833. (See Nicol on Fossil Coniferse, Edin. New Phil.Journal, Jan. 1834). The longitudinal sections of this Tree exhibit,like the recent Araucaria excels, small polygonal discs,arranged in double, and triple and quadruple rows within thelongitudinal vessels ; so also does a similar section from the Coalfieldof New Holland.I See Lindley and Hutton's Fossil Flora, PI. 88. A fossilcone referable to Coniferae, and possibly to the genus Araucaria,from the Lias of Lyme Regis, is represented at Plate 89 of thesame work.488 ORGANIZATION OF FOSSIL Converse.the four recent species of Araucaria at presentknown, one is found on the east coast of NewHolland, another in Norfolk Island, a third inBrazil, and the fourth in Chili. (Foss. Flora,vol. ii. p. 21.)Whatever result may follow from future investigations,our present information shows that thelargest and most perfect fossil Coniferse, whichhave been as yet sufficiently examined from theCoal formation and the Lias, are referable eitherto the genus Pinus, or Araucaria,* and that boththese modifications of the existing Family ofConiferae date their commencement from thatvery ancient period, when the Carboniferous strataof the Transition formation were deposited.Mr. Nicol states that in fossil woods from the Whitby Lias,when concentric layers are distinctly marked on their transversesection, (PI. 56% Fig. 2, a, a.) the longitudinal sections havealso the structure of Pinus (PI. 5Q a , Fig. 1.) ; but when the transversesection exhibits no distinct annual layers, (PI. 56 a , Fig.4.) or has them but slightly indicated, (PI. 5S a , Fig. 6. a) the longitudinalsection has the characters of Araucaria. (PI. 56% Fig.3, 5.) So also those Coniferae of the great Coal formation ofEdinburgh and Newcastle, which exhibit the structure of Araucariain their longitudinal section, have no distinct concentriclayers ; whilst in the fossil Coniferee from the New Holland andNova Scotia Coal field, both longitudinal and transverse sectionsagree with those of the recent tribe of Pinus.Mr. Witham also observes that the Coniferee of the Coal formation,and mountain limestone group, have few and slightappearances of the concentric lines, by which the annual layersof the wood are separated, which is also frequently the case withthe Trees of our present tropical regions, and from this circumstanceconjectures that, at the epochs of these formations, thechanges of season, as to temperature at least were not abrupt.conifers in the secondary series. 489Fragments of trunks of Coniferous wood, andoccasionally leaves and cones occur through allstages of the Oolite formation, from the Lias tothe Portland stone. On the upper surface ofthe Portland stone, we find the remains of anancient forest, in which are preserved large prostratesilicified trunks, and silicified stumps ofConiferae, having their roots still fixed in theblack vegetable mould in which they grew.Fragments of coniferous wood are also frequentthroughout the Wealden and Green-sand formations,and occur occasionally in Chalk.*It appears that the Coniferse are common tofossiliferous strata of all periods ; they are leastabundant in the Transition series, more numerousin the Secondary, and most frequent in the Tertiaryseries. Hence we learn that there has beenno time since the commencement of terrestrialvegetation on the surface of our Globe, in whichlarge Coniferous trees did not exist ; but our presentevidence is insufficient, to ascertain with accuracythe proportions they bore to the relativenumbers of other families of plants, in each ofthe successive geological epochs, which are thusconnected with our own, by a new and beautifulseries of links, derived from one of the most importanttribes of the vegetable kingdom.There is in the Oxford Museum a fragment of silicified coniferouswood; perforated by Teredines, found by Rev. Dr. Faussett,in a chalk flint at Lower Chartres, near Canterbury.4JJ0 FLORA OF THE SECONDARY SERIES.SECTION III.VEGETABLES IN STRATA OF THE SECONDARYSERIES.*Fossil Cycadece.The Flora of the Secondary Series t presentscharacters of an intermediate kind between theInsular vegetation of the Transition series, andthe Continental Flora of the Tertiary formations.Its predominating feature consists in the abundantpresence of Cycadese, (see PI. I, Figs. 33,34, 35,) together with Conifer8e,J and Ferns. §(See PI. 1, Figs. 37, 38, 39.)See PI. 1, Figs. 31 to 39.f M. Ad. Brongniart, in his arrangement of fossil plants, hasformed a distinct group out of the few species which have beenfound in the Red-sandstone formation (Goes bizarre) immediatelyabove the Coal. In our division of the strata, this Red-sandstoneis included, as an inferior member, in the Secondary series. FiveAlgae, three Calamites, five Ferns, and five Coniferae, two Liliaceee,and three uncertain Monocotyledonous plants form the entireamount of species which he enumerates in this small Flora.See also Jaeger uber die Pflanzenversteinerungen in dem von Stuttgart, 1827.\ We again refer to Witham's Account of Coniferae from theLias, in his observations on Fossil Vegetables, 1833.§ A very interesting account, accompanied by figures, shewingthe internal structure of the stems of fossil arborescent Ferns ofthe Secondary period, is given in Cotta's Dendrolithen, Dresden,1832; these appear to be chiefly from the New red sandstoneof Chemnitz near Dresden.EXTENT OF FOSSIL AND RECENT CYCADEjE. 491M. Ad. Brongniart enumerates about seventyspecies of land plants in the Secondary formations,(from the Keuper to the Chalk inclusive ;)one half of these are Coniferae and Cycadeae,and of this half, twenty-nine are Cycadeae ; theremaining half are chiefly vascular Cryptogamia,viz. Ferns, Equisetaceae, and Lycopodia-cease. In our actual vegetation, Coniferae andCycadeae scarcely compose a three hundredthpart.*The family of Cycadeae comprehends only twoliving Genera ; viz. Cycas, (PI. 58.) and Zamia.(PL 59.) There are five known living Species ofCycas and about seventeen of Zamia. Not asingle species of the Cycadeae grows at the presenttime in Europe ; their principal localities areparts of equinoctial America, the West Indies,the Cape of Good Hope, Madagascar, India,the Molucca Islands, Japan, China, and NewHolland.Four or five genera, and twenty-nine species ofCycadeae, occur in the fossil Flora of the Secondaryperiod, but remains of this family are veryThe fossil vegetables in the Secondary series, although theypresent many kinds of Lignite, very rarely form beds of valuableCoal. The imperfect coal of the Cleveland Moorlands nearWhitby, and of Bora in Sutherland, belong to the inferior regionof the Oolite formation. So also does the bituminous coalof Buckeberg near Minded, in Westphalia.The coal of Hoerin Scania is either in the Wealden formation,or in the Green-sand ann. les Sciences Nat. torn. iv. p. 200).492 HABIT AND STRUCTURE OF CYCADEjE.rare in strata of the Transition, and TertiaryseriesThe Cycadeae form a beautiful family of plantswhose external habit resembles that of Palms,whilst their internal structure approximates inseveral essential characters to that of Coniferae.In a third respect, (viz. the Gyrate Vernation, ormode in which the leaves are curled up at theirf I learn by letter from Count Sternberg, (Aug. 1835.) thathe has found Cycadese and Samnites in the Coal formation ofBohemia, of which he will publish figures in the 7th and 8thCahier of his Flore du Monde primitif. This is, I believe, thefirst example of the recognition of plants of this family in strataof the Carboniferous series.During a recent visit to the extensive and admirably arrangedgeological collection in the Museum at Strasbourg, I was informedby M. Voltz that the stem of a Cycadites in that Museum,described by M. Ad. Brongniart as a Mantellia, from the of Luneville, is derived from the Lias near that Town.M. Voltz knows no example of any Cycadites from the Muschel-kalk. Stems and leaves of Cycadeae occur also in the Lias atLyme Regis. (Lind. Foss. Fl. PI. 143.)The most abundant deposit of fossil leaves of Cycadese inEngland, is in the Oolitic formation on the coast of Yorkshire,between Whitby and Scarborough, (See Phillips' Illustrations ofthe Geology of Yorkshire.) Leaves of this family occur also inthe Oolitic slate of Stonesfield. Lindley and Hutton, Foss. Flora,PI. 172, 175.In Lindley and Hutton's Fossil. Flora, PL 136, Figures aregiven of Cones which he refers to the genus Zamia, from the sandstoneof the Wealden formation at Overland on the South coastof the I. of Wight.M. Ad. Brongniart has established a new fossil genus Nilsonia,in the family of Cycadese, which occurs at Her in Scania, instrata, either of the Wealden or Green-sand formation ; and anothergenus, Pteropkylium, which is found from the New redsand-stone upwards lo the Wealden formation.INTERMEDIATE CHARACTER OF CYCADEiE. 493points within the buds), they resemble Ferns.(See PL 1. F. 33, 34, 35, and PL 58, 59.)I shall select the family of Cycadeae from theFossil Flora of the Secondary period, and shallenter into some details respecting its organization,With a view of showing an example of the methodof analysis, by which Geologists are enabled toarrive at information as to the structure andeconomy of extinct species of fossil vegetables,and of the importance of the conclusions theyare enabled to establish. Those who have attendedto the recent progress of vegetable Physiologywill duly appreciate the value of microscopicinvestigations, which enable us to identifythe structure of vegetables of such remote antiquity,with that which prevails in the organizationof living species.The physiological discoveries that have latelybeen made with respect to living species of ,have shown them to occupy an intermediateplace between Palms, Ferns, and Co-literae,to each of which they bear certain pointsof resemblance ; and hence a peculiar interestattends the recognition of similar structures infossil plants, referable to a family whose charactersare so remarkable.The figure of a Cycas revoluta (PL 58,)* representsthe form and habit of plants belongingto this beautiful genus. In the magnificent crownDrawn from a Plant in Lord Grenville's Conservatory atDropmore in 1832.494 FOSSIL CYCADEjE IN DORSETSHIRE.of graceful foliage surrounding the summit of asimple cylindrical trunk, it resembles a Palm.The trunk in the genus Cycas, is usually long.That of C. cardinals rises to 30 feet.* In thegenus Zamia it is commonly short.Our figure of a Zamia pungent (PI. 59,)shews the mode of inflorescence in this Genus,by a single cone, rising like a Pine Apple, deprivedof its foliaceous top, from within thecrown of leaves at the summit of the stem.The trunk of the Cycadeae has no true bark,but is surrounded by a dense case, composed ofpersistent scales which have formed the bases offallen leaves ; these, together with other abortivescales, constitute a compact covering that suppliesthe place of bark. (See PI. 58 and 59.)In the Geol. Trans, of London (vol. iv. part 1.New Series) I have published, in conjunctionwith Mr. De la Beche, an account of the circumstancesunder which silicified fossil trunksof Cycadeae are found in the Isle of Portland,immediately above the surface of the Portlandstone, and below the Purbeck stone. They arelodged in the same beds of black mould in whichthey grew, and are accompanied by prostrateIn Curtis's Botanical Magazine, 1828, PI. 2826, Dr. Hookerhas published an Engraving of a Cycas cardinals which in 1827flowered in the Botanic Garden at Edinburgh. See PI. 1.Fig. 33.t Copied from an engraving published by Mr. Lambert, of aplant that bore fruit at Walton on Thames in the conservatory ofLady Mandeville, 1832.ANCIENT SUBMERGED FOREST. 495trunks of large coniferous trees, converted toflint, and by stumps of these trees standing erectwith their roots still fixed in their native soil.(See PI. 57, Fig. 1,)*PI. 57, Fig. 3, exhibits similar stumps of treesrooted in their native mould, in the Cliff immediatelyeast of Walworth Cove. Here the stratahave been elevated nearly to an angle of 45°,and the stumps still retain the unnatural inclinationinto which they have been thrown by thiselevation.The facts represented in these three last figuresare fully described and explained in the paperabove referred to ; they prove that plants belongingto a family that is now confined to thewarmer regions of the earth, were at a formerperiod, natives of the southern coast of EnglandThe sketch, PI. 57, Fig. 2, represents a triple series of circularundulations, marked in the stone, which surrounds a singlestump, rooted in the dirt-bed in the Isle of Portland. This verycurious disposition has apparently resulted from undulations,produced by winds, blowing at different times in different directionson the surface of the shallow fresh water, from the sedimentsof which the matter of this stratum was supplied, while thetop of this stem stood above the surface of the water. See Geol.Trans. Lond. N. S. vol. iv. p. 17.f The structure of this district affords also a good exampleof the proofs which Geology discloses, of alternate elevations andsubmersions of the strata, sometimes gradually, and sometimesviolently, during the formation of the crust of our planet.First. We have evidence of the rise of the Portland stone, tillit reached the surface of the sea wherein it was formed.Secondly. This surface became for a time, dry land, covered by490 TRUNKS AND SCALES ONLY PRESERVED.As no leaves have yet been found with thefossil Cycadeoe under consideration, we are limitedto the structure of their trunk and scales,in our search for their distinguishing characters.I have elsewhere (Geog Trans. London, N. S.vol. ii. part iii. 1828) instituted a comparison betweenthe internal structure of two species ofthese fossil trunks, and that of the trunks of arecent Zamia and recent Casatemporary forest, during an interval which is indicated by thethickness of a bed of black mould, called the Dirt bed, and bythe rings of annual growth in large petrified trunks of prostratetrees, whose roots had grown in this mould.Thirdly. We find this forest to have been gradually submerged,first beneath the waters of a freshwater lake, next of an estuary,and afterwards beneath those of a deep sea, in which Cretaceousand Tertiary strata were deposited, more than 2000 feet in thickness.Fourthly. The whole of these strata have been elevated by subterraneanviolence, into their actual position in the hills of Dor-seashore.We arrive at similar conclusions, as to the alternate elevationand depressions of the surface of the earth, from the erect positionof the stems of Calamites, in sandstone of the lower Ooliteformation on the eastern coast of Yorkshire. (See Murchison.Proceedings of Geol. Society of London, page 391.)M. Ad. Brongniart has referred these two fossil species to anew genus, by the name of Mantellia nidiformis and Mantelliacylindrical; in my paper, just quoted, I applied to them the provisionalname of Cycadeoidea meg-alophylla and Cycadeoideamicrophylla ; but Mr. Brown is of opinion, that until sufficientreasons are assigned for separating them from the genus Cycasor Zamia, the provisional name of Cycadites is more appropriate,as expressing the present state of our knowledge upon this subject.The name Mantellia is already applied by Parkinson (Introductionto Fossil Org. Rem. p. 53) to a genus of Zoophytes,which is figured in Goldfuss, T. vi. p. 14.INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF TRUNKS. 407I must refer to the memoir, in which thesesections are described, for specific details as tothe varied proportions and numerical distributionof these concentric circles of laminated woodand cellular tissue, in the trunks of living andfossil species of Cycadeae.*A strict correspondence is also exhibited inPlates 60, Fig. I, and 61, Fig. 1, represent very perfectspecimens of fossil Cycadites from Portland, now in the OxfordMuseum ; both having the important character of Buds protrudingfrom the Axillae of the leaf stalks.The section given in PI. 59, Fig. 2, of the trunk of a recentZamia horrida, from the Cape of Good Hope, displays a structuresimilar to that in the section of the fossil Cycadites megalophyllusfrom the Isle of Portland ; (PI. 60, Fig. 2) each presents a singlecircle of radiating lamina? of woody fibre, B, placed between acentral mass of cellular tissue, A, and an exterior circle of thesame tissue, C. Around the trunk, thus constituted of threeparts, is placed a case or false bark, D, composed of the persistentbases of fallen leaves, and of abortive scales. The continuationof the same structure is seen at the summit of the stem, PI.60, Fig. 1, A. B. C. D.The Cycadites microphyllus, PI. 61, Fig. 1, affords a similarapproach to the internal structure of the stem in the recentCycas. The summit of this fossil exhibits a central mass of cellulartissue (A), surrounded by two circles of radiating woodyplates, B. b., between these laminated circles, is a narrow circleof cellular tissue, whilst a broader circle of similar cellular tissue(C) is placed between the exterior laminated circle, (b) and theleaf scales (D). This alternation of radiating circles of woodwith circles of cellular tissue, is similar to the two laminatedcircles near the base of a young stem of Cycas revoluta, (PI.59, Fig. 3.) This section was communicated to me by Mr. Brownearly in 1828, to confirm the analogy which had been suggestedfrom the external surface, between these fossils, and the recentCyclades; and is figured in Geol. Trans. N. S. vol. ii. PI. 46.G. K K498 STRUCTURE OF SCALES OR BASES OF LEAF STALKS.the internal structure of the scales, or basesof leaf stalks surrounding the trunks of our fossilCycadites, with that of the corresponding scalesin the recent species.*In PI. 61, Figs. 2, 3, represent two vertical sections of aCycadites microphallus from Portland, converted to Chalcedony.These slices are parallel to the axis of the trunk, and intersecttransversely the persistent bases of the Petioles or Leaf-stalks.In each rhomboidal Petiole, we see the remains of three systemsof vegetable structure, of which magnified representations aregiven PI. 62, Fig. 1, 2, 3. We have, first, the principal mass ofcellular tissue (f ) ; secondly, sections of gum vessels (h) irregularlydispersed through this cellular tissue ; thirdly, bundlesof vessels, (c), placed in a somewhat rhomboidal form, parallelto, and a little within, the integument of each petiole. Thesebundles of vessels are composed of vascular woody fibres proceedingfrom the trunk of the plant towards the leaf. See magnifiedsection of one bundle at PL 62, Fig. 3, c'.A similar arrangement of nearly all these parts exists in thetransverse section of the leaf stalks of recent Cycadese. In Cycascardinals, and C. revoluta, and Zamia furfuracea, the bundlesof vessels are placed as in our fossil, nearly parallel to the integument.In Zamia spiralis, and Z. horrida, their dispositionwithin the Petiole, is less regular, but the internal structure ofeach bundle is nearly the same. In PI. 62, Fig. A shews theplace of these bundles of vessels in a transverse section of theleaf stalk of-Zamia spiralis ; Fig. A. c'. is the magnified appearanceof one of the bundles in this section ; Fig. B. c" is the magnifiedtransverse section of a similar bundle of vessels in thepetiole of Zamia horrida. In this species the vascular fibresare smaller and more numerous than in Z. spiralis, and the opakelines less distinct. Both in recent and fossil Cycadese the componentvascular fibres of these bundles are in rows approximatedso closely to each other, that their compressed edges give anappearance of opake lines between the rows of vascular fibres,(see PI. 62, Fig. 1, c'. Fig. B, c". and Fig. 3, c'.) These bundlesINCREASE OF CYCADEjE BY BUDS. 499Mode of increase by Suds the same in recentand fossil Cycadece.The Cycas revoluta figured in PI. 58* possessesa peculiar interest in relation to both ourof vessels seem to partake of the laminated disposition of thewoody circle within the trunk.An agreement is found also in the longitudinal sections ofthe Petioles of recent and fossil Cycadese. PI. 62, Fig. 1, isthe longitudinal section of part of the base of a Petiole of Zamiaspiralis, magnified to twice the natural size. It is made up ofcellular tissue, (f), interspersed with gum vessels, and with longbundles of vascular fibres, (c) proceeding from the trunk towardsthe leaf. On the lower integument, (V) is a dense coating ofminute curling filaments of down or cotton, (a) which being repeatedon each scale, renders the congeries of scales surroundingthe trunk, impervious to air and moisture.A similar disposition is seen in the longitudinal section of thefossil Petiole of Cycadites microphyllus represented at PI. 62, Fig.2, and magnified four times. At f, we have cellular tissue interspersedwith gum vessels, h. Beneath c, are longitudinal bundlesof vessels ; at b, is the integument ; at a, a most beautifulpetrifaction of the curling filaments of down or cotton, proceedingfrom the surface of this integument.In the vascular bundles within the fossil Petioles, (c) Mr.Brown has recognized the presence of spiral, or scalariform vessels(Vasa scalariformia) such as are found in the Petioles of recentCycadese ; he has also detected similar vessels, in the laminatedcircle within the trunk of the fossil Buds next to be described.The existence of vessels with discs peculiar to recent Cycadeseand Coniferse, such as have been described in speaking of fossilConiferee, has not yet been ascertained.This plant had been living many years, in Lord Grenville'sconservatory at Dropmore. In the autumn of 1827, the externalpart of the scales was cut away to get rid of insects : in the INCREASE OF CYCADEiE BY BUDS.fossil species, in consequence of its protruding aseries of buds from the axillae of many of thescales around its trunk. These buds explainanalogous appearances at the axillae of manyfossil scales on Cycadites megalophyllus, and Cy-citesmicrophyllus, (see PI. 60, Fig. 1, and PI.61, Fig. 1,) and form an important point of agreementin the Physiology of the living and fossilCycadeaB.*lowing spring the buds began to protrude. Similar buds appearedalso in the same conservatory on a plant of the Zamia spiralisfrom New Holland. In vol. vi. p. 5Q1, Horticult. Trans, leavesare stated to have protruded from the scales of a decayed trunkof Zamia horrida in a conservatory at Petersburg.I learn from Professor Henslowe, that the trunk of a Cycas re-volta, which in 1830 produced a Cone loaded with ripe druse,in Earl Fitzwilliam's hothouse at Wentworth, threw out a numberof buds, from the axillae of the leaf-scales soon after the Conewas cut off from its summit. In Linn. Trans, vol. vi. tab. 29, isa figure of a similar cone which bore fruit at Farnham Castle,1799.It is stated in Miller's Gardener's Dictionary, that the Cycasrevoluta was introduced into England about 1758, by CaptainHutchinson ; his ship was attacked, and the head of the plantshot off, but the stem being preserved, threw out several newheads, which were taken off, and produced as many plants.In the fossil trunk of Cycadites microphyllus, PL 61, Fig. 1,we see fourteen Buds protruding from the axillae of the leaf stalks,and in PL 60, Fig. 1, we have three Buds in a similar position inCycadites megalophyllus.In PL 61, Figs. 2, 3, exhibit transverse sections of three Budsof Cycadites microphyllus. The section of the uppermost bud,Fig. 3, g, passes only through the leaf stalks near its crown.The section of the bud, Fig. 3, 'd, being lower down in the embryotrunk, exhibits a double woody circle, arranged in radiatingCHARACTERS OF FOSSIL CYCADITES. 501Thus, we see that our fossil Cycadites areclosely allied by many remarkable charactersof structure, to existing Cycadeae.1. By the internal structure of the trunk, containinga radiating circle, or circles, of woodyfibre, embedded in cellular tissue. 2. By thestructure of their outer case, composed of persistentbases of petioles, in place of a bark ; and byall the minute details in the internal organizationof each Petiole. 3. By their mode of increase byBuds protruded from germs in the Axilla of thePetioles.However remote may have been the time whenplates, resembling the double woody circle in the mature trunk,PI. 61, 1, B, b. But in PL 61, Fig. 2, the laminated circlewithin the embryo trunk near d, is less distinctly double, asmight be expected in so young a state.At PI. 62, Fig. 3, d, and d', we see magnified representationsof a portion of the embryo circle within the Bud, PI. 61. Fig. 3, 'd.These woody circles within the buds, are placed between anexterior circle of cellular tissue, interspersed with gum vessels,and a central mass of the same tissue, as in the mature stems.On the right of the lower bud, PI. 61, Fig. 3, above b, and inthe magnified representation of the same at PL 62, Fig. 3, e, wehave portions of a small, imperfect laminated circle. Similar imperfectcircles occur also near the margin of the sections, PL 61 ,Figs. 2, 3, at e, e , e" ; these may be imperfectly developedBuds, crowded like the small Buds near the base of theliving Cycas, PL 58 : or they may have resulted from the confluenceof the bundles of vessels, in the Bases of leaves, forcedtogether by pressure, connected with a diminution or decay oftheir cellular substance. The normal position of these bundlesof vessels is seen magnified in PL 62. Fig. 3. c. and in nearlyall the Sections of Bases of petioles in PL 61. Fig. 2.502 LINK SUPPLIED BY CYCADEiE.these Prototypes of the family of Cycadeseceased to exist, the fact of their containing somany combinations of peculiarities identical withthose of existing Cycadese, connects these ancientarrangements in the Physiology of fossilBotany, with those which now characterizeone of the most remarkable families amongexisting plants. In virtue of these peculiarstructures, the living Cycadese form an importantlink, which no other Tribe of plantssupplies, connecting the great family of Coniferae,with the families of Palms and Ferns, and thusfill up a blank, which would otherwise haveseparated these three great natural divisions ofdicotyledonous, monocotyledonous, and acotyle-donors plants.The full development of this link in the Secondaryperiods of Geological history, affords animportant evidence of the Uniformity of Designwhich now pervades, and ever has pervaded, allthe laws of vegetable life.Facts like these are inestimably precious tothe Natural Theologian ; for they identify, as itwere, the Artificer, by details of manipulationthroughout his work. They appeal to the Physiologist,in language more commanding thanhuman Eloquence; the voice of very stocks andstones, that have been buried for countless agesin the deep recesses of the earth, proclaimingthe universal agency of One all-directing, all-recentPANDANE^L. 503sustaining Creator, in whose Will and Power,these harmonious systems originated, and bywhose Universal Providence, they are, and haveat all times been, maintained.Fossil PandanecB.The Pandanese, or Screw-Pines, form a mono-cotyledonsfamily which now grows only inthe warmer zones, and chiefly within the influenceof the sea ; they abound in the IndianArchipelago, and the islands of the Pacific Ocean.Their aspect is that of gigantic Pine appleplants having arborescent stems. (See PL 63,Fig. 1.)This family of Plants seems destined, like theCocoa nut Palm, to be among the first vegetableColonists of new lands just emerging from theocean ; they are found together almost universallyby navigators on the rising Coral islands of tropicalseas. We have just been considering thehistory of the fossil stems of Cycadese in the Isleof Portland, from which we learn that Plants ofthat now Extra european family were natives ofBritain, during the period of the Oolite formation.The unique and beautiful fossil fruit representedin our figures (Plate 63, Figs. 2, 3, 4,) affordsprobable evidence of the existence of anothertropical family nearly allied to the Pandaneae at504 FOSSIL FRUIT RELATED TO PANDANEJ9E.the commencement of the great Oolitic series inthe Secondary formations.*In structure this fossil Fruit approaches nearerto Pandanus than to any other living plant,and viewing the peculiarities of the fruit of ]"in connection with the office assignedThis fossil was found by the late Mr. Page, of Disportnear Bristol, in the lower region of the Inferior Oolite formationon the E. of Charmouth, Dorset, and is now in the OxfordMuseum. The size of this Fruit is that of a large orange, its surfaceis occupied by a stellated covering or Epicurism, composed ofhexagonal Tubercles, forming the summits of cells, which occupythe entire circumference of the fruit. (Figs. 2, a. 3, a. 4, a. 8, a.)Within each cell is contained a single seed, resembling a smallgrain of Rice more or less compressed, and usually hexagonal,Figs. 5, 6, 7, 8, 10. Where the Epicurism is removed, thepoints of the seeds are seen, thickly studded over the surface ofthe fruit, (Fig. 2, 3, e.) The Bases of the cells (Fig. 3 and 10 c.)are separated from the receptacle, by a congeries of foot-stalks(d) formed of a dense mass of fibres, resembling the fibres beneaththe base of the seeds of the modern Pandanus (Fig. 13, 14,15, d.) As this position of the seeds upon foot-stalks composedof long rigid fibres, at a distance from the receptacle, is a characterthat exists in no other family than the Pandanese, we arehereby enabled to connect our fossil fruit with this remarkabletribe of plants, as a new genus, Podocarya. I owe the suggestionof this name, and much of my information on this subject,to the kindness of my friend, Mr. Robert Brown.f The large spherical fruit of Pandanus, hanging on its parenttree is represented at PI. 63, Fig. 1. Fig. 11 is the summit ofone of the many Dupes into which this fruit is usually divided.Each cell when not barren contains a single oblong slender seed ;the cells in each drupe vary from two to fourteen in number, andmany of them are abortive, (Fig. 13.) The seeds within eachFUNCTIONS OF PANDANEjE. 505in the Economy of nature, to this family ofsea side plants, viz. to take the first possessionof new-formed land, just emerging from thewater, we see in the disposition of light buoyantfibres within the interior of these fruits, an arrangementpeculiarly adapted to the office ofvegetable colonization.* The sea-side locality ofthe Pandanese, causes many of their fruits tofall into the water, wherein they are driftedby the winds and waves, until they find a restingplace upon some distant shore. A singledrupe of Pandanus, thus charged with seeds,transports the elements of vegetation to the risingdrupe of Pandanus are enclosed in a hard nut, of which sectionsare given at Figs. 14, 15. These nuts are wanting in the Podocarya,whose seeds are smaller than those of Pandanese, and not collectedinto dupes, but dispersed uniformly in single cells overthe entire circumference of the fruit. (See PI. 63, Figs. 3, 8, 10.)The collection of the seeds into dupes surrounded by a hardnut, in the fruit of Pandanus, forms the essential differencebetween this genus, and our new genus, Podocarya.In the fruit of Pandanus, PI. 63, Figs. 11, 16, 17, the summitof each cell is covered with a hard cap or tubercle, irregularlyhexagonal, and crowned at its apex with the remains of a witheredstigma. We have a similar covering of hexagonal tuberclesover the cells of Podocarya (PI. 63, Figs. 2, a. 8, a. 10, a.) Theremains of a stigma appear also in the centre of these hexagonsabove the apex of each seed. (Figs. 8, a. 10, a.)There is a similar provision for transporting to distantregions of the ocean, the seeds of the other family of sea-sideplants which accompanies the Pandanus, in the buoyant mass offibrous covering that surrounds the fruit of the Cocoa-nut.506 VEGETABLE COLONIZATION.volcanic and coral islands of the modern Pacific.The seed thus stranded upon new formed land,produces a plant which has peculiar provision forits support on a surface destitute of soil, by longand large aerial roots protruded above the groundaround the lower part of its trunk. (See PI. 63.Fig. 1.) These roots on reaching the groundare calculated to prop up the plant as buttressessurrounding the basis of the stem, so that itcan maintain its erect position, and flourish inbarren sand on newly elevated reefs, where littlesoil has yet accumulated.We have as yet discovered no remains of theleaves, or trunk of Pandaneae in a fossil state, butthe presence of our unique fruit in the InferiorOolite formation near Charmouth, carries us backto a point of time, when we know from otherevidence that England was in the state of newbornland, emerging from the seas of a tepid climate; and shews that combinations of vegetablestructure such as exist in the modern Pandanege,adapted in a peculiar manner to the office ofvegetable colonization, prevailed also at the timewhen the Oolite rocks were in process of formation.This fruit also adds a new link to the chain ofevidence, which makes known to us the Flora ofthe Secondary periods of geology, and thereindiscloses fresh proofs of Order, and Harmony,and of Adaptation of peculiar means to peculiarVEGETABLES IN THE TERTIARY FORMATIONS. 507ends ; extending backwards from the actual conditionof our Planet through the manifold stagesof change, which its ancient surface has undergone.*SECTION IV.VEGETABLES IN STRATA OF THE TERTIARY SeriesIt has been stated that the vegetation of theTertiary period presents the general characterof that of our existing Continents within theTemperate Zone. In Strata of this Series,Dicotyledonous Plants assume nearly the sameproportions as at present, and are four or fivetimes more numerous than the Monocotyledo-nous ; and the greater number of fossil Plants,although of extinct species, have much resemblanceto living Genera.This third great change in the vegetable kingdomis considered to supply another argument infavour of the opinion, that the temperature ofthe Atmosphere, has gone on continually diminishingfrom the first commencement of life uponour globe.Fruits of another genus of Pandanese, to which Mr. Ad.Brongniart has given the name of Pandanocarpum, {Prodrome,p. 138,) occur together with fruits of Cocoa nut, at an earlyperiod of the Tertiary formations, among the numerous fossil fruitsthat are found in the London-clay of the Isle of Stepped.f See PI. 1, Figs. 66 to 72.508 DICOTYLEDONOUS PLANTS.The number of species of plants in the variousdivisions of the Tertiary strata, is as yet imperfectlyknown. In 1828, M. Ad. Brongniart consideredthe number then discovered, but not alldescribed, to be 166. Many of these belongingto Genera at that time not determined. Themost striking difference between the vegetablesof this and of the preceding periods is the abundancein the Tertiary series, of existing forms ofDicotyledonous Plants and large trees, e. g.Poplars, Willows, Elms, Chestnuts, Sycamores,and many other Genera whose living species arefamiliar to us.Some of the most remarkable accumulationsof this vegetation are those, which form extensivebeds of Lignite and Brown coal.* In some partsof Germany this Brown-coal occurs in strata ofmore than thirty feet in thickness, chiefly composedof trees which have been drifted, apparentlyby fresh water, from their place of growth,and spread forth in beds, usually alternating withsand and clay, at the bottom of then existinglakes or estuaries.The Lignite, or beds of imperfect and stinkingCoal near Poole in Dorset, Covey in Devon, andSoissons in France, have been referred to thefirst, or Eocene period of the Tertiary formations.See an admirable article on Lignites by Alexandre Brongniartin the 26th vol. of the Dictionnaire des Sciences Naturelles.BROWN-COAL AND LIGNITE. 509To the same period probably belongs the Nurtureof Iceland, (see Henderson's Iceland, vol.ii. p. 114.) and the well-known examples of Brown-coalon the Rhine near Cologne and Bonn, andof the Meaner mountain, and Habichtswald nearCassel. These formations occasionally containthe remains of Palms, and Professor Lindley haslately recognized, among some specimens foundby Mr. Horner in the Brown-coal near Bonn(See Ann. Phil. Lond. Sept. 1833, V. 3, p. 222),leaves closely allied to the Cinnamon of ourmodern tropics, and to the Podocarpus of thesouthern hemisphere.*At Putzberg near Bonn, six or seven beds of Brown-coalalternate with beds of sandy clay and plastic clay. The trees inthe Brown-coal are not all parallel to the planes of the strata,but cross one another in all directions, like the drifted trees nowaccumulated in the alluvial plains, and Delta of the Mississippi;(see Lyell's Geology, 3rd edit, vol i. p. 272.) some of themare occasionally forced even into a vertical position. In onevertical tree at Putzberg, which was three yards in diameter,M. Noggerath counted 792 concentric rings. In these rings wehave a chronometer, which registers the lapse of nearly eightcenturies, in that early portion of the Tertiary period which gavebirth to the forests, that supplied materials for the formation ofthe Brown-coal.The fact mentioned by Faujas that neither roots, branches, orleaves are found attached to the trunks of trees in the Lignite atBruhl and Liblar near Cologne, seems to show that these treesdid not grow on the spot, and that their more perishable partshave been lost during their transport from a distance.In the Brown-coal Formation near Bonn, and also with theSurturbrand of Iceland, are found Beds that divide into Laminae510 COAL OF MIOCENE PERIOD.In the Molasse of Switzerland, there are manysimilar deposits affording sometimes Coal of considerablepurity, formed during the second, orMiocene period of this series, and usually containingfresh water shells. Such are the Lignitesof Vernier near Geneva, of Paudex andMouton near Lausanne, of St. Saphorin nearVevay, of Kaepfnach near Horgen on the lake ofZurich, and of Meninges near Constance.The Brown coal at (Eningen forms thin bedsof little importance for fuel, but very perfectremains of vegetables are dispersed in greatabundance through the marly slates and limestonequarries which are worked there, and affordthe most perfect history of the vegetation of theMiocene Period, which has yet come within ourreach.*as thin as paper (Papier Kohle) and are composed entirely of acongeries of many kinds of leaves. Henderson mentions theleaves of two species of Poplar, resembling the P. tremble and P.balsamifera, and a Pine, resembling the Pinus abies as occurringin the Surturbrand of Iceland.Although we have followed Mr. Brongniart in referring the depositshere enumerated to the first, or Eocene period of theTertiary series, it is not improbable that some of them may be theproducts of a later era, in the Miocene or Pliocene periods.Future observations on the Species of their animal and vegetableremains will decide the exact place of each, in the grandSeries of the Tertiary formations.I have recently been favoured by Professor Braun of Carloswith the following important and hitherto unpublishedcatalogue, and observations on the fossil plants found in theFOSSIL PLANTS AT (Meninges.No distinct catalogues of plants found in thePliocene, or most recent periods of the Tertiaryseries, have yet been published.Freshwater formation of (Eningen, which has been alreadyspoken of in our account of fossil fishes. The plants enumeratedin this catalogue, were collected during a long series ofyears by the inmates of a monastery near (Eningen, on thedissolution of which they were removed to their present place inthe Museum of Carlsruhe. It appears by this catalogue thatthe plants of (Eningen afford examples of thirty-six species belongingto twenty-five genera of the following families.Families. Genera.Polypodiaceae 2Equisitaceee 1Lycopodiacese 1Coniferse 2Granites 1Najadeae 2Amentaceee 5Juglandese 1Ebenacese 1Tiliacese ]Acerinere 1Rhamneae 1Leguminous 2Dicotyledons ofdoubtful families 4Species.1 lCryptogamiee,total 4U2 Gymnospermise 2iMoncotyledons 310 1Genera. Species.Dicotyledons 16 27JThis table shews the great preponderance of Dicotyledonousplants in the Flora of (Eningen, and affords a standard of comparisonwith those of the Brown-coal of other localities in theTertiary series. The greater number of the species found here correspondwith those in the Brown-coal of the Wetter and vicinityof Bonn.Amid this predominance of dicotyledonous vegetables, not asingle herbaceous plant has yet been found excepting some FOSSIL PALMS.Fossil Palms.The discovery of the remains of Palm Treesin the Brown-coal of Germany has been alreadymerits of Ferns and Grasses, and many remains of aquatic plants :all the rest belong to Dicotyledonous, and Gympospermousligneous plants.Among these remains are many single leaves, apparentlydropped in the natural course of vegetation ; there are alsobranches with leaves on them, such as may have been torn fromtrees by stormy weather ; ripe seed vessels ; and the persistentcalix of many blossoms.The greater part of the fossil plants at (Eningen (about twothirds) belong to Genera which still grow in that neighbourhood ;but their species differ, and correspond more nearly with thosenow living in North America, than with any European species,the fossil Poplars afford an example of this kind.On the other hand, there are some Genera, which do not existin the present Flora of Germany, e. g. the Genus Diospyros ; andothers not in that of Europe, e. g, Taxodium, Liquidambar,Juglans, Gleditschia.Judging from the proportions in which their remains occur,Poplars, Willows, and Maples were the predominating foliaceoustrees in the former Flora of (Eningen. Of two very abundantfossil species, one, (Populuslatior,) resembles the modern CanadaPoplar; the other, (Populus ovalis) resembles the Balsam Poplarof North America.The determination of the species of fossil Willows is more difficult.One of these (Salix angustifolia) may have resembledour present Salix vitalis.Of the genus Acer, one species may be compared with Acercampestre, another with Acer pseudo plat anus ; but the most frequentspecies, (Acer protensum,) appears to correspond mostnearly with the Acer dasycarpon of North America ; to anotherPALMS IN TERTIARY FORMATIONS. 513noticed ; and the more frequent occurrence ofsimilar remains of this interesting family, in theTertiary formations of France, Switzerland, andspecies, related to Acer secundo, Mr. Braun gives the name ofAcer trifoliatum. A fossil species of Liquidambar (L. european,Braun.) differs from the living Liquidambar styracifluum of America,in having the narrower lobes of its leaf terminated by longerpoints, and was the former representative of this genus in Europe.The fruit of this Liquidambar is preserved, and also thatof two species of Acer and one Salix.The fossil Linden Tree of Meninges resembled our modern largeleaved Linden tree (Tilia grandiflora.)The fossil Elm resembled a small leaved form of Ulmus cam-vestries.Of two species of Juglans, one (J. falcifolia) maybe comparedwith the American J. nigra ; the other, with J. Alba, and, likeit, probably belonged to the division of nuts with bursting externalshells, (Caria Nuttal.)Among the scarcer plants at (Eningen, is a species of Dios-paros (D. braehysepala.) A remarkable calyx of this plant ispreserved and shews in its centre, the place where the fruit separateditself: it is distinguished from the living Diospyros lotusof the South of Europe by blunter and shorter sections.Among the fossil shrubs are two species of Rhamnus ; one ofthese (R. multinervis, Braun) resembles the R. albinus, in thestation of its leaf. The second and most frequent species, (R.terminalis, Braun) may with regard to the position and stationof its leaves, be compared in some degree with R. cathartics,but differed from all living species in having its flowers placedat the tips of the plant.Among the fossil Leguminous plants is a leaf more like that ofa fruticose Cytisus than of any herbaceous Trefoil.Of a Gleditschia, (G. podocarpa, Braun) there are fossil pinnatedleaves and many pods ; the latter seem, like the G. monas-parmaof North America, to have been single seeded, and aresmall and short, with a long stalk contracting the base of the pod.With these numerous species of foliaceous woods, are found alsoG. L L514 PALMS IN SECONDARY AND TRANSITION SERIES.England, whilst they are comparatively rare instrata of the Secondary and Transition series,a few species of Coniferee. One species of Abies is still undetermined; branches and small cones of another tree of thisfamily (Taxodium european Ad. Bring.) resemble the Cypressof Japan (Taxodium Japonica.)Among the remains of aquatic plants are a narrow-leaved ;and an Islets, similar to the I. lacustris now foundin small lakes of the Black Forest, but not in the Lake of Constance.The existence of Grasses at the period when this formation wasdeposited, is shewn by a well preserved impression of a leaf, similarto that of a Triticum, turning to the right, and on whichthe station is plainly expressed.Fragments of fossil Ferns occur here, having a resemblance toPteris aquilina and Aspidium Felix mas.The remains of Equisetum indicate a species resembling E. palustre.Among the few undetermined remains are the five-cleft andbeautiful veined impressions of the Calyx of a blossom, which areby no means rare at (Eningen.No remains of any Rosaceae have yet been discovered at thisplace." Letter from Prof. Brant Dr. Buckland,'Nov.25 > \835.In addition to these fossil Plants, the strata at (Eningen containmany species of freshwater Shells, and a remarkable collectionof fossil Fishes, which we have before mentioned, P. 285. Inthe family of Reptiles they present a very curious Tortoise, anda gigantic aquatic Salamander, more than three feet long, theHomo Diluvii testis of Chercher. A Lagoons and fossilFox have also been found here. (See Geol. Trans. Lond. N. S.vol. iii. p. 287.In Oct. 1835, I saw in the Museum at Leyden, a living Salamanderthree feet long, the first ever brought alive to Europe,of a species nearly allied to the fossil Salamander of (Eningen.This animal was brought by Dr. Piebald from a lake withinthe crater of an extinct volcano, on a high mountain in Japan.It fed greedily on small fishes, and frequently cast its epidermis.DISTRIBUTION OF RECENT AND FOSSIL PALMS. 515suggests the propriety of consigning to this partof our subject the few observations we have tomake on their history.The existing family of Palms* is supposed toconsist of nearly a thousand species, of which thegreater number are limited to peculiar regions ofthe torrid Zone. If we look to the geologicalhistory of this large and beautiful family, weshall find that although it was called into existence,together with the most early vegetableforms of the Transition period, it presents veryfew species in the Coal formation, (See KindlesFoss. Flora, No. XV, PI. 142, P. 163,) and occurssparingly in the Secondary series ;f but in theTertiary formation we have abundant stems andleaves, and fruits, derived from PalmsFossil Trunks of Palm Trees.The fossil stems of Palms are referable to manyspecies ; they occur beautifully silicified in theTertiary deposits of Hungary, and in the CalcaireGrossier of Paris. § Trunks of Palms are foundSee PI. 1, Figs. 66, 61, 68.f See Sprengel's Account of Endogenites Palmacites in Newred sandstone, near Chemnitz, (Halle, 1828.) and Cotta's ,(Dresden and Leipsic, 1832, PI. ix, x.)J Eight species in the family of Palms are given in Ad. Bringslist of the fossils of the Tertiary Series.§ Our figure, PI. 64, Fig. 2, represents the summit of a beau =516 PETRIFIED STEMS OF PALM TREES.also in the Fresh water formation of MontMartre.|| — It is stated, that at Liblar, near Cologne,they have been seen in a vertical positionsBeautifully solicited stems of Palm Treesabound in Antigua, and in India, and on thebanks of the Irawadi, in the kingdom of Ava.It is not surprising to find the remains of Palmsin warm latitudes where plants of this family arenow indigenous, as in Antigua or India ; buttheir occurrence in the Tertiary formations ofEurope, associated with the remains of Crocodilesand Tortoises, and with marine shells, nearlyallied to forms which are at present found in seastiful fossil Trunk in the Museum at Paris, allied to the family ofPalms, and nearly four feet in circumference, from the lowerregion of the Calcaire Grossier at Wallet near Soissons. M.Brongniart has applied to this fossil the name of Endogenitesechinus. The projecting bodies that surround it, like thefoliage of a Corinthian Capital, are the persistent portions offallen Petioles which remain adhering to the stem after the leavesthemselves have fallen off. They have a dilated base embracingone-fourth or one-third of the stem; the form of these bases, andthe disposition of their woody tissue in fasciculi of fibres, referthis fossil to some arborescent Monocotyledonous Tree allied toPalms.|| Prostrate trunks of Palm trees of considerable size are foundin the argillaceous marl beds above the Gypsum strata of theParis Basin, together with shells of Linea and Planorbis ; asthese Trunks occur here in fresh water deposits they can nothave been drifted by marine current from distant regions, butwere probably natives of Europe, and of France.IT It is not shewn whether these Palm trees were drifted intothis position, or are still standing in the spot whereon they grewLike the Cycadites and Coniferee in the Isle of Portland.FOSSIL LEAVES OF PALM TREES. 517of a warm temperature, seems to indicate thatthe climate of Europe during the Tertiary period,was warmer than it is at present.Fossil Palm leaves.We have seven known localities of fossil Palmleaves, in the Tertiary strata of France, Switzerland,and the Tyrol ; and among them at leastthree species, of flabelliform leaves, all differingnot only from that of the Cancerous humility, theonly native palm of the South of Europe, but alsofrom every known living species.* These leavesare too well preserved to have endured transportby water from a distant region, and must apparentlybe referred to extinct species, which, inthe Tertiary period, were indigenous in Europe.No pinnated Palm leaf has yet been found inthe Tertiary Strata, although the number of theseforms among existing palms, is more than doublethat of the flabelliform leaves. fThe leaf represented in PI. 64. fig. 1. is that of a flabelli-form Palm (Palmacites Lamanonis), from the Gypsum of Aix inProvence ; similar leaves have been found in three other parts ofFrance, near Amiens, Mans, and Angers, all in strata of theTertiary epoch. Another species (Palmacites Parisians) hasbeen found in the Calcaire Grossier, near Versailles (Cuvier andBrongniart, Geognosie des Environs de Paris, PI. 8, fig. 1. E.)A third species of Palm leaf (Palmacites fla bel latus) occurs inthe Molasse of Switzerland, near Lausanne, and in the Ligniteof Hoeing, in Tyrol. See PI. 1. figs. 13. 66.t The Date, Cocoa-nut Palm, and Areca are familiar examplesof Palms having pinnated leaves. See PI. 1. figs. 67. 68.518 FOSSIL FRUITS OF PALMS.Fossil Fruits of Palms.Many fossil fruits of the Tertiary period belongto the family of Palms, all of which, accordingto M. Ad. Brongniart, seem derived fromGenera that have pinnated leaves. Several suchfruits occur in the Tertiary clay of the Island ofSheppey ; among which are the Date,* now peculiarto Africa and India ; the Cocoa-nut, twhich grows universally within the tropics ; theBactria, which is limited. to America; and theAreca, which is found only in Asia. Not one ofthese can be referred to any flabelliform palm.Fossil Cocoa-nuts occur also at Brussels, and atLiblar near Cologne, together with fruits of theAreca.Although all these fruits belong to Generawhose leaves are pinnated, no fossil pinnatedPalm leaves (as we have just stated), have yetbeen found in Europe. It seems therefore mostlikely, from the mode in which so large a numberof miscellaneous fruits are crowded together inthe Isle of Sheppey, mixed with marine shellsand fragments of timber, almost always perforatedby Teredines, that the fruits in questionwere drifted by marine currents from a warmerSee Parkinson's Org. Rem. Vol. i. PI. VI. fig. 4, 9.t See Parkinson's Org. Rem. Vol. i. PI. VII. fig. 1—5.M. Brongniart says, these fruits are undoubtedly of the GenusCocos, near to Cocos lapide, of Gsertner.TROPICAL FRUITS IN Stepped. 519climate than that which Europe presented afterthe commencement of the Tertiary Epoch ; inthe same manner as tropical seeds and logs ofmahogany are now drifted from the Gulf ofMexico to the Coasts of Norway and Ireland.Besides the fruits of Palms, the Isle of Sheppeypresents an assemblage of many hundred speciesof other fruits,* most of them apparently tropical ;these could scarcely have been accumulated, asthey are, without a single leaf of the tree onwhich they grew, and have been associated withdrifted timber bored by Teredines, by any othermeans than a sea current.We have no decisive information as to thenumber of species of these fossil fruits ; theyhave been estimated at from six to seven hundred.!In the same clay with them are foundAccording to M. Ad. Brongniart, many of these have nearrelation to the aromatic fruits of the Amomum (cartoon), theyare triangular, much compressed, and umbilicated at the summit,which presents a small circular areola, apparently the cicatrix ofan adherent calyx ; within are three valves. A slight furrowpasses along the middle of each plain surface, similar to that onthe fruit of many scitamineous plants. These Sheppey fruits,however, cannot be identified with any known Genus of thatFamily, but approach so nearly to it, that Ad. Brongniart givesthem the name of Amomocarpum.f See Parkinson's Organic Remains, Vol. i. PI. 6, 7. Jacob'sFlora Favershamensis. And Dr. Parsons, in Phil. Trans. Lond.1757, Vol. 50, page 396, PI. XV. XVI. An immense collectionof these fruits is preserved in the British Museum, another in theMuseum at Canterbury, and a third in that of Mr. Bowerbank,in London.020 VEGETABLES OF THREE EPOCHS.great numbers of fossil Crustaceans, and also theremains of many fishes, and of Crocodiles, andaquatic Tortoises.As the drifted seeds that occur in Sheppeyseem to have been collected by the action ofmarine currents, the history of European vegetationduring the Tertiary period, must be soughtfor in those other remains of plants, whose stateand circumstances show that they have grownat no great distance from the spot in which theyare now found.*Conclusion.The following is a summary of what is yetknown, respecting the varying conditions of theFlora of the three great periods of Geologicalhistory we have been considering.The most characteristic distinctions betweenthe vegetable remains of these periods are asfollows. In the first period, the predominanceof vascular Cryptogamic, and comparative rarityof Dicotyledonous plants. In the second, the approximationto equality of vascular Cryptogamic,and Dicotyledonous plants. | In the third, thepredominance of Dicotyledonous, and rarity ofThe beautiful Amber, which is found on the eastern shoresof England, and on the Coasts of Prussia and Sicily, and which issupposed to be fossil resin, is derived from beds of Lignite inTertiary strata. Fragments of fossil gum were found near Londonin digging the tunnel through the London clay at Highgate.f The dicotyledonous plants of the Transition and SecondaryNUMBERS OF FOSSIL AND RECENT PLANTS. 5*21vascular Cryptogamic plants. Among existingvegetables almost two thirds are Dicotyledonous.The Remains of Monocotyledonous Plants occur,though sparingly, in each Period of Geologicalformations.The number of fossil plants as yet described isabout five hundred ; nearly three hundred ofthese are from strata of the Transition series ;and almost entirely from the Coal formation.About one hundred are from strata of the Secondaryseries, and more than a hundred from formationsof the Tertiary series. Many additionalspecies have been collected from each of theseseries, but are not yet named.As the known species of living vegetables aremore than fifty thousand, and the study of fossilbotany is as yet but in its infancy, it is probablethat a large amount of fossil species lies hid inthe bowels of the earth, which the discoveries ofeach passing year will be continually bringing tolight.The plants of the First period are in a greatmeasure composed of Ferns, and gigantic ; and of families, of intermediate characterbetween existing forms of Lycopodiaceae andConiferae, e. g. Lepidodendriae, Sigillariae, andStigmatise ; with a few Coniferae.Of plants of the Second period, about one thirdformations present only that peculiar tribe of this class, which ismade up of Cycadese and Conifeice, viz. Gymnospermous Pha-jierogamise. . ,522 PREVAILING FAMILIES IN EACH EPOCH.are Ferns ; and the greatest part of the remainderare, Cycadeae and Coniferae, with a few Lili-aceae. More species of Cycadeae occur amongthe fossils of this period, than are found living onthe present surface of the earth. They form morethan one third of the total known fossil Flora ofthe Secondary formations ; whilst of our actualvegetation, Cycadeae are not one two-thousandthpart.The vegetation of the Third period approximatedclosely to that of the existing surface ofthe globe.Among living families of plants, Sea weeds,Ferns, Lycopodiaceae, Equisetaceae, Cycadeaeand Coniferae, bear the nearest relations to theearliest forms of vegetation that have existed uponour planet.The family which has most universally pervadedevery stage of vegetation is that of Coni-frae; increasing in the number and variety of itsgenera and species, at each successive change inthe climate and condition of the surface of theearth. This family forms about one three-hundredthpart of the total number of existing vegetables.Another family which has pervaded all theSeries of formations, though in small proportions,is that of Palms.The view we have taken, of the connexions betweenthe extinct and living systems of the vegetablekingdom, supplies an extensive fund ofCONNEXION WITH Physico-theology. 523arguments, and lays open a new and large fieldof enquiry, both to the Physiologist, and to thestudent in Physico-theology.In the fossil Flora, we have not only the existingfundamental distinctions between Endogenousand Exogenous plants, but we have alsoagreement in the details of structure, throughoutnumerous families, which indicates the influenceof the same Laws, that regulate the developmentof the living members of the vegetable kingdom.The remains of Fructification, also ; found occasionallywith the plants of all formations, shewstill further, that the principles of vegetable Reproductionhave at all times been the same.The exquisite organizations which are disclosedby the microscope, in that which to the nakedeye is but a log of Lignite, or a lump of Coal, notonly demonstrate the adaptation of means to ends,but the application also of similar means, to effectcorresponding ends, throughout the several Creationswhich have modified the changing forms ofvegetable life.Such combinations of contrivances, varyingwith the varied conditions of the earth, not onlyprove the existence of a Designer from the existenceof method, and design ; but from the Connexionof parts, and Unity of purpose, whichpervade the entirety of one vast, and complex,but harmonious Whole, shew that One, and thesame Mind gave origin and efficacy to them all.CHAPTER XIX.Proofs of Design in the Dispositions of Strataof the Carboniferous Order.In reviewing the History and geological positionof vegetables which have passed into the state ofmineral coal, we have seen that our grand suppliesof fossil fuel are derived almost exclusively fromstrata of the Transition series. Examples ofCoal in any of the Secondary strata are few andinsignificant ; whilst the Lignites of the Tertiaryformations, although they occasionally presentsmall deposits of compact and useful fuel, exertno important influence on the economical conditionof mankind.*Before we had acquired by experiment some extensiveknowledge of the contents of each series of formations which theGeologist can readily identify, there was no a priori reason toexpect the presence of coal in any one Series of strata ratherthan another. Indiscriminate experiments in search of coal, instrata of every formation, were therefore desirable and proper,in an age when even the name of Geology was unknown ; butthe continuance of such Experiments in districts which are nowascertained to be composed of the non-carboniferous strata ofthe Secondary and Tertiary Series, can no longer be justified,since the accumulated experience of many years has proved,that it is only in those strata of the Transition Series which havebeen designated as the Carboniferous Order, that productiveCoal mines on a large scale have ever been discovered.BENEFICIAL DISPOSITION OF COAL STRATA. 525It remains to consider some of the physicaloperations on the surface of the Globe, to whichwe owe the disposition of these precious Relicsof a former world, in a state that affords us accessto inestimable treasure of mineral Coal.We have examined the nature of the ancientvegetables from which Coal derives its origin,and some of the processes through which theypassed in their progress towards their mineralstate. Let us now review some further importantgeological phenomena of the carboniferousstrata, and see how far the utility arising fromthe actual condition of this portion of the crustof the globe, may afford probable evidence thatit is the result of Foresight and Design.It was not enough that these vegetable remainsshould have been transported from theirnative forests, and buried at the bottom of ancientlakes and estuaries and seas, and thereconverted into coal ; it was further necessarythat great and extensive changes of level shouldelevate, and convert into dry and habitable land,strata loaded with riches, that would for everhave remained useless, had they continued entirelysubmerged beneath the inaccessible depths,wherein they were formed ; and it required theexercise of some of the most powerful machineryin the Dynamics of the terrestrial globe, to effectthe changes that were requisite to render theseElements of Art and Industry accessible to the526 IN TROUGHS OR BASINS.labour and ingenuity of man. Let us briefly examinethe results that have been accomplished.The place of the great Coal formation, in relationto the other series of strata, is shewn in ourfirst section (PI. 1. Fig. 14.) This ideal sectionrepresents an Example of dispositions which arerepeated over various areas upon the crust ofthe Globe.*The surface of the Earth is found to be coveredwith a series of irregular depressions or Basins,divided from one another, and sometimes whollysurrounded by projecting portions of subjacentstrata, or by unstratified crystalline rocks, whichhave been raised into hills and mountains, ofvarious degrees of height, direction and continuity.On either side of these more elevatedregions, the strata dip with more or less inclination,towards the lower spaces between onemountain range and another. (See PI. 1.)This disposition in the form of Troughs orBasins, which is common to all formations, hasbeen more particularly demonstrated in the CarboniferousSeries, (See PL 65. Fig. 1, 2, 3.) becausethe valuable nature of beds of Coal oftencauses them to be wrought throughout their wholeextent.The Coal Formation is here represented as having partakenof the same elevator movements, which have raised the strata ofall formations towards the mountain Ridges, that separate onebasin from another basin.OTHER FORMATIONS DISPOSED IN BASINS. 527One highly beneficial result of the basin-shapeddisposition of the Carboniferous stratahas been, to bring them all to the surface aroundthe circumference of each Basin, and to renderthem accessible, by sinking mines in almostevery part of their respective areas ; (See PL 65.Figs. 1, 2, 3.). An uninterrupted inclination inone direction only, would have soon plunged thelower strata to a depth inaccessible to man.The Basin of London, (PL 67.) affords an exampleof a similar disposition of the Tertiary stratareposing on the Chalk. The Basins of Paris,Vienna, and of Bohemia, afford other examplesof the same kind. (See PL 1. Figs. 24—28.)The Secondary and Transition strata of thecentral and North Western districts of England,are marginal portions of the great geological Basinof Northern Europe ; and their continuations arefound in the plains, and on the flanks of mountainregions on the Continent.*These general dispositions of all strata in theThe section (PI. 66. Fig. 1.) shews the manner in which theStrata of the Transition Series are continued downwards betweenthe Coal formation and the older members of the Grauwackeformation, through a series of deposits, to which, Mr. Murchisonhas recently assigned the name of the " Silurian system." ThisSilurian System is represented by No. 11, in our Section, Fig. 1.The recent labours of Mr. Murchison in the border counties ofEngland and Wales have ably filled up what has hitherto been ablank page, in the history of this portion of the vast and importantSystems of Rocks, included under the Transition series ; and528 CAUSES PRODUCING BASINS*form of Troughs or Basins have resulted from twodistinct systems of operations, in the economy ofthe terraqueous globe ; the first producing sedimentarydeposits, (derived from the materials ofolder rocks, and from chemical precipitates,) onthose lower spaces into which the detritus of ancientelevated regions was transported by theforce of water ; the second raising these stratafrom the sub-aqueous regions in which they weredeposited, by forces analogous to those whoseeffect we occasionally witness, in the tremendousmovements of land, that form one of the phenomenaof modern Earthquakes.have shewn us the links which connect the Carboniferous systemwith the older Slaty rocks. The large group of deposits to whichhe has given the appropriate name of Silurian system, (as theyoccupy much of the Territory of the ancient Silures,) admits ofa four-fold division, which is expressed in the section PI 66.Fig. 1. This section represents the exact order of succession ofthese Strata in a district, which must henceforth be classic in theAnnals of Geology.In September, 1835, I found the three uppermost divisions ofthis system, largely developed in the same relative order of successionon the south frontier of the Ardennes, between the greatCoal formation and the Grauwacke. See Proceedings of theMeeting of the Geological Society of France at Mezieres andNamur, Sep. 1835, bulletin de la Societe Geological de France,Tom. VII.) The same subdivisions of the Silurian system, maintaintheir relative place and importance over, a large extent ofthe mountainous district of the Eifel, between the Ardennes andthe Valley of the Rhine ; and are continued East of the Rhinethrough great part of the duchy of Nassau. (See Stiff Gebirgs-Kate, von dem Herzothum-Nassau. Wiesbaden, 1831.)THICKNESS OF COAL REDS. 529I am relieved from the necessity of enteringinto details respecting the history of the CoalFields of our own country, by the excellentsummary of what is known upon this interestingsubject, which has recently been given in a judiciousand well selected anonymous publication,entitled The History and Description of FossilFuel, the Collieries, and Coal Trade of GreatBritain. London, 1835.The most remarkable accumulations of thisimportant vegetable production in England arein the Wolverhampton and Dudley Coal Field,(PL 65, Fig. 1,) where there is a bed of coal, tenyards in thickness. The Scotch Coal field nearPaisley presents ten beds, whose united thicknessis one hundred feet. And the South WelshCoal Basin (PI. 65, Fig. 2,) contains, near Pontypool,twenty-three beds of coal, amounting togetherto ninety-three feet.In many Coal fields, the occurrence of richbeds of iron ore in the strata of slaty clay, thatalternate with the beds of coal, has rendered theadjacent districts remarkable as the site of mostimportant Iron foundries ; and these localities,as we have before stated, (p. 65,) usually presenta further practical advantage, in having beneaththe Coal and Iron ore, a substratum of Limestone,that supplies the third material required as aflux to reduce this ore to a metallic state.Our section, PI. 65, Fig. 1, illustrates the re-G. MMIRON ASSOCIATED WITH COAL.suit of these geological conditions in enrichingan important district in the centre of England,near Birmingham, with a continuous successionof Coal mines, and Iron foundries. A similarresult has followed from the same causes, on thenorth-east frontier of the enormous Coal basin ofSouth Wales, in the well-known Iron foundries,near Pontypool and Merthyr Tydfil,* (See PI.65, Fig. 2.) The beds of shale in the lower re-In the Transactions of the Natural History Society of Northumberland,Durham, and Newcastle, vol. i. p. 114, it is statedby Mr. Forster, that the quantity of iron annually manufacturedin Wales is about 270,000 tons, of which about three-fourths aremade into bars, and one-fourth sold as pigs and castings. Thequantity of coal required for its manufacture will be about fivetons and a half, for each ton of iron. The annual consumptionof coals by the iron works will therefore be about 1,500,000 tons.The quantity used in the smelting of copper ore imported fromCornwall, in the manufacture of tin plate, forging of iron forvarious purposes, and for domestic uses, may be calculated at350,000 tons, which makes altogether the annual consumptionof coal in Wales 1,850,000 tons. The quantity of iron manufacturedin Great Britain in the year 1827 was 690,000 tons.The production of this immense quantity was thus distributed,TONS.FURNACESn Staffordshire216,000 .95Shropshire .78,000 .31S. Wales . .272,000 .90N. Wales . .24,000 .12Yorkshire43,000 .24Derbyshire .20,500 .14Scotland . .36,500 .18690,000EFFECTS OF COAL ON HUMAN INDUSTRY. 531lion of this coal field are abundantly loaded withnodules of argillaceous iron ore, and below theseis a bed of millstone grit capable of enduring thefire, and used in constructing the furnaces ; stilllower is the limestone necessary to produce thefusion of the ore. PL 65, Figs. 1, 2.The great iron foundries of Derbyshire, Yorkshire,and the South of Scotland, afford other examplesof the beneficial results of a similar juxtaposition,of rich argillaceous iron ore and coal.The occurrence of this most useful of metals,"says Mr. Conybeare,* " in immediate connexionwith the fuel requisite for its reduction, and thelimestone which facilitates that reduction, is aninstance of arrangement so happily suited to thepurposes of human industry, that it can hardlybe considered as recurring unnecessarily to finalcauses, if we conceive that this distribution ofthe rude materials of the earth was determinedwith a view to the convenience of its inhabitants."Let us briefly consider what is the effect ofmineral fuel, on the actual condition of mankind.The mechanical power of coals is illustrated in astriking manner, in the following statement inSir J. F. W. Herschel's admirable Discourse onthe study of Natural Philosophy, 1831, p. 59."It is well known to modern engineers thatGeology of England and Wales, p. 333,5.32 POWER OF STEAM ENGINES.there is virtue in a bushel of coals, properly consumed,to raise seventy millions of pounds weighta foot high. This is actually the average effect ofan engine at this moment working in Cornwall.The ascent of Mont Blanc from Chamouniis considered, and with justice, as the most toilsomefeat that a strong man can execute in twodays. The combustion of two pounds of coalwould place him on the summit."The power which man derives from the use ofmineral coal, may be estimated by the duty*The number of pounds raised, multiplied by the numberof feet through which they are lifted, and divided by the numberof bushels of coal (each weighing eighty-four pounds) burnt inraising them, gives what is termed the duty of a steam engine, andis the criterion of its power. (See an important paper on improvementsof the steam engine, by Davies Gilbert, Esq. Phil.Trans. 1830, p. 121.)It is stated by Mr. J. Taylor, in his paper on the duty of steamengines, published in his valuable Records of Mining, 1829, thatthe power of the steam engine has within the last few years beenso advanced by a series of rapid improvements, that whereas, inearly times, the duty of an atmospheric engine was that of5,000,000 pounds of water, lifted one foot high by a bushel ofcoal, the duty of an engine lately erected at Wheal To wan inCornwall, has amounted to 87,000,000 pounds; or, in otherwords, that a series of improvements has enabled us to extractas much power from one bushel, as originally could be donefrom seventeen bushels of coal. Thus, through the instrumentalityof coal as applied in the steam engine, the power of manover matter has been increased seventeen fold since the first inventionof these engines ; and increased nearly threefold withintwenty years.There is now an engine at the mines called the Fowey ConsolsMINES AND MACHINERY. 533done by a pound, or any other given weight ofcoal consumed in working a steam engine ; sincethe quantity of water that the engine will raiseto a given height, or the number of quarters ofcorn that it will grind, or, in short, the amountof any other description of work that it will doisproportionate to that duty. As the principalworking of mineral veins can only be continuedby descending deeper every year, the difficultyof extracting metals is continually on the increase,and can only be overcome by those enimCornwall, of which Mr. Taylor considers the average duty,under ordinary circumstances, to be above 90.000,000 ; and whichhas been made to lift 97,000,000 lbs of water one foot high, withone bushel of coals.The effect of these improvements on the operations of mines,in facilitating their drainage, has been of inestimable importancein extracting metals from depths which otherwise could neverhave been reached. Mines which had been stopped from wantof power, have been reopened, others have been materially deepened,and a mass of mineral treasure has been rendered available,which without these engines must have been for ever inaccessible.It results from these rapid advances in the application ofcoal to the production of power, and consequently of wealth, thatmining operations of vast importance, have been conducted inCornwall at depths till lately without example, e. g. in WhealAbraham, at 242 fathoms, at Dolcoath at 235 fathoms, and in theConsolidated Mines in Gwennap at 290 fathoms, the latter minesgiving daily employment to no less than 2,500 persons.In the Consolidated Mines, the power of nine steam engines,four of which are the largest ever made, having cylinders ninetyinches in diameter, lifts from thirty to fifty hogsheads of waterper minute, (varying according to the season) from an average534 WORK DONE BY STEAM ENGINES.large powers of draining which Coal, and thesteam engine, alone supply. It would be quiteimpossible to procure the fuel necessary for theseengines, from any other source than mineral coal.The importance of Coal should be estimated,not only by the pecuniary value of the metalsthus produced, but by their further and moreimportant value, when applied to the infinitelyvaried operations and productions of machineryand of the arts.It has been calculated that in this country about15,000 steam engines are daily at work ; one ofthose in Cornwall is said to have the power of athousand horses,* the power of each horse, accordingto Mr. Watt, being equal to that of fiveand a half men ; supposing the average power ofeach steam engine to be that of twenty-five horses,we have a total amount of steam power equal tothat of about two millions of men. When we con-depthof 230 fathoms. The produce of these mines has latelyamounted to more than 20,000 tons of ore per annum, yieldingabout 2,000 tons of fine copper, being more than one seventhof the whole quantity raised in Britain. The levels or galleriesin these mines extend in horizontal distance a length of about 43miles. (See J. Taylor's account of the depths of mines, thirdreport of British Association, 1833, p. 428.)Mr. J. Taylor further states, (Lond. Edin. Phil. Mag. Jan.1836, p. 67) that the steam engines now at work in draining themines in Cornwall, are equal in power to at least 44,000 horses,one sixteenth part of a bushel of coals performing the work of ahorse.When Engineers speak of a 25 horse Engine, they mean oneVARIOUS APPLICATIONS OF STEAM. 535side, that a large proportion of this power is appliedto move machinery, and that the amount ofwork now done by machinery in England, hasbeen supposed to be equivalent to that of betweenthree and four hundred millions of men by directlabour, we are almost astounded at the influenceof Coal and Iron and Steam, upon the fate andfortunes of the human race. " It is on the rivers,"(says Mr. Webster,) " and the boatmanmay repose on his oars ; it is in high ways, andbegins to exert itself along the courses of landconveyances ; it is at the bottom of mines, athousand (he might have said, 1800) feet belowthe earth's surface ; it is in the mill, and in theworkshops of the trades. It rows, it pumps, itexcavates, it carries, it draws, it lifts, it hammers,it spins, it weaves, it prints"*We need no further evidence to shew that thepresence of coal is, in an especial degree, thewhich would do the work of that number of horses constantlyacting, but supposing that the same horses could work only 8hours in every 24, there must be 15 horses kept at least to producethe effect of such an Engine.The largest Engine in Cornwall may, if worked to the full extent,be equal to from a 300 to 350 horse power, and would thereforerequire 1000 horses to be kept to produce the same constanteffect. In this way it has been said that an Engine was of 1000horse power, but this is not according to the usual computation.Letter from J. Taylor, Esq. to Dr. Auckland.As there is no reproduction of Coal in this country, since nonatural causes are now in operation to form other beds of it ;whilst, owing to the regular increase of our population, and the536 COAL THE FOUNDATION OF STEAM POWER.foundation of increasing population, riches, andpower, and of improvement in almost every Artwhich administers to the necessities and comfortsof Mankind. And, however remote maynew purposes to which the steam engine is continually applied,its consumption is advancing at a rapidly accelerating rate; it is ofmost portentous interest to a nation, that has so large a portion ofits inhabitants dependent for existence on machinery, kept in actiononly by the use of coal, to economize this precious fuel. Icannot, therefore, conclude this interesting subject without makingsome remarks upon a practice which can only be viewed in the lightof a national calamity, demanding the attention of the legislature.We have, during many years witnessed the disgraceful andalmost incredible fact, that more than a million chaldron perannum, being nearly one third part of the best coals producedby the mines near Newcastle, have been condemned to wantonwaste, on a fiery heap perpetually blazing near the mouth ofalmost every coal pit in that district.This destruction originated mainly in certain legislative enactments,providing that Coal in London should be sold, and theduty upon it be rated, by measure, and not by weight. Thesmaller Coal is broken, the greater the space it fills ; it became,therefore, the interest of every dealer in Coal, to buy it of as largea size, and to sell it of as small a size as he was able. This compelledthe Proprietors of the Coal-mines to send the large Coalonly to market, and to consign the small Coal to destruction.In the year 1830, the attention of Parliament was called tothese evils ; and pursuant to the Report of a Committee, the dutyon Coal was repealed, and Coal directed to be sold by weightinstead of measure. The effect of this change has been, that aconsiderable quantity of Coal is now shipped for the LondonMarket, in the state in which it comes from the pit; that afterlanding the cargo, the small coal is separated by screening fromthe rest, and answers as fuel for various ordinary purposes, aswell as much of the Coal which was sold in London before thealteration of the law.PROSPECTIVE VIEW TO THE USES OF MAN. 537have been the periods, at which these materials offuture beneficial dispensations were laid up instore, we may fairly assume, that, besides theimmediate purposes effected at, or before the timeThe destruction of Coals on the fiery heaps near Newcastle,although diminished, still goes on, however, to a frightful extent,that ought not to be permitted ; since the inevitable consequenceof this practice, if allowed to continue, must be, in no long spaceof time, to consume all the beds nearest to the surface, andreadiest of access to the coast ; and thus enhance the price ofCoal in those parts of England which depend upon the Coalfieldof Newcastle for their supply ; and finally to exhaust thisCoal-field, at a period, nearer by at least one third, than that towhich it would last, if wisely economized. (See Report of theSelect Committee of the House of Commons, on the state ofthe Coal Trade, 1830, page 242. and Bakewell's Introductionto Geology, 1833, page 183 and 543.)We are all fully aware of the impolicy of needless legislativeinterference; but a broad line has been drawn by nature betweencommodities annually or periodically reproduced by the Soil onits surface, and that subterranean treasure, and sustaining foundationof Industry, which is laid by Nature in strata of mineral Coal,whose amount is limited > and which, when once exhausted, is gonefor ever. As the Law most justly interferes to prevent the wantondestruction of life and property, it should seem also to be itsduty to prevent all needless waste of mineral fuel ; since the exhaustionof this fuel would irrecoverably paralyze the industryof millions. The Tenant of the soil may neglect, or cultivate hislands, and dispose of his produce, as caprice or interest maydictate ; the surface of his fields is not consumed, but remainssusceptible of tillage by his successor ; had he the physicalpower to annihilate the Land, and thereby inflict an irremediableinjury upon posterity, the legislature would justly interfere toprevent such destruction of the future resources of the nation.This highly favoured Country, has been enriched with mineraltreasures in her strata of Coal, incomparably more precious than538 PROSPECTIVE VIEW TO THE USES OF MAX.of their deposition in the strata of the Earth, anulterior prospective view to the future uses ofMan, formed part of the design, with which theywere, ages ago, disposed in a manner so admirablyadapted to the benefit of the Human Race.mines of silver or of gold. From these sustaining sources ofindustry and wealth let us help ourselves abundantly, and liberallyenjoy these precious gifts of the Creator ; but let us not abusethem, or by wilful neglect and wanton waste, destroy the foundationsof the Industry of future Generations.Might not an easy remedy for this evil be found in a Legislativeenactment, that all Coals from the Ports of Northumberlandand Durham, should be shipped in the state in which theycome from the Pit, and forbidding by high penalties thescreening of any Sea-borne Coals before they leave the Port atwhich they are embarked. A Law of this kind would at onceterminate that ruinous competition among the Coal owners,which has urged them to vie with each other in the wastefuldestruction of small Coal, in order to increase the Profits ofthe Coal Merchants, and gratify the preference for large Coalson the part of rich consumers ; and would also afford the Publicasupply of Coals of every price and quality, which the use ofthe screen would enable him to accommodate to the demands ofthe various Classes of the Community.A farther consideration of national Policy should prompt us toconsider, how far the duty of supporting our commercial interests,and of husbanding the resources of posterity should permitus to allow any extensive exportation of Coal, from a denselypeopled manufacturing country like our own ; a large proportionof whose present wealth is founded on machinery, which can bekept in action only by the produce of our native Coal Mines,and whose prosperity can never survive the period of their exhaustion.53.9Chapter XXProofs of Design in the Effects of DisturbingForces on the Strata of the Earth.In the proofs of the agency of a wise, andpowerful, and benevolent Creator, which wehave derived from the Animal and Vegetablekingdoms, the evidence has rested chiefly onthe prevalence of Adaptations and Contrivances,and of Mechanisms adapted to the production ofcertain ends, throughout the organic remains ofa former world.An argument of another kind may be foundedon the Order, Symmetry, and Constancy, of theCrystalline forms of the unorganized Mineralingredients of the Earth. But in consideringthe great geological phenomena which appearin the disposition of the strata, and their variousaccidents, a third kind of evidence arises fromconditions of the earth, which are the result ofdisturbing forces, that appear to a certain degreeto have acted at random and fortuitously.Elevations and subsidence, inclinations andcontortions, fractures and dislocations, are phenomena,which, although at first sight they presentonly the appearance of disorder and ORDER AMIDST APPARENT CONFUSION.fusion, yet when fully understood, demonstratethe existence of Order, and Method, and Design,even in the operations of the most turbulent,among the many mighty physical forces whichhave affected the terraqueous globe.*Some of the most important results of the actionof these forces have been already noticed in" Notwithstanding the appearances of irregularity and confusionin the formation of the crust of our globe, which arepresented to the eye in the contemplation of its external features,Geologists have been able in numerous instances to detect, inthe arrangement and position of its stratified masses, distinctapproximations to geometrical laws. In the phenomena of anticlinallines, faults, fissures, mineral veins, &c. such laws areeasily recognized." Hopkins's Researches in Physical Geology.Trans. Cambridge Phil. Soc. v. 6. part 1. 1835.It scarcely admits of a doubt," says the author of an ablearticle in the Quarterly Review, (Sept. 1826, p. 537,) " that theagents employed in effecting this most perfect and systematicarrangement have been earthquakes, operating with differentdegrees of violence, and at various intervals of time, during alapse of ages. The order that now reigns has resulted therefore,from causes which have generally been considered as capableonly of defacing and devastating the earth's surface, but whichwe thus find strong grounds for suspecting were, in the primevalstate of the globe, and perhaps still are, instrumental in its perpetualrenovation. The effects of these subterranean forcesprove that they are governed by general laws, and that theselaws have been conceived by consummate wisdom and forethought."'•' Sources of apparent derangement in the system appear, whentheir operation throughout a series of ages is brought into oneview, to have produced a great preponderance of good, and to begoverned by fixed general laws, conducive, perhaps essential, tothe habitable state of the globe." Ibid. p. 539.UTILITY OF FAULTS AND DISLOCATIONS. 541our fourth and fifth chapters ; and our first Section,PL 1, illustrates their beneficial effect, inelevating and converting into habitable Lands,strata of various kinds that were formed at thebottom of the ancient Waters ; and in diversifyingthe surface of these lands with Mountains,Plains, and Valleys, of various productive qualities,and variously adapted to the habitation ofMan, and the inferior tribes of terrestrial animals.In our last Chapter we considered the advantagesof the disposition of the Carboniferousstrata in the form of Basins. It remains to examinethe further advantages that arise fromother disturbances of these strata by Faults orFractures, which are of great importance in facilitatingthe operations of Coal mines ; and toextend our inquiry into the more general effectof similar Dislocations of other strata, in producingconvenient receptacles for many valuableMetallic ores, and in regulating the supplies ofWater from the interior of the earth, throughthe medium of Springs.I have elsewhere observed* that the occurrenceof Faults, and the Inclined position inwhich the strata composing the Coal measuresare usually laid out, are facts of the highestimportance, as connected with the accessibilityof their mineral contents. From their inclinedInaugural Lecture, Oxford, 1819.•542 BENEFICIAL EFFECTS OF UNDULATIONS.position, the thin strata of Coal are worked withgreater facility than if they had been horizontal ;but as this inclination has a tendency to plungetheir lower extremities to a depth that wouldbe inaccessible, a series of Faults, or Traps, isinterposed, by which the component portions ofthe same formation are arranged in a series ofsuccessive tables, or stages, rising one behindanother, and elevated continually upwards towardsthe surface, from their lowest points ofdepression. (See PI. 65. Fig. 3. and PI. 60.Fig. 2.) A similar effect is often produced byUndulations or contortions of the strata, whichgive the united advantage of inclined positionand of keeping them near the surface. TheBasin-shaped structure which so frequently occursin coal fields, has a tendency to producethe same beneficial consequences. (See PL 65.Figs. 1. 2. 3.)But a still more important benefit results fromthe occurrence of Faints or Fractures,* withoutwhich the contents of many deep and rich mines" Faults," says Mr. Conybeare, " consist of fissures traversingthe strata, extending often for several miles, and penetratingto a depth, in very few instances ascertained; they areaccompanied by a subsidence of the strata on one side of theirline, or (which amounts to the same thing) an elevation of themon the other; so that it appears, that the same force which hasrent the rocks thus asunder, has caused one side of the fracturedmass to rise, or the other to sink. — The fissures are usually filledby clay." Geology of England and Wales, Part I. p. 348.BENEFICIAL EFFECTS OF FAULTS. 543would have been inaccessible. (See PI. 65. Fig.3. and PI. 66. Fig. 2.) Had the strata of Shaleand Grit, that alternate with the Coal, been continuouslyunited without fracture, the quantity ofwater that would have penetrated from the surroundingcountry, into any considerable excavationsthat might be made in the porous grit beds,would have overcome all power of machinerythat could profitably be applied to the drainageof a mine ; whereas by the simple arrangementof a system of Faults, the water is admitted onlyin such quantities as are within control. Thusthe component strata of a Coal field are dividedinto insulated masses, or sheets of rock, of irregularform and area, not one of which is continuousin the same plane over any very largedistrict ; but each is usually separated from itsnext adjacent mass, by a dam of clay, impenetrableto water, and filling the fissure producedby the fracture which caused the Fault. (SeePI. 66. Fig. 2. and PI. 1. Figs. I,— I, 7.)If we suppose a thick sheet of Ice to be brokeninto fragments of irregular area, and these fragmentsagain united, after receiving a slight degreeof irregular inclination to the plane of theoriginal sheet, the reunited fragments of ice willrepresent the appearance of the component portionsof the broken masses, or sheets of Coalmeasures we are describing. The interveningportions of more recent Ice, by which they are544 DRAINAGE OF COAL MINES.held together, represent the clay and rubbishthat fill the Faults, and form the partition wallsthat insulate these adjacent portions of strata,which were originally formed, like the sheet ofIce, in one continuous plane. Thus, each sheetor inclined table of Coal measures, is inclosed bya system of more or less vertical walls of brokenclay, derived from its argillaceous shale beds, atthe moment in which the Fracture and Dislocationtook place ; and hence have resulted thosejoints and separations, which, though they occasionallyinterrupt at inconvenient positions,and cut off suddenly the progress of the collier,and often shatter those portions of the strata thatare in immediate contact with them, yet are in themain his greatest safeguard, and are indeed essentialto his operations.*These same Faults also, whilst they preventthe Water from flowing in excessive quantities in" If a field of coal (says Mr. Buddha) abounding in water,was not intersected with slip Dykes, the working of it might beimpracticable, as the whole body of water which it might containwould flow uninterruptedly into any opening which might bemade into it ; these Faults operate as Coffer Dams, and separatethe field of coal into districts." — Letter from Mr. John Buddha,an eminent Engineer and experienced Coal Viewer at Newcastle,to Prof. Auckland, Nov. 30, 1831.In working a Coal Pit, the Miner studiously avoids comingnear a Fault, knowing that if he should penetrate this naturalbarrier, the Water from the other side will often burst in, andinundate the works he is conducting on the dry side of it.A shaft was begun about the year 1825 at Gosport, near New-faultsPRODUCE SPRINGS-545situations where it would be detrimental, are atthe same time of the greatest service, in convertingit to purposes of utility, by creating onthe surface a series of Springs along the line ofFault, which often give notice of the Fracture thathas taken place beneath. This important effectof Faults on the hydraulic machinery of the globeextends through stratified rocks of every formation.(See PI. 69. Fig. 2.) It is also probablethat most of the Springs, that issue fromunstratified rocks, are kept in action through theinstrumentality of the Faults by which they areintersected.A similar interruption of continuity in themasses of Primary rocks, and in the rocks ofintermediate age between these and the Coalformation, is found to occur extensively in theworking of metallic veins. A vein is often cut offsuddenly by a Fault, or fracture, crossing it trans-castle,on the wet side of the 90 fathom Dyke, and was soinundated with water that it was soon found necessary to abandonit. Another shaft was then begun on the dry side of the dyke,only a few yards from the former, and in this they descendednearly 200 fathoms without any impediment from water.Artificial dams are sometimes made in coal mines to performthe office of the natural barriers which Dykes and Faultssupply. A dam of this kind was lately made near Manchester,by Mr. Hilton, to cut off water that descended from the upperregion of porous strata, which dipped towards his excavations inalower region of the same strata, the continuity of which wasthus artificially interrupted.G. N N546 FAULTS INTERSECT METALLIC VEINS.herself, and its once continuous portions arethrown to a considerable distance from eachother. This line of fracture is usually markedby a wall of clay, formed probably by the abrasionof the rocks whose adjacent portions havebeen thus dislocated. Such faults are known inthe mines of Cornwall by the term Jiucan, andthey often produce a similar advantage to thosethat traverse the Coal measures, in guarding theminer from inundation, by a series of naturaldams traversing the rocks in various directions,and intercepting all communication between thatmass in which he is conducting his operations,and the adjacent masses on the other side of thelucan or dam.*It may be added also, that the Faults in a Coalfield,by interrupting the continuity of the bedsof coal, and causing their truncated edges to abutagainst those of uninflammable strata of shale or" My object is rather to suggest whether the arrangementof veins, &c. does not argue design and a probable connectionwith other phenomena of our Globe.Metalliferous veins, and those of quartz, &c. appear to bechannels for the circulation of the subterraneous water andvapour; and the innumerable clay veins, or " lucan courses"(as they are termed in Cornwall), which intersect them, and areoften found contained in them, being generally impervious towater, prevent their draining the surface of the higher groundsas they otherwise would, and also facilitate the working of minesto a much greater depth than would be practicable withoutthem." R. W. Fox on the Mines of Cornwall, Phil. Trans.1830, jo. 404.FINAL CAUSES. 547grit, afford a preservative against the ravages ofaccidental Fire beyond the area of that sheet inwhich it may take its beginning ; but for sucha provision, entire Coal fields might be occasionallyburnt out and destroyed.It is impossible to contemplate a disposition ofthings, so well adapted to afford the materialsessential to supply the first wants, and to keepalive the industry of the Inhabitants of ourearth ; and entirely to attribute such a dispositionto the blind operation of Fortuitous causes. Althoughindeed it be dangerous hastily to haverecourse to Final causes, yet since in manybranches of physical knowledge, (more especiallyin those which relate to organized matter,)the end of many a contrivance is better understood,than the contrivance itself, it would surelybe as unphilosophical to hesitate at the admissionof final Causes, when the general tenor and evidenceof the Phenomena naturally suggest them,as it would be to introduce them gratuitouslyunsupported by such evidence. We may surelytherefore feel ourselves authorized to view, inthe Geological arrangements above described, asystem of wise and benevolent Contrivances, prospectivelysubsidiary to the wants and comfortsof the future inhabitants of the globe ; and extendingonwards, from its first Formation, throughthe subsequent Revolutions and Convulsions thathave affected the surface of our Planet.548 MINERAL VEINS.Chapter XXI.Advantageous Effect of Disturbing Forces ingiving Origin to Mineral Veins *A further result attending the Disturbances ofthe surface of the Earth has been, to produceRents or Fissures in the Rocks which have beensubjected to these violent movements, and toconvert them into receptacles of metallic ores,accessible by the labours of man. The greaterpart of metalliferous veins originated in enormouscracks and crevices, penetrating irregularly andobliquely downwards to an unknown depth, andresembling the rents and chasms which are producedby modern Earthquakes. The generaldisposition of mineral veins within these narrowfissures, will be best understood by reference toour first Section. (PL 1 . Figs, k 1 .— k 24.) Thenarrow lines which pass obliquely from the lowerto the upper portion of this Section, representthe manner in which Rocks of various ages areintersected by fissures, which have become theReceptacles of rich Treasures of Metallic Ore.These fissures are more or less filled with variousforms of metalliferous and earthy minerals,See PI. 1. Figs, k l.—k 24, and PI. 67. Fig. 3.VEINS MOST FREQUENT IN THE OLDER ROCKS. 549deposited in successive, and often correspondinglayers on each side of the vein.Metallic Veins are of most frequent occurrencein rocks of the Primary and Transition series,particularly in those lower portions of stratifiedrocks which are nearest to unstratified crystallinerocks. They are of rare occurrence inSecondary formations, and still more so in Tertiarystrata.*M. Dufrenoy has recently shewn that the mines of Haematiteand Spathic iron in the Eastern Pyrenees, which occur inLimestones of three ages, referable severally to the TransitionSeries, to the Lias, and to the Chalk, are all situated in parts,where these Limestones are in near contact with the Granite ;and he considers that they have all most probably been filled bythe sublimation of mineral matter into cavities of the limestones,at, or soon after the time of the Elevation of the Granite of thispart of the Pyrenees. The period of this elevation was posteriorto the deposit of the Chalk formation, and anterior to that ofthe Tertiary Strata. These Limestones have all become crystallinewhere they are in contact with the Granite ; and the Ironis in some places mixed with Copper pyrites, and Argentiferousgalena. (Memoire sur la Position des Mines de Fer de la Partieorientale des Pyrenees, 1834.)According to the recent observations of Mr. C. Darwin, theGranite of the Cordilleras of Chili (near the Uspellata Pass)which forms peaks of a height probably of 14,000 feet, has beenfluid in the Tertiary period ; and Tertiary strata which havebeen rendered crystalline by its heat, and are traversed by dykesfrom the granitic mass, are now inclined at high angles, andform regular, and complicated anticlinal lines. These same sedimentarystrata, and also lavas are there traversed by very numeroustrue metallic veins of iron, copper, arsenic, silver, andgold, and these can be traced to the underlying granite. (Lond.and Edin. Phil. Mag. N. S. Vol. 8, p. 158.)550 WIDTH OF METALLIC VEINS.A few metals are occasionally, though rarely,found disseminated through the substance ofRocks. Thus Tin is sometimes found disseminatedthrough Granite, and Copper throughthe cupriferous slate at the base of the Hartz,at Mansfeld, &c.The most numerous and rich of the metallicveins in Cornwall, and in many other miningdistricts, are found near the junction of theGranite with the incumbent Slates. These varyin width from less than an inch to thirty feetand upwards ; but the prevailing width, both ofTin and Copper Veins in that county, is fromone to three feet ; and in these narrower veins,the Ore is less intermixt with other substances,and more advantageously wrought.*Several hypotheses have been proposed toAn excellent illustration of the manner in which metallicveins are disposed in the Rocks which form their matrix, maybefound in Mr. R. Thomas's geological Report, accompaniedby a Map and Sections of the mining district near Redruth.This map comprehends the most interesting spot of all themining districts in Cornwall, and exhibits in a small compass themost important phenomena of metallic veins, slides, and crosscourses, all of them penetrating to an unknown depth, and continuinguninterruptedly through Rocks of various ages. In PI.67, Fig. 3, I have selected from this work a section, which exhibitsan unusually dense accumulation of veins producing Tin,Copper, and Lead.Much highly valuable information on these subjects mayshortly be expected from the Geological Survey of Cornwall,now in progress by Mr. De la Beche, under the appointment ofthe Board of Ordnance.THEORIES OF METALLIC VEINS. 551explain the manner in which these chasms insolid rocks have become filled with metallicores, and with earthy minerals, often of a differentnature from the rocks containing them.Werner supposed that veins were supplied bymatter descending into them from above, in astate of aqueous solution ; whilst Hutton, and hisfollowers, imagined that their contents were injectedfrom below, in a state of igneous fusion.A third hypothesis has been recently proposed,which refers the filling of veins to a process ofSublimation from subjacent masses of intenselyheated mineral matter, into apertures and fissuresof the superincumbent Rocks.* A fourth hypothesisconsiders veins to have been slowly filledby Segregation, or infiltration ; sometimes intocontemporaneous cracks and cavities, formedIn the London and Edin. Phil. Mag. March, 1829, p. 172,Mr. Patterson has published the result of his experiments inmaking artificial Lead Ore (Galena) in an Earthen tube, highlyheated in the middle. After causing the steam of water to pass overa quantity of Galena, placed in the hottest portion of this tube, thewater was decomposed, and all the Galena had been sublimed fromthe heated part, and deposited again in colder parts of the tube, incubes which exactly resembled the original Ore. No pure Leadwas formed. From this deposition of Galena, in a highly crystallineform, from its vapour in contact with steam, he draws theimportant conclusion, that Galena might, in some instances, havebeen supplied to mineral veins by sublimation from below.Dr. Daubeny has found by a recent experiment that if steambe passed through heated Boracic Acid, it takes up and carriesalong with it a portion of the Acid, which per se does not sublime.This experiment illustrates the sublimation of Boracic Acidin volcanic craters.552 THEORIES OF METALLIC VEINS.during the contraction and consolidation of theoriginally soft substances of the rocks themselves ;and more frequently into fissures produced bythe fracture and dislocation of the solid strata.Segregation of this kind may have taken placefrom electro-chemical agency, continued duringlong periods of time.*The total quantity of all metals known toexist near the surface of the Earth (exceptingIron,) being comparatively small, and theirvalue to mankind being of the highest order,as the main instruments by the aid of which heemerges from the savage state, it was of theutmost importance, that they should be disposedin a manner that would render them accessibleby his industry ; and this object is admirablyattained through the machinery of metallic veins.The observations of Mr. Fox on the electro-magnetic propertiesof metalliferous veins in Cornwall, (Phil. Trans. 1830, &c.)seem to throw new light upon this obscure and difficult subject.And the experiments of M. Becquerel on the artificial productionof crystallized insoluble compounds of Copper, Lead, Lime, &c.by the slow and long continued reaction and transportation ofthe elements of soluble compounds, (see Becquerel, Traite deelectricity, T. i. c. 7, page 547, 1834,) appear to explain manychemical changes that may have taken place under the influenceof feeble electrical currents in the interior of the earth, and moreespecially in Veins.I have been favoured by Professor Wheatstone with the followingbrief explanation of the experiments here quoted.When two bodies, one of which is liquid, react very feeblyon each other, the presence of a third body, which is either aconductor of electricity, or in which capillary action supplies theADVANTAGEOUS DISPOSITION OF METALS. 553Had large quantities of metals existed throughoutRocks of all formations, they might havebeen noxious to vegetation ; had small quantitiesbeen disseminated through the Body ofthe Strata, they would never have repaid the costof separation from the matrix. These inconveniencesare obviated by the actual arrangement,under which these rare substances are occasionallycollected together in the natural Magazinesafforded by metallic veins.In my Inaugural Lecture (page 12) I havespoken of the evidences of design and benevolentcontrivance, which are apparent in the originalformation and disposition of the repositories ofminerals ; in the relative quantities in which theyare distributed ; in the provisions that are madeto render them accessible, at a certain expenceplace of conductibility, opens a path to the electricity resultingfrom the chemical action, and a voltaic current is formed whichserves to augment the energy of the chemical action of the twobodies. In ordinary chemical actions, combinations are effectedby the direct reaction of bodies on each other, by which all theirconstituents simultaneously concur to the general effect; but inthe mode considered by Becquerel the bodies in the nascentstate, and excessively feeble forces, are employed, by which themolecules are produced, as it were, one by one, and are disposedto assume regular forms, even when they are insoluble, becausethe number of the molecules cannot occasion any disturbance intheir arrangement. By the application of these principles, thatis, by the long-continued action of very feeble electrical currents,this author has shewn that many crystallized bodies, hithertofound only in nature, may be artificially obtained."554 DESIGN IN THE DISPOSITION OF MINERALS.of human skill and industry, and at the sametime secure from wanton destruction, and fromnatural decay ; in the more general dispersion ofthose metals which are most important, and thecomparatively rare occurrence of others whichare less so ; and still further in affording themeans whereby their compound ores may be reducedto a state of purity.*The argument, however, which arises fromthe utility of these dispositions, does not dependon the establishment of any one or more ofthe explanations proposed to account for them.Whatever may have been the means wherebyI owe to my friend Mr. John Taylor the suggestion of anotherargument, arising from the phenomena of mines, which derivesmuch value from being a result of the long experience of apractical man of science.There is one argument," says Mr. Taylor, " which has alwaysstruck me with considerable force, as proving wise and beneficentdesign, to be drawn from the position of the metals. I shouldsay that they are so placed as to be out of the reach of immediateand improvident exhaustion, exercising the utmost ingenuity ofman, first to discover them, then to devise means of conqueringthe difficulties by which the pursuit of them is surrounded.Hence a continued supply through successive ages, and hencemotives to industry and to the exercise ot mental faculties, fromwhich our greatest happiness is derived. The metals might havebeen so placed as to have been all easily taken away, causing aglut in some periods and a dearth in others, and they might havebeen accessible without thought, or ingenuity,As they are, there appears to me to be that accordance withthe perfect arrangements of an anywise Creator, which it is sobeautiful to observe and to contemplate."PROSPECTIVE PROVISION FOR MAN. 555mineral veins were charged with their preciouscontents ; whether Segregation, or Sublimation,were the exclusive method by which the metalswere accumulated ; or, whether each of the supposedcauses may have operated simultaneouslyor consecutively in their production ; the existenceof these veins remains a fact of the highestimportance to the human race : and although theDisturbances, and other processes in which theyoriginated, may have taken place at periods longantecedent to the creation of our species, we mayreasonably infer, that a provision for the comfortand convenience of the last, and most perfectcreatures He was about to place upon its surface,was in the providential contemplation of theCreator, in his primary disposal of the physicalforces, which have caused some of the earliest,and most violent Perturbations of the globe.*That part of the History of Metals which relates to theirvarious Properties and Uses, and their especial Adaptation to thePhysical condition of Man, has been so ably and amply illustratedby two of my Associates in this Series of Treatises, that Ihave more satisfaction in referring my readers to the Chapters ofDr. Kidd and Dr. Prout upon these subjects than in attemptingmyself to follow the history of the productions of metallic veins,beyond the sources from which they are derived within the bodyof the Earth.A summary of the all-important Uses of Metals to Mankindis thus briefly given, by one of our earliest and most original writerson Physico-theology.As for Metals, they are so many ways useful to mankind,and those Uses so well known to all, that it would be lost labourChapter XXII.Adaptations of the Earth to afford supplies ofvater through the medium of Springs.As the presence of water is essential both toanimal and vegetable existence, the adjustmentof the Earth's surface to supply this necessaryfluid, in due proportion to the demand, affordsone of the many proofs of Design, which arise outof the investigation of its actual condition, and ofits relations to the organized beings which areplaced upon it.to say anything of them : without the use of these we could havenothing of culture or civility : no Tillage or Agriculture ; noReaping or Mowing ; no Ploughing or Digging ; no Pruning orLoping ; no Grafting or Position ; no mechanical Arts or Trades ;no Vessels or Utensils of Household-stuff; no convenient Housesor Edifices ; no Shipping or Navigation. What a kind of barbarousand sordid life we must necessarily have lived, the Indiansin the Northern part of America are a clear demonstration.Only it is remarkable that those which are of most frequent andnecessary use, as Iron, Brass and Lead, are the most commonand plentiful : others that are more rare, may better be spared,yet are they thereby qualified to be made the common measureand standard of the value of all other commodities, and so toserve for Coin or Money, to which use they have been employedby all civil Nations in all Ages." Ray's Wisdom of God in theCreation. Pt. i. 5th ed. 1709, p. 110.FUNCTIONS OF THE ATMOSPHERE. 557Nearly three fourths of the Earth being coveredwith Sea, whilst the remaining dry landisin need of continual supplies of water, for thesustenance of the animal and vegetable kingdoms,the processes by which these supplies arerendered available for such important purposes,form no inconsiderable part of the beautiful andconnected mechanisms of the terraqueous Globe.The great Instrument of communication betweenthe surface of the Sea, and that of theLand, is the Atmosphere, by means of which aperpetual supply of fresh water is derived froman Ocean of salt water, through the simple processof evaporation .By this process, water is incessantly ascendingin the state of Vapour, and again descending inthe form of Dew and Rain.Of the water thus supplied to the surface ofthe land, a small portion only returns to the Seadirectly in seasons of flood through the channelsof Rivers ;*A second portion is re-absorbed into the Atmosphereby Evaporation ;A third portion enters into the composition ofAnimal and Vegetable bodies ;It is stated by M. Arago, that one third only of the waterwhich falls in rain, within the basin of the Seine, flows by thatriver into the sea : the remaining two thirds either return intothe atmosphere by evaporation, or go to the support of vegetableand animal life, or find their way into the sea by subterraneouspassages. Annuaire, pour lean 1835.558 PERPETUAL CIRCULATION OF WATER.A fourth portion descends into the strata, andis accumulated in their interstices into subterraneoussheets and reservoirs of water, from whichit is discharged gradually at the surface in theform of perennial Springs, that form the ordinarysupply of Rivers.As soon as Springs issue from the Earth, theirwaters commence their return towards the Sea ;rills unite into streamlets, which, by further accumulationform rivulets and rivers, and at lengthterminate in estuaries, where they mix again withtheir parent ocean. Here they remain, bearingpart in all its various functions, until they areagain evaporated into the Atmosphere, to passand repass through the same Cycles of perpetualcirculation.The adaptations of the Atmosphere to thisimportant service in the economy of the Globebelong not to the province of the geologist. Ourtask is limited to the consideration of the mechanicalarrangements in the solid materials ofthe Earth, by means of which they co-operatewith the Atmosphere, in administering to thecirculation of the most important of all fluids.There are two circumstances in the conditionof the strata, which exert a material influencein collecting subterraneous stores of water, fromwhich constant supplies are regularly giving forthin the form of springs ; the first consists in theAlternation of porous beds of sand and stone,ALTERNATIONS OF CLAY WITH POROUS STRATA. 559with strata of clay that are impermeable bywater ;* the second circumstance is the Dislocationof these strata, resulting from Fractures andFaults.The simplest condition under which water iscollected within the Earth, is in superficial bedsof Gravel which rest on a sub-stratum of anykind of Clay. The Rain that falls upon a bed ofgravel sinks down through the interstices of thegravel, and charges its lowest region with a subterraneoussheet of water, which is easily penetratedby wells, that seldom fail except in seasonsof extreme drought. The accumulations of thisw r ater are relieved by Springs, overflowing fromthe lower margin of each bed of gravel.A similar result takes place in almost allkinds of permeable strata, which have beneaththem a bed of clay, or of any other impermeablematerial. The Rain water descends and accumulatesin the lower region of each porousstratum next above the clay, and overflows in thesame manner by perennial springs. Hence thenumerous alternations of porous beds with bedsimpenetrable to water, that occur throughout theentire series of stratified rocks, produce effectsof the highest consequence in the hydraulic conditionof the Earth, and maintain an universalsystem of natural Reservoirs, from which waterSee pp. 70, 71.500 SPRINGS CAUSED BY FAULTS.overflows incessantly in the form of Springs, thatcarry with them fertility into the adjacent valleys.(See PL 67, fig. 1, S.)The discharges of water from these reservoirsare much facilitated, and increased in number,by the occurrence of Faults or Fractures that intersectthe strata.*There are two systems of Springs which havetheir origin in Faults, the one supplied by waterdescending from the higher regions of strata adjacentto a fault, by which it is simply interceptedin its descent, and diverted to the surface in theform of perennial springs ; (see PL 67, fig. 1, H.)the other maintained by water ascending frombelow by Hydrostatic pressure, (as in ArtesianWells,) and derived from strata, which at theircontact with the fault, are often at a great depth ;Mr. Townshend, in his Chapter on Springs, states, that thereare six distinct systems of springs in the neighbourhood of Bath,which issue from as many regular strata of subterraneous water,formed by filtration through either sand or porous rocks, andplaced each upon its subjacent bed of clay. From these, onesystem of springs is produced by overflowing in the directiontowards which the strata are inclined, or have their dip ; whilstanother system results from the dislocation of the strata, andbreaks out laterally through the fractures by which they are intersected.It is stated by Mr. Hopkins, (Phil. Mag. Aug. 1834, p. 131),that all the great springs in the Lime-stone District of Derbyshireare found in conjunction with great Faults, " I do not recollect(says he) a single exception to this rule, for I believe in every instancewhere I observed a powerful spring, I had independentevidence of the existence of a great fault."RISE OF WATER BY HYDROSTATIC PRESSURE. 561the water is conducted to this depth either bypercolation through pores and crevices, or bysmall subterraneous channels in these strata, frommore elevated distant regions, whence it descends,until its progress is arrested by the Fault. (SeePL 67. Fig. 2, d, and PL 69. Fig. 2, H. L.)Besides the advantages that arise to the wholeof the Animal Creation, from these dispositionsin the structure of the Earth, whereby naturalsupplies of water are multiplied almost to infinityover its surface, a further result, of vast and peculiarimportance to Man, consists in the facilitieswhich are afforded him of procuring artificialwells, throughout those parts of the world whichare best adapted for human habitation.The Causes of the rise of water in ordinaryartificial wells, are the same that regulate itsdischarge from the natural apertures which giveorigin to springs ; and as both these effects willbe most intelligibly exemplified, by a considerationof the causes of the remarkable ascent ofwater to the surface, and often above the surface,in those peculiar perforations which are calledArtesian Wells, our attention may here be profitablydirected to their history.Artesian Wells.The name of Artesian Wells is applied to perpetuallyflowing artificial fountains, obtained byboring a small hole, through strata that are des.o o562 ARTESIAN WELLS.titute of water, into lower strata loaded with subterraneoussheets of this important fluid, whichascends by hydrostatic pressure, through pipeslet down to conduct it to the surface. The nameis derived from Artois (the ancient Artesian,)where the practice of making such wells has foralong time extensively prevailed.*The manner of action of an Artesian Well is explained bythe Section PI. 69. Fig. 3, copied from M. Hericart de Thurn'srepresentation of a double Fountain at St. Open, which bringsup water, from two water-bearing strata at different levels belowthe surface. In this double fountain, the ascending forces ofthe water in the two strata A and B are different ; the waterfrom the lowest stratum B rising to the highest level b" ; thatfrom the upper stratum A rising only to a. The water fromboth strata is thus brought to the surface by one Bore Hole ofsufficient size to contain a double pipe, viz. a smaller pipe includedwithin a larger one, with an interval between them forthe passage of water ; thus, the smaller pipe b brings up thewater of the lower stratum B, to the highest level of the fountainb", whilst the larger pipe a brings up the water from stratum Ato the lower level a : both these streams are employed to supplythe Canal-basin at St. Open, above the level of the Seine.Should the lower stratum B contain pure water, and that in theupper stratum A be tainted, the pure water might by this apparatusbe brought to the surface through the impure, withoutcontact or contamination.In common cases of Artesian wells, where a single pipe aloneis used, if the Boring penetrates a bed containing impure water ;it is continued deeper until it arrives at another stratum containingpure water ; the bottom of the pipe being plunged into thispure water, it ascends within it, and is conducted to the surfacethrough whatever impurities may exist in the superior strata.The impure water, through which the boring may pass in its descent,being excluded by the pipe from mixing with the purewater ascending from below.ARTESIAN WELLS. 503Artesian Wells are most available, and of thegreatest use, in low and level districts wherewater cannot be obtained from superficial springs,or by ordinary wells of moderate depth. Fountainsof this kind are known by the name of Slowwells, on the Eastern coast of Lincolnshire, in thelow district covered by clay between the Woldsof Chalk near Louth, and the Sea shore. Thesedistricts were without any springs, until it wasdiscovered that by boring through this clay to thesubjacent Chalk, a fountain might be obtained,which would flow incessantly to the height ofseveral feet above the surface.In the King's well at Sheerness sunk in 1781through the London clay, into sandy strata of thePlastic clay formation, to the depth of 330 feet,the water rushed up violently from the bottom,and rose within eight feet of the surface. (SeePhil. Trans. 1784.) In the years 1823 and 1829two more perfect Artesian wells were sunk nearlyto the same depth in the Dock yards at Portsmouthanil Gosport.Wells of this kind have now become frequentin the neighbourhood of London, where perpetualFountains are in some places obtained by deepperforations through the London clay, into porousbeds of the Plastic clay formation, or into theChalk.*One of the first Artesian wells near London was that ofNorland House on the N. W. of Holland House, made in 1794,564 ARTESIAN WELLS.Important treatises upon the subject of ArtesianWells have lately been published by M. Hericartde Thurn and M. Arago in France, and by M. Vonand described in Phil. Trans. London. 1797. The water of thiswell was derived from sandy strata of the plastic clay formation,but so much obstruction by sand attends the admission of water tothe pipes from this formation, that it is now generally found moreconvenient to pass lower through these sandy strata, and obtainwater from the subjacent chalk. Examples of wells that rise tothe surface of the lowest tract of land on the W. of London maybeseen in the Artesian fountain in front of the Episcopal palaceat Fulham, and in the garden of the Horticultural Society.Many such fountains have been made in the Town of Brentford,from which the water rises to the height of a few feet above thesurface.This height is found to diminish as the number of perpetuallyflowing fountains increases ; and a general application of themwould discharge the subjacent water so much more rapidly thanit arrives through the interstices of the chalk, that fountains ofthis kind when numerous would cease to overflow, although thewater within them would rise and maintain its level nearly at thesurface of the land.The Section, PI. 68 is intended to explain the cause of the riseof water in Artesian Wells in the Basin of London, from permeablestrata in the Plastic-clay formation, and subjacent Chalk.The water in all these strata is derived from the rain, which fallson those portions of their surface that are not covered by theLondon Clay, and is upheld by clay beds of the Gault, beneaththe Chalk and Fire-stone. Thus admitted and sustained, itaccumulates in the joints and crevices of these strata to theline A. B. at which it overflows by springs, in valleys, such asthat represented in our section under C. Below this line, allthe permeable strata must be permanently filled with a subterraneansheet of water, except where faults and other disturbingcauses afford local sources of relief. Where these reliefs do notinterfere, the horizontal line A, B, represents the level to whichwater would rise by hydrostatic pressure, in any perforationsARTESIAN WELLS. 565Bfuckmann in Germany.* It appears that thereare extensive districts in various parts of Europe,where, under certain conditions of geologicalstructure, and at certain levels, artificial fountainswill rise to the surface of strata which throwout no natural springs,! and will afford abundantsupplies of water for agricultural and domesticthrough the London Clay, either into sandy beds of the PlasticClay formation, or into the Chalk ; such as those represented atD. E. F. G. H. I. If the Perforation be made at G. or H. wherethe surface of the country is below the line A. B. the water willrise in a perpetually flowing Artesian fountain, as it does in thevalley of the Thames between Brentford and London.See Hericart de Thurn's Considerations sur la cause duJaillissement des Eaux des puts fores, 1829.Notices scientifiques par M. Arago. Annuaire, pour 1' An. 1835.Von Bruckmann tiber Artesische Drunken. Heilbronn amNeckar, 1833.f The Diagrams in PI. 69, Figs. 1 and 2. are constructed toillustrate the causes of the rise of water in natural, or artificialsprings, within basin-shaped strata that are intersected by thesides of Valleys, or traversed by Faults.Supposing a Basin (PI. 69 Fig. 1.) composed of permeablestrata, E. F. G. alternating with impermeable strata, H. I. K. L.to have the margin of all these strata continuous in all directionsat one uniformly horizontal level A, B, the water whichfalls in rain upon the extremities of the strata E, F, G, would accumulatewithin them, and fill all their interstices with water uptothe line A, B ; and if a Pipe were passed down through theupper, into either of the lower strata, at any point within thecircumference of this basin, the water would rise within it to thehorizontal line A, B, which represents the general level of themargin of the Basin. A disposition so regular never exists innature, the extremities or outcrops of each stratum are usuallyat different levels, (Fig. 1 . a. c. e. g.) In such cases the line a. b.560 ARTESIAN WELLS.purposes and sometimes even for moving machinery.The quantity of water thus obtained inArtois is often sufficient to turn the wheels ofCorn mills.In the Tertiary basin of Perpignan and thechalk of Tours, there are almost subterraneanrivers having enormous upward pressure. TheWater of an Artesian well in Roussillon risesfrom 30 to 50 feet above the surface. At Perpignanand Tours, M. Arago states that thewater rushes up with so much force, that arepresents the water level within the stratum G ; below this line,water would be permanently present in G ; it could never riseabove it, being relieved by springs that would overflow at a.The line, c. d. represents the level above which the water couldnever rise in the stratum F ; and the line e, f, represents thehighest water level within the stratum E. The discharge of allrain waters that percolated the strata E, F, G, thus being effectedby overflowing at e. c. a.If common wells were perforated from the surface, i. k. 1. intothe strata G. F. E, the water would rise within them only to thehorizontal lines a b, c d, e f.The upper porous stratum C, also, would be permanentlyloaded with water below the horizontal line, g, h, and permanentlydry above it.The theoretical section, PI. 69. fig. 2. represents a portion of abasin intersected by the fault Hel, filled with matter impermeableto water. Supposing the lower extremities of the inclined andpermeable strata N, O, P, Q, R, to be intersected by thefault or dyke H, L, the rain water which enters the uncoveredportions of these strata, between the impermeable clay beds,A,B, C, D, E, would accumulate in the permeable strata up tothe horizontal lines, A A", B B", C C", D D", E E". If an Artesianwell was perforated into each of these strata to A, B', C,ARTESIAN WELLS. 567Cannon Ball placed in the Pipe of an ArtesianWell is violently ejected by the ascending stream.In some places application has been made toeconomical purposes, of the higher temperatureof the water rising from great depths. In NurembergVon Bruckmann has applied the warmwater of Artesian wells to heat a paper manufactoryat Heilbronn, and to prevent the freezingof common water around his mill wheels. Thesame practice is also adopted in Alsace, andat Constant near Stuttgart. It has even beenD', E', through the clay beds A, B, C, D, E, the water fromthese beds would rise within a pipe ascending from the perforation,to the levels A", B", C", D", E".These theoretical Results can never occur to the extent hererepresented, in consequence of the intersections of the strata byvalleys of Denudation, the irregular interposition of Faults, andthe varying conditions of the matter composing Dykes.If a valley were excavated in the stratum M below A", the waterof this stratum would overflow into the bottom of this valley, andwould never rise on the side of the fault so high as the level H.Wherever the contact of the Dyke H, L, with the strataM, N, O, P, Q, R, that are intersected by it, is imperfect, an issueis formed, through which the water from these inclined strata willbe discharged at the surface by a natural Artesian well ; hence aseries of Artesian springs will mark the line of contact of theDyke with the fractured edges of the strata from which the waterrises, and the level of the water within these strata will be alwaysapproximating to that of the springs at H ; but as the permeabilityof Dykes varies in different parts of their course, theireffect in sustaining water within the strata adjacent to them,must be irregular, and the water line within these strata will varyaccording to circumstances, between the highest possible levels,A, B, C, D, E, and the lowest possible level H.508 ARTESIAN WELLS.proposed to apply the heat of ascending springsto the warming of green houses. Artesian wellshave long been used in Italy, in the duchy ofModena ; they have also been successfully appliedin Holland, China,* and N. America. Bymeans of similar wells, it is probable that watermay be raised to the surface of many parts ofthe sandy deserts of Africa and Asia, and it hasbeen in contemplation to construct a series ofAn economical and easy method of sinking Artesian Wellsand boring for coal, &c, has recently been practised near Saar-brick,by M. Sellow. Instead of the tardy and costly processof boring with a number of Iron Rods screwed to each other, oneheavy Bar of cast Iron about six feet long and four inches indiameter, armed at its lower end with a cutting Chisel, and surroundedby a hollow chamber, to receive through valves, andbring up the detritus of the perforated stratum, is suspended fromthe end of a strong rope, which passes over a wheel or pulleyfixed above the spot in which the hole is made. As this ropeis raised up and down over the wheel, its portion gives to theBar of Iron a circular motion, sufficient to vary the place of thecutting Chisel at each descent.When the chamber is full, the whole apparatus is raisedquickly to the surface to be unloaded, and is again let down bythe action of the same wheel. This process has been long practisedin China, from whence the report of its use has beenbrought to Europe. The Chinese are said to have bored in thismanner to the depth of 1000 feet. M. Sellow has with this instrumentlately made perforations 18 inches in diameter, andseveral hundred feet deep, for the purpose of ventilating coalmines at Saarbriick. The general substitution of this methodfor the costly process of boring with rods of iron, may be ofmuch public importance, especially where water can only beobtained from great depths.ARTESIAN WELLS. 569these wells along the main road which crossesthe Isthmus of Suez.I have felt it important thus to enter into thetheory of Artesian Wells, because their morefrequent adoption will add to the facilities ofsupplying fresh Water in many regions of theEarth, particularly in low and level districts,where this prime necessary of Life is inaccessibleby any other means ; and because the theory oftheir mode of operation explains one of the mostimportant and most common contrivances in thesubterraneous economy of the Globe, for the productionof natural springs.By these compound results of the original dispositionof the strata and their subsequent disturbances,the entire Crust of the Earth has becomeone grand and connected Apparatus of HydraulicMachinery, cooperating incessantly with the Seaand with the Atmosphere, to dispense unfailingsupplies of fresh Water over the habitable surfaceof the Land.*Among the incidental advantages arising toMan from the introduction of Faults and Dislocationsof the strata, into the system of curiousarrangements that pervade the subterranean ecolecauses of intermitting Springs, and ebbing and flowingwells, and many minor irregularities in the Hydraulic Actionof natural vents of water, depend on local Accidents, such as theinterposition of Syphons, Cavities, &c, which are scarcely of sufficientimportance to be noticed, in the general view we are heretaking of the Causes of the Origin of Springs.570 HYDltAULIC ADJUSTMENTS.nome of the Globe, we may further include thecircumstance, that these fractures are the mostfrequent channels of issue to mineral and thermalwaters, whose medicinal virtues alleviatemany of the diseases of the Human Frame.*Thus in the whole machinery of Springs andRivers, and the apparatus that is kept in actionfor their duration, through the instrumentalityof a system of curiously constructed hills andvalleys, receiving their supply occasionally fromthe rains of heaven, and treasuring it up in theireverlasting storehouses to be dispensed perpetuallyby thousands of never-failing fountains, wesee a provision not less striking, than it isimportant. So also in the adjustment of therelative quantities of Sea and Land, in such dueproportions as to supply the earth by constantevaporation, without diminishing the waters ofthe ocean ; and in the appointment of the Atmosphereto be the vehicle of this wonderful andunceasing circulation ; in thus separating thesewaters from their native salt, (which though ofthe highest utility to preserve the purity of theDr. Daubeny has shewn that a large proportion of thethermal springs with which we are acquainted, arise throughfractures situated on the great lines of dislocation of the strata.See Daubeny on Thermal Springs, Edin. Phil. Jour. April,1832, p. 49.Professor Hoffman has given examples of these fractures inthe axis of valleys of elevation, through which chalybeate watersrise at Vermont, and in other valleys of Westphalia. See PI.67, fig. 2.UNORGANIZED MINERAL BODIES. 571sea, renders them unfit for the support of terrestrialanimals or vegetables), and transmittingthem in genial showers to scatter fertility overthe earth, and maintain the never-failing reservoirsof those springs and rivers by which theyare again returned to mix with their parentocean ; in all these circumstances we find suchevidence of nicely balanced adaptation of meansto ends, of wise foresight, and benevolent intention,and infinite power, that he must be blindindeed, who refuses to recognize in them proofsof the most exalted attributes of the Creator"*Chapter XXIII.Proofs of Design in the Structure and Compositionof unorganized Mineral Bodies.Much of the physical history of the compoundforms of unorganized mineral bodies, has beenanticipated in the considerations given in ourearly chapters to the unstratified and crystallinerocks. It remains only to say a few wordsrespecting the simple minerals that form theingredients of these rocks, and the elementarybodies of which they are composed. fAuckland, Inaug. Lecture, p. 13.f The term simple mineral is applied not only to uncombinedmineral substances, which are rare in Nature, such as pure native572 PROOFS OF DESIGNIn crossing a heath," (says Paley,) " supposeI pitched my foot against a stone, and wereasked how the stone came to be there ; I mightpossibly answer, that, for any thing I knew tothe contrary, it had lain there for ever : nor wouldit perhaps be very easy to show the absurdity ofthis answer"*Nay says the Geologist, for if the stone were apebble, the adventures of this pebble may havebeen many and various, and fraught with recordsof physical events, that produced importantchanges upon the surface of our planet ; and itsrolled condition implies that it has undergoneconsiderable locomotion by the action of water.gold or silver, but also to all kinds of compound mineral bodiesthat present a regular crystalline structure, accompanied by definiteproportions of their chemical ingredients. The differencebetween a simple mineral and a simple substance may be illustratedby the case of calcareous spar, or crystallized carbonateof lime. The ultimate elements, viz. Calcium, Oxygen, andCarbon, are simple substances ; the crystalline compound resultingfrom the union of these elements, in certain definite proportions,forms a simple mineral, called Carbonate of lime. Thetotal number of simple minerals hitherto ascertained according toBerzelius is nearly six hundred, that of simple substances, orelementary principles, is fifty-four.I have quoted this passage, not in disparagement of the generalargument of Paley, which is altogether independent of theincidental and needless comparison with which he has prefacedit, but to show the importance of the addition, that has beenmade by the discoveries of Geology and Mineralogy, to the evidenceof the non-eternity of the earth, which so great a masterpronounced to be imperfect, for lack of such information as thesemodern sciences have recently supplied.IN SIMPLE MINERALS. 573Or, should the stone be Sandstone, or part ofany Conglomerate, or fragmentary stratum, madeup of the rounded detritus of other rocks, theingredients of such a stone would bear similar evidenceof movements by the force of water, whichreduced them to the state of sand, or pebbles, andtransported them to their present place, beforethe existence of the stratum of which they formapart ; consequently no such stratum can havelain in its present place for ever.Again, should the supposed stone contain withinit the petrified remains of any fossil Animal orfossil Plant, these would not only show that animaland vegetable life had preceded the formationof the rock in which they are embedded ;but their organic structure might afford examplesof contrivance and design, as unequivocally attestingthe exercise of Intelligence and Power, asthe mechanism of a Watch or Steam engine, orany other instrument produced by human art,bears evidence of intention and skill in theworkman who invented and constructed them.Lastly, should it even be Granite,, or anycrystalline Primary Rock, containing neitherorganic remains, nor fragments of other rocksmore ancient than itself, it can still be shown thatthere was a time when even stones of this classhad not assumed their present state, and consequentlythat there is not one of them, which canhave existed, where they now are, for ever. The574 PROOFS OF DESIGNMineralogist has ascertained that Granite is acompound substance, made up of three distinctand dissimilar simple mineral bodies, Quartz, Felspar,and Mica, each presenting certain regularcombinations of external form and internal structure,with physical properties peculiar to itself.And Chemical Analysis has shewn that these severalbodies are made up of other bodies, all ofwhich had a prior existence in some more simplestate, before they entered on their present unionin the mineral constituents of what are supposedto be the most ancient rocks accessible to humanobservation. The Crystallographer also has furthershewn that the several ingredients of Granite,and of all other kinds of Crystalline Rocks arecomposed of Molecules which are invisibly minute,and that each of these Molecules is madeup of still smaller and more simple Molecules,every one of them combined in fixed and definiteproportions, and affording at all the successivestages of their analysis, presumptive proof thatthey possess determinate geometrical figures.These combinations and figures are so far from indicatingthe fortuitous result of accident, that theyare disposed according to laws the most severelyrigid, and in proportions mathematically exact.*The above Paragraphs of this Chapter excepting the first,are taken almost verbatim from the Author's MS. Notes of hisLectures on Mineralogy, bearing the date of June 1822, andhe has adhered more closely to the form under which they SIMPLE MINERALS. 575The Atheistical Theory assuming the gratuitouspostulate of the eternity of matter and motion,would represent the question thus. All matter,it would contend, must of necessity have assumedsome form or other, and therefore may fortuitouslyhave settled into any of those under which itactually appears. Now, on this hypothesis, weought to find all kinds of substances presentedoccasionally under an infinite number of externalforms, and combined in endless varieties of indefiniteproportions ; but observation has shewnthat crystalline mineral bodies occur under afixed and limited number of external forms calledsecondary, and that these are constructed on aseries of more simple primary forms, which aredemonstrable by cleavage and mechanical division,without chemical analysis : the integrantmolecules* of these primary forms of crystals arepear, than he might otherwise have done, for the sake of showingthat no part of them has been suggested by any recent publications; and that the views here taken have not originated inexpress considerations called forth by the occasion of the presentTreatise, but are the natural result of ordinary serious attentionto the phenomena of Geology and Mineralogy, viewed in theirconjoint relations to one another, and of enquiry pursued a fewsteps further beyond the facts towards the causes in which theyoriginated.Ce que j'ai dit de la forme deviendra encore plus evident,si, en penetrant dans le mechanism intime de la structure, onconceit tous ces crista comme des assemblages de moleculesintegrantes parfaitement semblables par leurs formes, et subordinates,a un arrangement regular. Ainsi, au lieu queene *576 PROOFS OF DESIGNusually compound bodies, made up of an ulteriorseries of constituent molecules, i. e. molecules ofthe first substances obtained by chemical analysis; and these in many cases are also compoundbodies, made up of the elementary molecules, orfinal indivisible atoms,* of which the ultimateparticles of matter are probably composed. tetude superficially des crista n'y laissait voir que des singularityde la nature, une etude approfondie nous conduit a cetteconsequence que le meme Dieu dont la puissance et la sagesseont sounds la course des astres a des lois qui ne se dependentjamais, en a aussi etabli auxquelles ont obey avec la meme fidelityles molecules qui se sont denies pour donner naissance auxcorps caches dans les retracted du globe que nous habits.Hay. Tableau comparative des Results de la Cristallographieet de V Analyse Chimique. P. xvii." We seem to be justified in concluding, that a limit is to beassigned to the divisibility of matter, and consequently that wemust suppose the existence of certain ultimate particles, stamped,as Newton conjectured, in the beginning of time by the hands ofthe Almighty with permanent characters, and retaining the exactsize and figure, no less than the other more subtle qualities and relationswhich were given to them at the first moment of their creation.The particles of the several substances existing in nature maythus deserve to be regarded as the alphabet, composing the greatvolume which records the wisdom and goodness of the Creator."Daubeny's Atomic Theory, p. 107.f We may once for all illustrate the combinations of exact andmethodical arrangements under which the ordinary crystallineforms of minerals have been produced, by the phenomena of asingle species ; viz. the well-known substance of Carbonate ofLime.We have more than five hundred varieties of secondary formspresented by the crystals of this abundant earthy mineral. Ineach of these we trace a five-fold series of subordinate relationsIN SIMPLE MINERALS. 577When we have in this manner traced back allkinds of mineral bodies, to the first and mostsimple condition of their component Elements,we find these Elements to have been at all timesregulated by the self-same system of fixed anduniversal laws, which still maintains the mechanismof the material world. In the operationof these laws we recognize such direct and constantsubserviency of means to ends, so much ofharmony, and order, and methodical arrangement,in the physical properties and proportional quantities,and chemical functions of the inorganicof one system of combinations to another system, under whichevery individual crystal has been adjusted by laws, acting correctivelyto produce harmonious results.Every crystal of Carbonate of Lime is made up of millions ofparticles of the same compound substance, having one invariableprimary form, viz. that of a rhomboidal solid, which may beobtained to an indefinite extent by mechanical division.The integrant molecules of these rhomboidal solids form thesmallest particles to which the Limestone can be reduced withoutchemical decomposition.The first result of chemical analysis divides these integrantmolecules of Carbonate of Lime into two compound substances,namely, Quick Lime and Carbonic Acid, each of which is madeup of an incalculable number of constituent molecules.A further analysis of these constituent molecules shews thatthey also are compound bodies, each made up of two elementarysubstances, viz. the Lime made up of elementary molecules ofthe metal Calcium, and Oxygen ; and the Carbonic Acid, ofelementary molecules of Carbon and Oxygen.These ultimate molecules of Calcium Carbon, and Oxygen,form the final indivisible atoms into which every secondary crystalof Carbonate of Lime can be resolved.G. P P578 PROOFS OF DESIGNElements, and we further see such convincingevidence of intelligence and foresight in theadaptation of these primordial Elements to aninfinity of complex uses, under many future systemsof animal and vegetable organizations, thatwe can find no reasonable account of the existenceof all this beautiful and exact machinery,if we accept not that which would refer its originto the antecedent Will and Power of a SupremeCreator ; a Being, whose nature is confessedlyincomprehensible to our finite faculties, but whomthe " things which do appear" proclaim to besupremely Wise, and Great, and Good.To attribute all this harmony and order to anyfortuitous causes that would exclude Design,would be to reject conclusions founded on thatkind of evidence, on which the human mind reposeswith undoubting confidence in all the ordinarybusiness of life, as well as in physical andmetaphysical investigations. " Si nondum officersprotest concursus atomorum, cur portico, curtemplum, cur domus, cur urbem non protest ? quaesunt minus opera et multo quidem faciliora."*Such was the interrogatory of the RomanMoralist, arising from his contemplation of theobvious phenomena of the natural world ; andthe conclusion of Bentley from a wider view ofmore recondite phenomena, in an age remarkablefor the advancement of some of the highestCicero de Natura Deorura, lib. ii. 37.IN SIMPLE MINERALS. 579branches of Physical Science, has been mostabundantly confirmed by the manifold discoveriesof a succeeding century. We therefore ofthe present age have a thousand additional reasonsto affirm with him, that " though universalmatter should have endured from everlasting,divided into infinite particles in the Epicureanway, and though motion should have been coevaland coeternal with it ; yet those particles or atomscould never of themselves, by omnifarious kindsof motion, whether fortuitous or mechanical, havefallen, or been disposed into this or a like visiblesystem"* — Bentley, Seem. vi. of Atheism, p. 192.Dr. Prout has pursued this subject still further in the thirdChapter of his Bridgewater Treatise, and shewn that the molecularconstitution of matter with its admirable adaptations to theeconomy of the natural world, cannot have endured from eternity,and is by no means a necessary condition of its existence ; buthas resulted from the Will of some intelligent and voluntaryAgent, possessing power commensurate with his Will.In the first Section of his fourth Chapter the same author hasalso so clearly shown the great extent to which several of the mostcommon mineral substances e. g. lime, magnesia, and iron, enterinto the composition of animal and vegetable bodies, and has sofully set forth the evidences of design in the constitution and propertiesof the few simple substances, viz. fifty-four Elementaryprinciples, into some one or more of which the component materialsof all the three great kingdoms of Nature can be resolved,that I deem it superfluous to repeat in another form, the substanceof arguments which have been so well and fully drawnby my learned Colleague, from those phenomena of the mineralElements, which form no small part of the evidence afforded bythe Chemistry of Mineralogy, in proof of the Wisdom, and Power,and Goodness of the Creator.580 PROOFS OF THE EXISTENCE OF A DEITY.Chapter XXIV.Conclusion.In our last Chapter we have considered the Natureof the Evidence afforded by unorganizedmineral bodies, in proof of the existence of designin the original adaptation of the material Elementsto their various functions, in the inorganicand organic departments of the Natural World,and have seen that the only sufficient Explanationwe can discover, of the orderly and wonderfuldispositions of the material Elements " inmeasure and number and weight," throughoutthe terraqueous globe, is that which refers theorigin of every thing above us, and beneath us,and around us, to the will and workings of OneOmnipotent Creator. If the properties impartedto these Elements at the moment of their Creation,adapted them beforehand to the infinity ofcomplicated useful purposes, which they havealready answered, and may have further still toanswer, under many successive Dispensations inthe material World, such an aboriginal constitutionso far from superseding an intelligent Agent,would only exalt our conceptions of the consummateskill and power, that could comprehendTERRESTRIAL ADAPTATIONS. 581such an infinity of future uses under future systems,in the original groundwork of his Creation.In an early part of our Enquiry, we tracedback the history of the Primary rocks, whichcomposed the first solid materials of the Globe, toa probable condition of universal Fusion, incompatiblewith the existence of any forms of organiclife, and saw reason to conclude that asthe crust of the Globe became gradually reducedin temperature, the unstratified crystalline rocks,and stratified rocks produced by their destruction,were disposed and modified, during long periodsof time, by physical forces, the same in kind withthose which actually subsist, but more intense intheir degree of operation ; and that the result hasbeen to adapt our planet to become the receptacleof divers races of vegetable and animalbeings, and finally to render it a fit and convenienthabitation for Mankind.We have seen still further that the surface ofthe Land, and the Waters of the Sea have duringlong periods, and at distant intervals of time,preceding the Creation of our species, beenpeopled with many different races of Vegetablesand Animals, supplying the place of otherraces that had gone before them ; and in allthese phenomena, considered singly, we havefound evidence of Method and Design. Wehave moreover seen such a systematic recurrenceof analogous Designs, producing various ends by582 UNITY OF THE DEITY.various combinations of Mechanism, multipliedalmost to infinity in their details of application,yet all constructed on the same few commonfundamental principles which pervade the livingforms of organized Beings, that we reasonablyconclude all these past and present contrivancesto be parts of a comprehensive and connectedwhole, originating in the Will and Power of oneand the same Creator.Had the number or nature of the materialElements appeared to have been different underformer conditions of the Earth, or had the Lawswhich have regulated the phenomena of inorganicmatter, been subjected to change at variousEpochs, during the progress of the manyformations of which Geology takes cognizance,there might indeed have been proofs of Wisdomand Power in such unconnected phenomena, butthey would have been insufficient to demonstratethe Unity and Universal Agency of the sameeternal and supreme First Cause of all things.Again, had Geology gone no further than toprove the existence of multifarious examples ofDesign, its evidences would indeed have beendecisive against the Atheist ; but if such Designhad been manifested only by distinct and dissimilarsystems of Organization, and independentMechanisms, connected together by no analogies,and bearing no relations to one another, or to anyexisting types in the Animal or Vegetable king-unityOF THE DEITY. 583dons, these demonstrations of Design, althoughaffording evidence of Intelligence and Power,would not have proved a common origin in theWill of one and the same Creator ; and the Polytheistmight have appealed to such non-accordantand inharmonious systems, as affordingindications of the agency of many independentIntelligences, and as corroborating his theory ofa plurality of Gods.But the argument which would infer an Unityof cause, from unity of effects, repeated throughvarious and complex systems of organizationwidely remote from each other in time and placeand circumstances, applies with accumulativeforce, when we not only can expand the details offacts on which it is founded, over the entire surfaceof the present world, but are enabled tocomprehend in the same category all the variousextinct forms of many preceding systems of organization,which we find entombed within thebowels of the Earth. It was well observed byPaley, respecting the variations we find in livingspecies of Plants and Animals, in distant regionsand under various climates, that " We never getamongst such original or totally different modesof Existence, as to indicate that we are come intothe province of a different Creator, or under thedirection of a different Will"* And the veryPaley Nat. Theol. p. 450. Chap, on the Unity of the Deity.584 UNITY OF THE DEITY.extensive subterranean researches that have morerecently been made, have greatly enlarged therange of Facts in accordance with those onwhich Paley grounded this assertion.In all the numerous examples of Design whichwe have selected from the various animal andvegetable remains, that occur in a fossil state,there is such a never failing Identity in thefundamental principles of their construction, andsuch uniform adoption of analogous means, toproduce various ends, with so much only of departurefrom one common type of mechanism, aswas requisite to adapt each instrument to its ownespecial function, and to fit each Species to itspeculiar place and office in the scale of createdBeings, that we can scarcely fail to acknowledgein all these facts, a Demonstration of the Unityof the Intelligence, in which such transcendantHarmony originated ; and we may almost dareto assert that neither Atheism nor Polytheismwould ever have found acceptance in the World,had the evidences of high Intelligence and ofUnity of Design, which are disclosed by moderndiscoveries in physical science, been fully knownto the Authors, or the Abettors of Systems towhich they are so diametrically opposed. " Itis the same hand writing that we read, thesame system and contrivance that we trace, thesame unity of object, and relation to finalcauses, which we see maintained throughout,PROOFS OF CREATION AND BEGINNING. 585and constantly proclaiming the Unity of the greatdivine Original"*It has been stated in our Sixth Chapter, onprimary stratified rocks, that Geology has renderedan important service to Natural Theology,in demonstrating by evidences peculiar to itself,that there was a time when none of the existingforms of organic beings had appeared upon ourPlanet, and that the doctrines of the derivationof living species either by Development andTransmutation \ from other species, or by anEternal Succession from preceding individuals ofthe same species, without any evidence of a Be-auckland'sInaug. Let. 1819, p. 13.f As a misunderstanding may arise in the minds of personsnot familiar with the language of physiology, respecting the importof the word Development, it may be proper here to state,that in its primary sense, it is applied to express the organicchanges which take place in the bodies of every animal andvegetable Being, from their embryo state, until they arrive atfull maturity. In a more extended sense, the term is also appliedto those progressive changes in fossil genera and species,which have followed one another during the deposition of thestrata of the earth, in the course of the gradual advancementof the grand system of Creation. The same term has beenadopted by Lamarck, to express his hypothetical views of the derivationof existing species from preceding species, by successiveTransmutations of one form of organization into another form,independent of the influence of any creative Agent. It is importantthat these distinctions should be rightly understood, lest thefrequent application of the word Development, which occurs inthe writings of modern physiologists, should lead to a false inference,that the use of this term implies an admission of the theoryof Transmutation with which Lamarck has associated it.586 PECULIAR EVIDENCES OF GEOLOGY.ginning or prospect of an End, has no wherebeen met by so full an answer, as that affordedby the phenomena, of fossil Organic Remains.In the course of our enquiry, we have foundabundant proofs, both of the Beginning and theEnd of several successive systems of animal andvegetable life ; each compelling us to refer its originto the direct agency of Creative Interference ;We conceive it undeniable, that we see, in thetransition from an Earth peopled by one set ofanimals to the same Earth swarming with entirelynew forms of organic life, a distinct manifestationof creative power transcending theoperation of known laws of nature : and, it appearsto us, that Geology has thus lighted a newlamp along the path of Natural Theology"*Whatever alarm therefore may have been excitedin the earlier stages of their development, thetime is now arrived when Geological discoveriesappear to be so far from disclosing any phenomena,that are not in harmony with the argumentssupplied by other branches of physicalScience, in proof of the existence and agency ofOne and the same all-wise and all-powerfulCreator, that they add to the evidences of NaturalReligion links of high importance thathave confessedly been wanting, and are nowfilled up by facts which the investigation of thestructure of the Earth has brought to light.British Critic, No. XVII. Jan. 1831, p. 194.CONNEXION OF RELIGION AND SCIENCE. 587If I understand Geology aright, (says ProfessorHitchcock,) so far from teaching the eternityof the world, it proves more directly thanany other science can, that its revolutions andraces of inhabitants had a commencement, andthat it contains within itself the chemical energies,which need only to be set at liberty, bythe will of their Creator, to accomplish its destruction.Because this science teaches that therevolutions of nature have occupied immenseperiods of time, it does not therefore teach thatthey form an eternal series. It only enlargesour conceptions of the Deity ; and when menshall cease to regard Geology with jealousy andnarrow minded prejudices, they will find that itopens fields of research and contemplation aswide and as grand as astronomy itself"* fThere is in truth, (says Bishop Bromfield)no opposition nor inconsistency between Religionand Science, commonly so called, exceptHitchcock's Geology of Massachusetts, P. 395.f " Why should we hesitate to admit the existence of ourGlobe through periods as long as geological researches require ;since the sacred word does not declare the time of its originalcreation ; and since such a view of its antiquity enlarges ourideas of the operations of the Deity in respect to duration, asmuch as astronomy does in regard to space ? Instead of bringingus into collision with Moses, it seems to me that Geology furnishesus with some of the grandest conceptions of the DivineAttributes and Plans to be found in the whole circle of humanknowledge." Hitchcock's Geology of Massachusetts, 1835,p. 225,588 PROVINCES OF REASON AND REVELATION.that which has been conjured up by injudiciouszeal or false philosophy, mistaking the ends of adivine revelation." And again in another passageof the same powerful discourse, after definingthe proper objects for the exercise of thehuman understanding, his Lordship most justlyobserves, " Under these limitations and correctionswe may join in the praises which arelavished upon philosophy and science, andfearlessly go forth with their votaries into all thevarious paths of research, by which the mind ofman pierces into the hidden treasures of nature \harmonizes its more conspicuous features, andremoves the veil which to the ignorant or carelessobserver, obscures the traces of God's gloryin the works of his hands"*The disappointment which many minds experience,at finding in the phenomena of the naturalworld no indications of the will of God, respectingthe moral conduct or future prospects of thehuman race, arises principally from an indistinctand mistaken view of the respective provinces ofReason and Revelation.By the exercise of our Reason, we discoverabundant evidences of the Existence, and ofsome of the Attributes of a supreme Creator,and apprehend the operations of many of thesecond causes or instrumental agents, by whichSermon at the opening of King's College, London, 1831,pp. 19. 14.PROVINCES OF REASON AND REVELATION. 589He upholds the mechanism of the material World;but here its province ends : respecting the subjectson which, above all others, it concerns mankindto be well informed, namely, the will ofGod in his moral government, and the futureprospects of the human race, Reason only assuresus of the absolute need in which we standof a Revelation. Many of the greatest proficientin philosophy have felt and expressedthese distinctions. " The consideration of God'sProvidence (says Boyle) in the conduct of thingscorporeal may prove to a well-disposed Contemplator,a Bridge, whereon he may pass fromNatural to Revealed Religion." fjNext (says Locke) to the knowledge of oneGod, Maker of all things, a clear knowledge oftheir duty was wanting to mankind."And He, whose name, by the consent of nations,is above all praise, the inventor and founderf Christian Virtuoso, 1690. P. 42.X "Natural Religion, as it is the first that is embraced by themind, so it is the foundation upon which revealed religion oughtto be superstructure, and is as it were, the stock upon whichChristianity must be engrafted. For though I readily acknowledgenatural religion to be insufficient, yet I think it very necessary.It will be to little purpose to press an infidel witharguments drawn from the worthiness, that appears in the Christiandoctrine to have been revealed by God, and from the miraclesits first preachers wrought to confirm it ; if the unbeliever benot already persuaded, upon the account of natural religion, thatthere is a God, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligentlyseek him." Boyle's Christian Virtuoso, Part II. prop. 1.590 PROVINCES OF REASON AND REVELATION.of the Inductive Philosophy, thus breathes forthhis pious meditation, " Thy creatures have beenmy books, but thy Scriptures much more. Ihave sought thee in the courts, fields, and gardens,but I have found thee in thy temples."Beacons Works, V. 4. fol. p. 487.The sentiment here quoted had been longfamiliar to him, for it pervades his writings; itis thus strikingly expressed in his immortalwork. " Concludes igitur theologian sacraex Vero et Oracles Dei, non ex lumina Naturaeaut Rationis dictating hauriri debere.Scriptum est enim coeli warrant Gloria Dei, atnunquam scriptum inventor, coeli warrant VoluntaryDei"* tHaving then this broad line marked out beforeus, and with a clear and perfect understanding, asto what we ought, and what we ought not to ex-baconDe Aug. Scient. Lib. IX. ch. i,f " Nothing," says Sir I. F. W. Herschel " can be more unfoundedthan the objection which has been taken in limine, bypersons, well-meaning perhaps, certainly narrow minded, againstthe study of natural philosophy, and indeed against all science,that it fosters in its cultivators an undue and overweening self-conceit,leads them to doubt the immortality of the soul, and toscoff at revealed religion. Its natural effect, we may confidentlyassert, on every well constituted mind, is and must be the directcontrary. No doubt, the testimony of natural reason, on whateverexercised, must of necessity stop short of those truths whichit is the object of revelation to make known ; but while it placesthe existence and principal attributes of a Deity on such groundsas to render doubt absurd and atheism ridiculous, it unquestionedOF STUDY OF NATURAL PHILOSOPHY. 591pet from the discoveries of Natural Philosophy,we may strenuously pursue our labours in thefruitful fields of Science, under the full assurancethat we shall gather a rich and abundant harvest,fraught with endless evidences of the existence,and wisdom, and power, and goodness of theCreator."The Philosopher (says Professor Babbage)has conferred on the Moralist an obligation of surpassingweight ; in unveiling to him the livingmiracles which teem in rich exuberance aroundthe minutest atom, as well as through the largestmasses of ever active matter, he has placed beforehim resistless evidence of immeasurable designs"*See only (says Lord Brougham) in what contemplationsthe wisest of men end their most sublimeenquiries ! Mark where it is that a Newtonfinally reposes after piercing the thickest veil thatably opposes no natural or necessary obstacle to further progress ;on the contrary, by cherishing as a vital principle an unboundedspirit of enquiry, and ardency of expectation, it fetters themind from prejudices of every kind, and leaves it open and freeto every impression of a higher nature which it is susceptible ofreceiving, guarding only against enthusiasm and self-deceptionby a habit of strict investigation, but encouraging, rather thansuppressing, every thing that can offer a prospect or a hope beyondthe present obscure and unsatisfactory state. The characterof the true Philosopher is to hope all things not impossible,and to believe all things not unreasonable." Discourse on theStudy of Natural Philosophy, p. 7.Babbage on the Economy of Manufactures, 1 Ed. p. 319.592 PROPER PROVINCE OF GEOLOGY.envelopes nature — grasping and arresting in theircourse the most subtle of her elements and theswiftest — traversing the regions of boundless spaceexploring worlds beyond the solar way — givingout the law which binds the universe in eternalorder ! He rests, as by an inevitable necessity,upon the contemplation of the great First Cause,and holds it his highest glory to have made theevidence of his existence, and the dispensationsof his power and of his wisdom better understoodby men"*If then it is admitted to be the high and peculiarprivilege of our human nature, and a devotionalexercise of our most exalted faculties, toextend our thoughts towards Immensity and intoEternity, to gaze on the marvellous Beauty thatpervades the material world, and to comprehendthat Witness of himself, which the Author of theUniverse has set before us in the visible works ofhis Creation ; it is clear that next to the study ofthose distant worlds which engage the contemplationof the Astronomer, the largest and mostsublime subject of physical enquiry which canoccupy the mind of Man, and by far the most interesting,from the personal concern we have init, is the history of the formation and structure ofthe Planet on which we dwell, of the many andwonderful revolutions through which it hasLord Brougham's Discourse of Natural Theology, 1 Ed.p. 194.GEOLOGY AUXILIARY TO THEOLOGY. 593passed, of the vast and various changes in organiclife that have followed one another upon its surface,and of its multifarious adaptations to thesupport of its present inhabitants, and to thephysical and moral condition of the Human race.These and kindred branches of enquiry, coextensivewith the very matter of the globe itself,form the proper subject of Geology, duly andcautiously pursued, as a legitimate branch ofinductive science : the history of the Mineralkingdom is exclusively its own ; and of the othertwo great departments of Nature, which form theVegetable and Animal kingdoms, the foundationswere laid in ages, whose records are entombedin the interior of the Earth, and are recoveredonly by the labours of the Geologist, who in thepetrified organic remains of former conditions ofour Planet, deciphers documents of the Wisdomin which the world was created.Shall it any longer then be said, that a science,which unfolds such abundant evidence of theBeing and Attributes of God, can reasonablybe viewed in any other light than as theefficient Auxiliary and Handmaid of Religion?Some few there still may be, whom timidity orprejudice or want of opportunity allow not toexamine its evidence ; who are alarmed by thenovelty, or surprised by the extent and magnitudeof the views which Geology forces on theirattention, and who would rather have kept closedG. Q Q594 GEOLOGICAL PROOF OF A DEITY.the volume of witness, which has been sealedup for ages beneath the surface of the earth, thanimpose on the student in Natural Theology theduty of studying its contents ; a duty, in whichfor lack of experience they may anticipate a hazardousor a laborious task, but which by thoseengaged in it is found to afford a rational andrighteous and delightful exercise of their highestfaculties, in multiplying the evidences of theExistence and Attributes and Providence ofGod.*The alarm however which was excited by thenovelty of its first discoveries has well nigh passedA study of the natural world teaches not the truths of revealedreligion, nor do the truths of religion inform us of theinductions of physical science. Hence it is, that men whosestudies are too much confined to one branch of knowledge, oftenlearn to overrate themselves, and so become narrow-minded.Bigotry is a besetting sin of our nature. Too often it has beenthe attendant of religious zeal : but it is perhaps most bitter andunsparing when found with the irreligious. A philosopher, understandingnot one atom of their spirit, will sometimes scoff atthe labours of religious men ; and one who calls himself religiouswill perhaps return a like harsh judgment, and thank God thathe is not as the philosophers, — forgetting all the while, that mancan ascend to no knowledge, except by faculties given to him byhis Creator's hand, and that all natural knowledge is but a reflexionof the will of God. In harsh judgments such as these,there is not only much folly, but much sin. True wisdom consistsin seeing how all the faculties of the mind, and all parts ofknowledge bear upon each other, so as to work together to acommon end ; ministering at once to the happiness of man, andhis Maker's glory. — Sedgwick's Discourse on the Studies of theUniversity, Cambridge, 1833, App. note F. p. 102, 103.GEOLOGICAL PROOF OF A DEITY. 595away, and those to whom it has been permittedto be the humble instruments of their promulgation,and who have steadily persevered, under thefirm assurance that " Truth can never be opposedto Truth," and that the works of God whenrightly understood, and viewed in their true relations,and from a right position, would at lengthbe found to be in perfect accordance with hisWord, are now receiving their high reward, infinding difficulties vanish, objections graduallywithdrawn, and in seeing the evidences of Geologyadmitted into the list of witnesses to the truth ofthe great fundamental doctrines of Theology.*The whole course of the enquiry which we havenow conducted to its close, has shown that thephysical history of our globe, in which somehave seen only Waste, Disorder, and Confusion,teems with endless examples of Economy, andOrder, and Design ; and the result of all ourresearches, carried back through the unwrittenrecords of past time, has been to fix more steadilyOne of the most distinguished and powerful Theologicalwriters of our time, who about 20 years ago devoted a chapter ofhis work on the Evidence of the Christian Revelation, to the refutationof what he then called " the Scepticism of Geologists," has inhis recent publication on Natural Theology, commenced his considerationsrespecting the origin of the world, with what he nowterms " The Geological argument in behalf of a Deity." Chalmers'sNatural Theology, V. I. p. 229. Glasgow, 1835.For Dr. Chalmers's interpretation of Genesis i. 1. et seq. seeEdinburgh Christian Instructor, April, 1814.596 GEOLOGICAL PROOF OF A DEITY.our assurance of the Existence of One supremeCreator of all things, to exalt more highly ourconviction of the immensity of his Perfections,of his Might, and Majesty, his Wisdom, and Goodness,and all sustaining Providence ; and to penetrateour understanding with a profound andsensible perception,* of the " high Venerationman's intellect owes to God."tThe Earth from her deep foundations uniteswith the celestial orbs that roll through boundlessspace, to declare the glory and shew forth thepraise of their common Author and Preserver;and the voice of Natural Religion accords harmoniouslywith the testimonies of Revelation, inascribing the origin of the Universe to the will ofOne eternal, and dominant Intelligence, the AlmightyLord and supreme first cause of all thingsthat subsist — " the same yesterday, to-day andfor ever" — " before the Mountains were broughtforth, or ever the Earth and the World weremade, God from everlasting and world withoutEnd."" Though I cannot with eyes of flesh behold the invisibleGod ; yet, I do in the strictest sense behold and perceive by allmy senses such signs and tokens, such effects and operations assuggest, indicate, and demonstrate an invisible God." — berkeley'sMinute Philosopher. Dial. iv. c. 5.t Boyle.SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES.P. 41. Professor Kersten has found distinctly formed crystalsof prismatic Felspar on the walls of a furnace in which Copperslate and Copper Ores had been melted. Among these propheticallyformed crystals, some were simple, others twin.They are composed of Silica, Alumina, and Potash. This discoveryis very important, in a geological point of view, from itsbearing on the theory of the igneous origin of crystalline rocks,in which Felspar is usually so large an ingredient. Hithertoevery attempt to make felspar crystals by artificial means hasfailed. See Poggendorf's Annalen, No. 22, 1834, and Jameson'sEdin. New Phil. Journal.P. 88. An account has recently been received from India ofthe discovery of an unknown and very curious fossil ruminatinganimal, nearly as large as an Elephant, which supplies a newand important link in the Order of Mammalia, between theRuminant and Pachydermata. A detailed description of thisanimal has been published by Dr. Falconer and Captain Castle,who have given it the name of Sivatherium, from the Salic orSub-Himalayan range of hills in which it was found, betweenthe Jumna and the Ganges. In size it exceeded the largestRhinoceros. The head has been discovered nearly entire. Thefront of the skull is remarkably wide, and retains the bony coresof two short thick and straight horns, similar in position to thoseof the four horned Antelope of Hindostan. The nasal bones aresalient in a degree without example among Ruminants, and exceedingin this respect those of the Rhinoceros, Tapir, andPalaeotherium, the only herbivorous animals that have this sortof structure. Hence there is no doubt that the Sivatherium wasinvested with a trunk like the Tapir. Its jaw is twice as large asthat of a Buffalo, and larger than that of a Rhinoceros. The598 SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES.remains of the Sivatherium were accompanied by those of theElephant, Mastodon, Rhinoceros, Hippopotamus, several Ruminant,(fecitis stated (p. 88) that there is a wider distance between theliving Genera of the Order Pachydermata than between those ofany other Order of Mammalia, and that many intervals in theseries of these animals have been filled up by extinct Genera andSpecies, discovered in strata of the Tertiary series. The Siva-thrumforms an important addition to the extinct Genera ofthis intermediate and connecting character. The value of suchlinks with reference to considerations in Natural Theology hasbeen already alluded to, p. 114.P. 106. Since this work was in the press, the author has seenat Liege the very extensive collection of fossil Bones made byM. Schmerling in the caverns of that neighbourhood, and hasvisited some of the places where they were found. Many ofthese bones appear to have been brought together like those inthe cave of Kirkwall, by the agency of Hyaenas, and have evidentlybeen gnawed by these animals ; others, particularly thoseof Bears, are not broken, or gnawed, but were probably collectedin the same manner as the bones of Bears in the cave of Galenby the retreat of these animals into the recesses of cavernson the approach of death ; some may have been introduced bythe action of water.The human bones found in these caverns are in a state ofless decay than those of the extinct species of beasts ; they areaccompanied by rude flint knives and other instruments of flintand bone, and are probably derived from uncivilized tribes thatinhabited the caves. Some of the human bones may also be theremains of individuals who, in more recent times, may have beenburied in such convenient repositories.M. Schmerling, in his Recherches sur les Ossemens Fossilesdes Cavernes de Liege, expresses his opinion that these humanbones are coeval with those of the quadrupeds, of extinct species,found with them ; an opinion from which the Author, after acareful examination of M. Schmerling' s collection, entirely dissents.SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES. 599P. 135. The Dinotherium has been spoken of as the largestof terrestrial Mammalia, and as presenting in its lower Jaw andTusks a disposition of an extraordinary kind, adapted to thepeculiar habits of a gigantic herbivorous aquatic Quadruped.The Author has recently been informed by Professor Kaup, ofDarmstadt, that an entire head of this animal has been discoveredat Epplesheim, measuring more than a yard in lengthand as much in breadth, and that he is preparing a descriptionand figures of this head for immediate publication.P. 446. In the conclusion of our chapter on the remains ofanimals of the lowest order, we noticed Ehrenberg's discoveriesof the internal organization, and almost universal presence inthe Air and Water, of microscopic living Infusoria, little expectingthat before this work had issued from the press, they wouldalso be found in a fossil state. In the London and Edin. Phil.Mag. Aug. 1, 1836, p. 158, there is an extract of a letter sentby M. Alexander Brongniart from Berlin to the Royal Academyof Sciences of Paris, announcing that Ehrenberg has also discoveredthe silicified remains of Infusoria in the stone calledTripoli (Polierschiefer of Werner), a substance which has beensupposed to be formed from sediments of fine volcanic ashes inquiet waters. These petrified Infusoria form a large proportionof the substance of this kind of stone from four different localities,on which Ehrenberg has made his observations ; they wereprobably living in the waters, at the time when they becamecharged with the volcanic dust, in which the Tripoli originated.It is added in this notice that the slimy Iron ore of certainmarshes is loaded with Infusoria, of the genus Gallionella.Institut, No. 166.END OF VOL. I.ERRATA.VOL. I.Page 48, Note, for Chapter read Cordier.54, 1. 4, for external read eternal.55, 1. 2, for organized read organic.63, Note, 1. I, for Brogniart read Brongniart.75, Note, 1. 25, for upper read lower.95, Note, 1. 17, for reason read reasons.123, 1. 5, for Motte read Monte.142, Note, /or Cowper read Cooper.155, 1. 14, for Ilium read Ileum.160, Note, for Weirs read Weiss.177, Note, 1. I, for (a) read (u.)202, for peut-etre read est peut-être.254, 1. 18, /or wherein read in which.254, 1. 21, for contains read contain.264, 1. 2, for Paleontology read Palaeontology.275, 1. 6, for Megalicthys read Megalichthys.281, 1. 9, for Gyrodus read Microdon.282, 1. 14, for figs. 4. 5. read figs. 3. 4.291, 1. 19, for Myliobatis read Militates.379, Note, 1. 5, for cancerous read calcareous.379, Note, 1. 7, for PI. 44 read 44'.391, 1. 2, for Brogniart read Brongniart.420, 1. 23,/or fig. 2 a - read fig. 2, a.431, 1. 29, for PI. 52, fig. 2, read PI. 52, fig. 3.432, 1. 8, for Pentacrinite read Pentacrinites.435, Note, 1. 7, for Pentacrinite's read Pentacrinites.439, Note, 1. 3, for 13 read 14.470, Note, 1. 1,/or Greswell read Cromwell.470, Note, 1. 14, for in our PI. 56, fig. 1, read in CountSternberg's Tab. 7, fig. 5.481, Note, 1. 9, for dycotyledonous read dicotyledonous.525, 1. 5, for treasure read treasures.528, Note, 1. ult. for Herzothum read Herzogthum.VOL.11.Page 46, 1. 19. for Myliobatis read Militates.Plate 27 d - B. 14,/or Palata read Palate.Plate 53, fig.- 2, H. omitted at the Scapula.C. Whittington, Took Court, Chancery Lane.