THE BRIDGEWATER TREATISESON THE POWER WISDOM AND GOODNESS OF GODAS MANIFESTED IN THE CREATIONTREATISE ION THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THE MORALAND INTELLECTUAL CONSTITUTION OF MANBY THE REV. T. CHALMERS Did.IN TWO VolumesON THE POWER WISDOM AND GOODNESS OF GODAS MANIFESTED IN THE ADAPTATIONOF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THE MORAL ANDINTELLECTUAL CONSTITUTION OF MANBY THEREV. THOMAS CHALMERS D. D.PTiOFKSSOR OF DIVtXITY IN The UMVF.nSITYOF EdinburghVOL IILONDONWILLIAM PICKERINGsio.e-^L 175V, ZLrSRARY6CRIPPS INSTITUTIONOF OCEANOGRAPHYUNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIALA .lO' ! A C.\ • n~'^«>«.(iAC. Nottingham, Took COURT, CHANCERY LANE.CONTENTSTO THE SECOND VOLUME.PART I.On the Adaptation of External Nature to the MoralConstitution of Man.Chap. VII. On those Special Affections which conduce tothe Economic Well-being' of Society 1VIII. On the Relation in which the Special Affectionsof our Nature stand to Virtue ; and on theDemonstration given forth by it, both to theCharacter of man and the Character ofGod 51IX. Miscellaneous Evidences of Virtuous and BenevolentDesign, in the Adaptation of ExternalNature to the Moral Constitution ofMan 69X. On the Capacities of the World for makinga virtuous Species happy ; and the Argumentdeducible from this, both for theCharacter of God and the Immortality ofMan 97VI Contents.PART II.On the Adaptation of External Nature to the IntellectualConstitution of Man.Chap. I. Chief Instances of this Adaptation 131II. On the Connection between the Intellect and theEmotions 180,III. On the Connection between the Intellect and theWill 219IV. On the Defects and the Uses of Natural Theolog-y 257\PART I.ON THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN.Chapter VII.On those special Affection 3 which conduce to theeconomic well-being of Society1. We now proceed to consider the economic, incontra-distinction to the civil and political wellbeingof society, to the extent that this is dependenton certain mental tendencies — whether thesecan be demonstrated by analysis to be onlysecondary results or in themselves to be simpleelements of the human constitution. We maybesaid indeed, to have already bordered on thispart of our argument — when considering theorigin and the rights of property ; or the mannerin which certain possessory affections, thatappear even in the infancy of the mind andanticipate by many years the exercise of humanwisdom, lead to a better distribution, both of theearth and of all the valuables which are upon it,than human wisdom could possibly have devised,or at least than human power without the helpof these special affections could have carriedc. II. B2 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOinto effect. For there might be a useful economysanctioned by law, yet which law could not havesecurely established, unless it had had a foundationin nature. For in this respect, there is alimit to the force even of the mightiest despotisminsomuch that the most absolute monarch onthe face of the earth must so far conform himself,to the indelible human nature of the subjectsover whom he proudly bears the sway ; else, inthe reaction of their outraged principles andfeelings, they would hurl him from his throne.And thus it is well, that, so very generally in thedifferent countries of the world, law, both in herrespect for the possessory and acquired rights ofproperty and in her enforcement of them, has,instead of chalking out an arbitrary path forherself, only folio vied Adhere nature beforehandhad pointed the way. It is far better, that,rather than devise a jurisprudence made up ofher own capricious inventions — she should, to sogreat an extent, have but ratified a prior jurisprudence,founded on the original or at least theuniversal affections of humanity. We know fewthings more instructive than a study of the mischievouseffects, which attend a deviation fromthis course— of which, we at present shall statetwo remarkable instances. The evils whichensue when law traverses any of those principles,that lie deeply seated in the very makeand constitution of the mind, bring out into morestriking exhibition the superior wisdom of thatTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 3nature from which she has departed — even asthe original perfection of a mechanism is nevermorefully demonstrated, than by the contrastof those repeated failures, which shows of everychange or attempted improvement, that it butderanges or deteriorates the operations of the instrumentin question. And thus too it is, that alesson of sound theology may be gathered, fromthe errors with their accompanying evils of unsoundlegislation — on those occasions when thewisdom of man comes into conflict and collisionwith the wisdom of God.2. Of the two instances that we are now toproduce, in which law hath made a deviationfrom nature, and done in consequence a tremendousquantity of evil, the first is the TytheSystem of England. We do not think that theprovision of her established clergy is in any waytoo liberal — but very much the reverse. Still wehold it signally unfortunate that it should havebeen levied so, as to do most unnecessary violenceto the possessory feeling, both of theowners and occupiers of land all over the country.Had the tythe, like some other of thepublic burdens, been commuted into a pecuniaryand yearly tax on the proprietors — the possessoryfeeling would not have been so painfully or sodirectly thwarted by it. But it is the constantintromission of the tythe agents or proctors withthe fields, and the ipsa corpora that are withinthe limits of the property— which exposes this4 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOstrong natural affection to an annoyance that isfelt to be intolerable.* But far the best methodof adjusting the state of the law to thoseprinciples of ownership which are anterior tolaw, and which all its authority is unable toquench — would be a commutation into land.Let the church property in each parish bedissevered in this way from its main territory ;and then, both for the lay and the ecclesiasticaldomain, there would be an accordance of thelegal with the possessory right. It is becausethese are in such painful dissonance, under theexisting state of things, that there is so muchexasperation in England, connected with thesupport and maintenance of her clergy. Nodoubt law can enforce her own arrangements,however arbitrary and unnatural they mightThe following example of the thousands which might bealleged will show how apt the possessor feeling is to revoltagainst the legal right, and at length to overbear it.The fee-simple of the Church property of the Dean and Chapterof Durham is in the Dean and Chapter of Durham.The custom for ages has been to let houses on leases of fortyyears, and lands on leases of twenty-one years, at small reservedrents, these leases being renewable at the end of seven years, atthe pleasure of the Dean and Chapter on the payment of arbitraryfines — which fines however as actually levied are exceedinglymoderate, one year and a quarter being asked for houses, and oneand a half for lands.Several of the families of the occupiers of lands and houses soleased have been in possession for generations — and long possessionhas given to some of these occupiers such a strength ofpossessory feeling, that they have the sense of being aggrieved,if they do not get the renewals on their own terms.THE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 5be ; but it is a striking exhibition, we have alwaysthought, of the triumph of the possessory over thelegal, that, in the contests between the two parties,the clergy have constantly been losing ground.And, in resistance to all the opprobrium whichhas been thrown upon them, do we affirm, that,with a disinterestedness which is almost heroic,they have, in deed and in practice, forborneto the average extent of at least one half, theassertion of their claims. The truth is, thatthe felt odium which attaches to the systemought never to have fallen upon them. It isan inseparable consequence of the arrangementitself, by which law hath traversed nature — soas to be constantly rubbing, as it where, againstthat possessory feeling, which may be regardedas one of the strongest of her instincts. Thereare few reformations that would do more tosweeten the breath of English society, thanthe removal of this sore annoyance — the broodingfountain of so many heartburning and somany testaments, by which the elements ofan unappeasable warfare are ever at work betweenthe landed interest of the country, andfar the most important class of its public functionaries; and, what is the saddest perversityof all, those, whose office it is by the mildpersuasions of Christianity, to train the populationof our land in the lessons of love and peaceand righteousness — they are forced by the nec.II. c6 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOnecessities of a system which many of themdeplore, into the attitude of extortioners ; andplaced in that very current, along which apeoples hatred and a people's obloquy arewholly unavoidable.* Even under the theocracyof the Jews, the system of tithes was with difficultyupholden ; and many are the remonstranceswhich the gifted seers of Israel held with itspeople, for having brought of the lame and thediseased as offerings. Such, in fact, is theviolence done by this system to the possessoryfeelings, that a conscientious submission to itsexactions, may be regarded as a most decisivetest of religious obedience — such an obedience,indeed, as was but ill maintained, even in thedays of the Hebrew polity, although it lead theforce of temporal sanctions, with the miraclesand manifestations of a presiding deity to sustainit. Unless by the express appointment ofheaven, this yoke of Judaism, unaccompaniedas it now is by the peculiar and preternaturalThere is often the utmost injustice in that professional odiumwhich is laid upon a whole order, and none have suffered moreunder it, than the clergy of England have, from the sweepingand indiscriminate charges, which have been preferred againstthem, by the demagogues of our land. We believe that nothinghas given more of edge and currency to these invectives, thanthe very unfortunate way in which their maintenance has beenprovided for : and many are the amiable and accomplished individualsamong themselves to whom it is a matter of downrightirony.THE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 7enforcements of that dispensation, ought neverto have been perpetuated in the days of Christianity.There are distinct, and, we hold, validreasons, for the national maintenance of an orderof men in the capacity of religious instructorsto the people. But maintenance in a way soobnoxious to nature, is alike adverse to a soundcivil and a sound Christian policy. Both thecause of religion and the cause of loyalty havesuffered by it. The alienation of the church'swealth, were a deadly blow to the best andhighest interests of England ; but there arefew things which would conduce more to thestrength and peace of our nation, than a fairand right commutation of it.3. Our next very flagrant example of a mischievouscollision between the legal and thepossessory, is the English system of poor laws.By law each man who can make good his pleaof necessity, has a claim for the relief of it, fromthe owners or occupiers of the soil, or fromthe owners and occupiers of houses ; and never,till the end of time, will all the authority, andall the enactments of the statute-book, be ableto divest them of the feeling, that their propertyis invaded. Law never can so counterwork thestrong possessory feeling, as to reconcile theproprietors of England to this legalized enormity,or rid them of the sensation of a perpetualviolence. It is this mal-adjustment between8 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOthe voice that nature gives forth on the rightof property, and the voice that arbitrary lawgives forth upon it — it is this, which begets somethingmore than a painful insecurity as to thestability of their possessions. There is besides,a positive, and what we should call, a mostnatural irritation. That strong possessory feeling,by which each is wedded to his own domainin the relation of its rightful proprietor; andwhich they can no more help, because as muchapart of their original constitution, than theparental feeling by which each is wedded tohis own family in the relation of its naturalprotector — this strong possessory feeling, we say,is, under their existing economy, subject alloverEngland to a perpetual and most painfulannoyance. And accordingly we do find theutmost acerbity of tone and temper, among theupper classes of England, in reference to theirpoor. We are not sure, indeed, if there beany great difference, with many of them, betweenthe feeling which they have towardsthe poor, and the feeling which they havetowards poachers. It is true that the law is onthe side of the one, and against the other. Yetit goes most strikingly to prove, how impossibleit is for law to carry the acquiescence of theheart, when it contravenes the primary andurgent affections of nature — that paupers arein any degree assimilated to poachers in theTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. Vpublic imagination ; and that the inroads ofboth upon property should be resented, as ifboth alike were a sort of trespass or invasion.4. And it is further interesting to observethe effect of this unnatural state of things onthe paupers themselves. Even in their deportment,we might read an unconscious homageto the possessory right. And whereas, it hasbeen argued in behalf of a poor-rate, that, sofarfrom degrading, it sustains an independenceof spirit among the peasantry, by turning thatwhich would have been a matter of beggaryinto a matter of rightful and manly assertion —there is none who has attended the meeting of aparish vestry, that will not readily admit, thetotal dissimilarity which obtains between the assertionto a right of maintenance, and the assertionof any other right whatever, whether in thefield of war or of patriotism. There may bemuch of the insolence of beggary; but alongwith this, there is a most discernible mixtureof its mean, and crouching, and ignoble sordidness.There is no common quality whateverbetween the clamorous onset of this worthlessand dissipated crew, and the generous battle-crypro arts et focus, in which the humblest of ourpopulation will join — when paternal acres, orthe rights of any actually holden property areinvaded. In the mind of the pauper, with allhis challenging and all his boisterousness, there10 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOis still the latent impression, that, after all,there is a certain want of firmness about hisplea. He is not altogether sure of the groundupon which he is standing ; and, in spite of allthat law has done to pervert his imagination,the possessory right of those against whom heprefers his demand, stares him in the face,and disturbs him not a little out of that confidence,wherewith a man represents and urgesthe demands of unquestionable justice. Inspite of himself, he cannot avoid having somewhatthe look and the consciousness of apoacher. And so the effect of England's mostunfortunate blunder, has been, to alienate onthe one hand her rich from her poor ; and onthe other to debase into the very spirit andsordidness of beggary, a large and ever-increasingmass of her population. There is but oneway, we can never cease to affirm, by whichthis grievous distemper of the body politic canbe removed. And that is, by causing the lawof property to harmonize with the strong anduniversal instincts of nature in regard to it ;by making the possessory right to be at leastas inviolable as the common sense of mankindwould make it; and as to the poor, by utterlyrecalling the blunder that England made,when she turned into a matter of legal constraint,that which should ever be a neither of loveand liberty, and when she aggravated ten-foldTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 11the dependence and misery of the lower classes,by divorcing the cause of humanity from thewilling generosities, the spontaneous and unforcedsympathies of our nature.5. But this brings into view another of ourspecial affections — our compassion for the distress,including, as one of its most prominentand frequently recurring objects, our compassionfor the destitution of others. We have alreadyseen, how nature hath provided, by one of itsimplanted affections, for the establishment ofproperty ; and for the respect in which, amidall its inequalities, it is held by society. Buthelpless destitution forms one extreme of thisinequality, which a mere system of propertyappears to leave out ; and which, if not otherwiseprovided for by the wisdom of nature inthe constitution of the human mind, wouldperhaps justify an attempt by the wisdom ofman to provide for it in the constitution ofhuman law. We do not instance, at present,certain other securities which have been institutedby the hand of nature, and which, if nottraversed and enfeebled by a legislation whollyuncalled for, would of themselves, prevent theextensive prevalence of want in society. Theseare the urgent law of self-preservation, promptingto industry on the one hand and to economyon the other ; and the strong law of relativeaffection — which laws, if not tampered with12 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOand undermined in their force and efficacy bythe law of pauperism, would not have relieved,but greatly better, would have prevented thevast majority of those cases which fill theworkhouses, and swarm around the vestries ofEngland. Still these, however, would not haveprevented all poverty. A few instances, likethose which are so quietly and manageable,but withal effectually met in the countryparishes of Scotland, would still occur in everylittle community, however virtuous or wellregulated. And in regard to these, there isanother law of the mental constitution, bywhich nature hath made special provision forthem — even the beautiful law of compassion, invirtue of w which the sight of another in agony,(and most of all perhaps in the agony of pininghunger), would, if unrelieved, create a sensationof discomfort in the heart of the observer,scarcely inferior to what he should have felt,had the suffering and the agony been his own.6. But in England, the state, regardless of allthe indices which nature had planted in thehuman constitution, hath taken the regulationof this matter into its own hands. By its law ofpauperism, it hath, in the first instance, ordainedfor the poor a legal property in the soil ; andthereby, running counter to the strong possessoryaffection, it hath done violence to the naturaland original distribution of the land, and loosenedTHE ECONOMIC WELL-being OF SOCIETY. 13the secure hold of each separate owner, on theportion which belongs to him. And in thesecond instance, distrustful of the efficacy ofcompassion, it, by way of helping forward itslanguid energies, hath applied the strong handof power to it. Now it so happens, that nothingmore effectually stifles compassion, or puts it toflight, than to be thus meddled with. The spiritof kindness utterly refuses the constraints ofauthority ; and law in England, by taking thebusiness of charity upon itself, instead of supplementing,hath well nigh destroyed the anteriorprovision made for it by nature — thus leaving itto be chiefly provided for, by methods and by amachinery of its own. The proper function oflaw is to enforce the rights of justice, or to defendagainst the violation of them ; and never does itmake a more flagrant or a more hurtful invasion,beyond the confines of its own legitimate territory— than, when confounding humanity withjustice, it would apply the same enforcementsto the one virtue as to the other. It should havetaken a lesson from the strong and evident distinctionwhich nature hath made between thesetwo virtues, in her construction of our moralsystem ; and should have observed a correspondingdistinction in its own treatment of themresenting the violation of the one ; but leavingthe other to the free interchanges of good-willon the side of the dispenser, and of gratitude on14 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOthe side of the recipient. When law, distrustfulof the compassion that is in all hearts, enacted asystem of compulsory relief, lest, in our neglectof others, the indigent should starve ; it did incomparablyworse, than if, distrustful of theappetite of hunger, it had enacted for the use offood a certain regimen of times and quantities,lest, neglectful of ourselves, our bodies mighthave perished. Nature has made a betterprovision than this for both these interests ; butlaw has done more mischief by interference withthe one, than it could ever have done by interferencewith the other. It could not have quelledthe appetite of hunger, which still, in spite of allthe law's officiousness, would have remained thegreat practical impellent to the use of food, for thewell-being of our physical economy. But it hasdone much to quell and to overbear the affectionof compassion— that never failing impellent, in afree and natural state of things, to deeds ofcharity, for the well-being of the social economy.The evils which have ensued are of too potentand pressing a character to require description.They have placed England in a grievous dilemma,from which she can only be extricated, bythe new modelling of this part of her statutebook, and a nearer conformity of its provisionsto the principles of natural jurisprudence. Meanwhilethey afford an emphatic demonstration forthe superior wisdom of nature, which is neverTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 15SO decisively or so triumphantly attested, as bythe mischief that is done, when her processesare contravened or her principles are violated.*7. We are aware of a certain ethical system,that would obliterate the distinction betweenjustice and humanity, by running or resolvingthe one into the other — affirming of the formermore particularly, that all its virtue is foundedon its utility ; and that therefore justice, towhich may be added truth, is no further a virtue,than as it is instrumental of good to men — thusmaking both truth and justice, mere species ormodifications of benevolence. Now, as we havealready stated, it is not with the theory of morals,but with the moral constitution of man that wehave properly to do ; and, most certain it is,that man does feel the moral rightness both ofjustice and truth, irrespective altogether of theirconsequences — or, at least, apart from any suchview to these consequences at the time, as themind is at all conscious of. There is rfh appetiteof our sentient nature which terminatesWithout contending for the language of our older moralists,the distinction which they mean to express, by virtues of perfectand imperfect obligation, has a foundation in reality and in thenature of things — as between justice where the obligation on oneside implies a counterpart right upon the other, and benevolenceto which, whatever the obligation maybe on the part of the dispenser,there is no corresponding right on the part of the recipient.The proper office of law is to enforce the former virtues. When itattempts to enforce the latter, it makes a mischievous extensionof itself beyond its own legitimate boundaries.16 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOin food, and that is irrespective of all its subsequentutilities to the animal economy ; and thereis an appetite for doing what is right which terminatesin virtue, and which bears as little respectto its utilities — whether for the good of selfor for the good of society. The man whom sometemptation to what is dishonorable would putinto a state of recoil and restlessness, has noother aim, in the resistance he makes to it, thansimply to make full acquittal of his integrity.This is his landing place ; and he looks no further.There may be a thousand dependent blessingsto humanity, from the observation of moralrectitude. But the pure and simple apj^etencyfor rectitude, rests upon this as its object, withoutany onward reference to the consequences whichshall flow from it. This consideration alone issufficient to dispose of the system of utility — asbeing metaphysically incorrect in point of conception,and incorrect in the expression of it. Ifa man can do virtuously, when not aiming at theuseful, and not so much as thinking of it — thento design and execute what is useful, may beand is a virtue ; but it is not all virtue.*If our moral judgment tell that some particular thing is right,without our adverting to its utility — then though all that we holdto be morally right should be proved by observation to yield themaximum of utility, utility is not on that account the mind's criterionfor the rightness of this particular thing. God hath givenus the sense of what is right; and He hath besides so ordained thesystem of things, that what is right is generally that which isTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 178. There is one way in which a theoristmay take refuge from this conclusion. It isquite palpable, that a man often feels himselfto be doing virtuously — when, to all sense, heis not thinking of the utilities which follow inits train. But then it may be affirmed, thathe really is so thinking — although he is notsensible of it. There can be little doubt ofsuch being the actual economy of the world,such the existing arrangement of its laws and itssequences — that virtue and happiness are veryclosely associated ; and that, no less in thoseinstances, where the resulting happiness is notat all thought of, than in those where happinessis the direct and declared object of the virtue.Who can doubt that truth and justice bear asmanifold and as important a subserviency tothe good of the species as beneficence does ? —and yet it is only with the latter, that this goodis the object of our immediate contemplation.But then it is affirmed, that, when two termsare constantly associated in nature, there mustbe as constant an association of them in themind of the observer of nature — an associationat length so habitual, and therefore so rapid.most useful — yet, in many instances, it is not the perceived usefulness,which makes us recognize it to be right. We agree toowith Bishop Butler in not venturing to assume that God's soleend in creation was the production of the greatest happiness.GQ 0518 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOthat we become utterly unconscious of it. Ofthis we have examples, in the most frequentand familiar operations of human life. In theact of reading, every alphabetical letter musthave been present to the mind — yet how manythousands of them, in the course of a singlehour, must have past in fleeting succession,without so much as one moment's sense oftheir presence, which the mind has any recollectionof. And it is the same in listening toan acquaintance, when we receive the wholemeaning and effect of his discourse, withoutthe distinct consciousness of very many ofthose individual words which still were indispensableto the meaning. Nay, there are otherand yet more inscrutable mysteries in thehuman constitution ; and which relate, not tothe thoughts that we conceive without beingsensible of them, but even to the volitions thatwe put forth, and to very many of which wearealike insensible. We have only to reflecton the number and complexity of those muscleswhich are put into action, in the mere processesof writing or walking, or even of so balancingourselves as to maintain a posture of stability.It is understood to be at the bidding of the will,that each of our muscles performs its distinctoffice ; and yet, out of the countless volitions,which had their part and their play, in thesecomplicated, and yet withal most familiar andTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 19easily practicable operations— how many thereare which wholly escape the eye of consciousness.And thus too, recourse may be had tothe imagination of certain associating processes,too hidden for being the objects of sense at thetime, and too fugitive for being the objects ofremembrance afterwards. And on the strengthof these it may be asked — how are we to know,that the utility of truth and justice is notpresent to the mind of man, w hen he dischargesthe obligation of these virtues ; and how are weto know, that it is not the undiscoverablethought of this utility, which forms the impel-lentprinciple of that undiscoverable volition,by which man is urged to the performanceof them ?9. Now we are precluded from replying tothis question in any other way, than that thetheory which requires such an argument forits support, may be said to fetch all its materialsfrom the region of conjecture. It ventures onthe affirmation of what is going on in a terraincognita; and we have not the means withinour reach, for meeting it in the terms of a positivecontradiction. But we can at least say, thata mere argumentum ah ignorantia is not a sufficientbasis on which to ground a philosophictheory ; and that thus to fetch an hypothesisfrom among the inscrutabilities of the mind,to speak of processes going on there so quick20 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOand so evanescent that the eye of consciousnesscannot discover them — is to rear a superstructurenot upon the facts which lie within thelimit of separation between the known and theunknown, but upon the fancies which lie withoutthis limit. A great deal more is necessary forthe establishment of an assertion, than that anadversary cannot disprove it. A thousandpossibilities may be affirmed which are susceptibleneither of proof nor of disproof ; and surelyit were the worst of logic to accept as proof,the mere circumstance that they are beyond thereach of disproof. They, in fact, lie alikebeyond the reach of both; in which case theyshould be ranked among the figments of mereimagination, and not among the findings ofexperience. How are we to know but that, in thebosom of our great planetary amplitude, theredo not float, and in elliptic orbits round thesun, pieces of matter vastly too diminutive forour telescopes ; and that thus the large intermediatespaces between the known bodies ofthe system, instead of so many desolate blanks,are in fact peopled with little worlds — all ofthem teeming, like our own, with busy andcheerful animation. Now, in the powerlessnessof our existing telescopes, we do not knowbut it may be so. But we will not believe thatit is so, till a telescope of power enough beinvented, for disclosing this scene of wondersTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 21to our observation. And it is the same of themoral theory that now engages us. It rests, notupon M^hat it finds among the arcana of thehuman spirit, but upon what it fancies to bethere ; and they are fancies too which we cannotdeny, but which we will not admit — till, by someimproved power of internal observation, theyare turned into findings. We are quite sensibleof the virtuousness of truth ; but we have notyet been made sensible, that we always recognizethis virtuousness, because of a glance wehave had of the utility of tiiith — though onlyperhaps for a moment of time, too minute andmicroscopical for being noticed by the nakedeye of consciousness. We can go no furtherupon this question than the light of evidencewill carry us. And, while we both feel in ourown bosoms and observe in the testimony ofthose around us, the moral deference whichis due to truth and justice — we have not yetdetected this to be the same with that deference,which we render to the virtue of benevolence.Or, in other words, we do venerate and regardthese as virtues — while, for aught ive know,the utility of them is not in all our thoughts.We agree with Dugald Stewart in thinking,that, " considerations of utility do not seem tousthe only ground of the approbation we bestowon this disposition." He further observes, that,abstracting from all regard to consequences,C. II. D22 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOthere is something pleasing and amiable insincerity,openness, and truth ; something disagreeableand disgusting in duplicity, equivocation,and falsehood. Dr. Hutchison himself,the great patron of that theory which resolvesall moral qualities into benevolence, confessesthis — for he speaks of a sense which leads usto approve of veracity, distinct from the sensewhich approves of qualities useful to mankind"*10. However difficult it may be, to resolve theobjective question which respects the constitutionof virtue in itself — in the subjective question,which respects the constitution of themind, we cannot but acknowledge the broadand palpable distinction, which the Author ofour moral frame hath made, between justice andtruth on the one hand, and beneficence on theother. And it had been well, if law-givers haddiscriminated, as nature has done, between justiceand humanity — although the mischief of theirunfortunate deviation serves, all the more strikingly,to prove the adaptation of our moral constitutionto the exigencies of human society. Thelaw of pauperism hath assimilated beneficenceto justice, by enacting the former, in the veryway that it does the latter ; and enforcing whatit has thus enacted by penalties. Beneficenceloses altogether its proper and original character— when, instead of moving on the impulseStewart's " Outlines of Moral Philosophy," Art. Veracity.THE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 23of a spontaneous kindness that operates fromwithin, it moves on the impulse of a legal obligationfrom without. Should law specify theyearly sum that must pass from my hands to thedestitute around me — then, it is not beneficencewhich has to do with the matter. What I haveto surrender, law hath already ordained to betheproperty of another ; and I, in giving it up,am doing an act of justice and not an act ofliberality. To exercise the virtue of beneficence,I must go beyond the sum that is specifiedby law ; and thus law, in her attemptsto seize upon beneficence, and to bring herunder rule, hath only forced her to retirewithin a narrower territory, on Which aloneit is that she can put forth the free and nativecharacteristics which belong to her. Law, infact, cannot, with any possible ingenuity, obtainan imperative hold on beneficence at all — forher very touch transforms this virtue into another.Should law go forth on the enterprize ofarresting beneficence upon her own domain, andthere laying upon her its authoritative dictates —it would find that beneficence had eluded itspursuit ; and that all which it could possibly do,was to wrest from her that part of the domainof which it had taken occupation, and bringit under the authority of justice. When itthought to enact for beneficence, it only, intruth, enacted a new division of property ; andin so doing, it contravenes the possessory, one of24 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOnature's special affections — m hile, by its attemptsto force what should have been left to the freeexercise of compassion, it has done much tosupersede or to extinguish another of theseaffections. It hath so pushed forward the lineof demarcation — as to widen the space whichjustice might call her own, and to contract thespace which beneficence might call her own.But never will law be able to make a captive ofbeneficence, or to lay personal arrest upon her.It might lessen and limit her means, or evenstarve her into utter annihilation. But nevercan it make a living captive of her. It is altogethera vain and hopeless undertaking to legislateon the duties of beneficence ; for the verynature of this virtue, is to do good freely andwillingly with its own. But on the moment thatlaw interposes to any given extent with one'sproperty, to that extent it ceases to be his own ;and any good that is done by it is not donefreely. The force of law and the freeness oflove cannot amalgamate the one with the other.Like water and oil they are immiscible. Wecannot translate beneficence into the statute-bookof law without expunging it from thestatute-book of the heart ; and, to whateverextent we make it the object of compulsion, tothat extent we must destroy it. *11. And in the proportion that beneficence isput to flight, is gratitude put to flight along withTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 25it. The proper object of this emotion is another'sgood-will. But I do not hold as from the goodwillof another, that which law hath enabled meto plea as my own right — nay to demand, with afront of hardy and resolute assertion. It is thiswhich makes it the most delicate and dangerousof all ground — when law offers to prescribe rulesfor the exercise of beneficence, or to lay its compulsoryhand on a virtue, the very freedom ofwhich is indispensable to its existence. And itnot only extinguishes the virtue ; but it puts anend to all those responses of glad and gratefulemotion, which its presence and its smile and thegenerosity of its free-will offerings awaken insociety. It is laying an arrest on all the musicof living intercourse, thus to forbid those beautifuland delicious echoes, which are reflected,on every visit of unconstrained mercy, from thosefamilies that are gladdened by her footsteps.And what is worse, it is substituting in theirplace, the hoarse and jarring discords of thechallenge and the conflict and the angry litigation.We may thus see, that there is a provincein human affairs, on which law should make noentrance — a certain department of human virtuewherein the moralities should be left to theirown unfettered play, else they shall be frozeninto utter apathy — a field sacred to liberty andgood-will that should ever be kept beyond thereach of jurisprudence; or on which, if she once"26 AFi Actions WHICH CONDUCE TOobtain a footing, she will spoil it of all thoseunsought and unbidden graces that nativelyadorn it. So that while to law we would committhe defence of society from all the aggressionsof violence, and confide the strict and thestern guardianship of the interests of justice —we should tremble for humanity lest it witheredand expired under the grasp of so rough a protector; and lest before a countenance grave asthat of a judge, and grim as that of a messenger-alarms,this frail but loveliest of the virtuesshould be turned, as if by the head of Medusa,into stone.12. But there are other moral ills in thisunfortunate perversion, beside the extinction ofgood-will in the hearts of the affluent and ofgratitude in the hearts of the poor — though itbe no slight mischief to any community, thatthe tie of kindliness between these two ordersshould have been broken ; and that the businessof charity, which when left spontaneous is sofertile in all the amenities of life, should betransformed into a fierce warfare of rights, fromits very nature incapable of adjustment, and,whether they be the encroached upon or therepelled, subjecting both parties to the sense ofa perpetual violence. But over and above this,there are other distempers, wherewith it hathsmitten the social economy of England, and ofwhich experience will supply the English observerTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 27with many a vivid recollection. The recklessbut withal most natural improvidence of thosewhom the state has undertaken to provide for,seeing that law hath proclaimed in their favoura discharge from the cares and the duties ofself-preservation — the headlong dissipation, inconsequence— the dissolution of family ties, forthe same public and proclaimed charity whichabsolves a man from attention to himself willabsolve him also from attention to his relatives —the decay and interruption of sympathy in allthe little vicinities of town and country, foreach man under this system of an assured anduniversal provision feels himself absolved toofrom attention to his neighbours — These distempersboth social and economic have a commonorigin ; and the excess of them above whattaketh place in a natural state of things, may allbe traced to the unfortunate aberration, which,in this instance, the constitution of human lawhath made from the constitution of human nature.13. In our attempts to trace the rise of thepossessory affection and of a sense of property,we have not been able to discover any foundationin nature, for a sentiment that we often hearimpetuously urged by the advocates of thesystem of pauperism — that every man has aright to the means of subsistence. Nature doesnot connect this right with existence ; but withcontinued occupation, and with another printsAFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOciplc to which it also gives the sanction of itsvoice — that, each man is legitimate owner of thefruits of his own industry. These are the principleson which nature hath drawn her landmarksover every territory that is peopled andcultivated by human beings. And the actualdistribution of property is the fruit, partly ofman's own direct aim and acquisition, and partlyof circumstances oA^er which he had no control.The right of man to the means of existence onthe sole ground that he exists has been loudly andvehemently asserted ; yet is a factitious sentimentnotwithstanding — tending to efface the distinctnessof nature's landmarks, and to traversethose arrangements, by which she hath providedfar better for the peace and comfort of society,nay for the more sure and liberal support of allits members. It is true that nature, in fixingthe principles on which man has a right to thefruits of the earth, to the materials of his subsistence,has left out certain individuals of thehuman family — some outcast stragglers, who,on neither of nature's principles, will be foundpossessed of any right, or of any property. Itis for their sake that human law hath interposed,in some countries of the Avorld ; and, by creatingor ordaining a right for them, has endeavouredto make good the deficiency of nature. But ifjustice alone could have ensured a right distributionfor the supply of want, and if it mustTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 29be through the medium of a right that thedestitute shall obtain their maintenance — then,would there have been no need for anotherprinciple, which stands out most noticeably inour nature ; and compassion would have been asuperfluous part of the human constitution. Itis thus that nature provides for the unprovided —not by unsettling the limits which her previouseducation had established in all minds — not bythe extension of a right to every man ; but byestablishing in behalf of those some men, whomaccident or the necessity of circumstances oreven their own misconduct had left without aright, a compassionate interest in the bosomof their fellows. They have no advocate toplead for them at the bar of justice ; and thereforenature hath furnished them with a gentlerand more persuasive advocate, who might solicitfor them at the bar of mercy ; and, for theirexpress benefit, hath given to most men an earfor pity, to many a hand open as day for meltingcharity. But it is not to any rare, or romanticgenerosity, that she hath confided the relief oftheir wants. She hath made compassion one ofthe strongest, and, in spite of all the depravationsto which humanity is exposed, one of thesteadiest of our universal instincts. It were anintolerable spectacle even to the inmates of afelon's cell, did they behold one of their fellowsin the agonies of hunger ; and rather than30 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOendure it, would they share their own scanty mealWith them.* It were still more intolerable to thehouseholders of any neighbourhood — insomuchthat, where law had not attempted to supersedenature, every instance of distress or destitutionwould, whether in town or country, give riseto an internal operation of charity throughoutevery little vicinity of the land. The mischiefwhich law hath done, by trying to mend thebetter mechanism which nature had instituted,is itself a most impressive testimony to thewisdom of nature. The perfection of herarrangements, is never more strikingly exhibited,than by those evils which the disturbanceof them brings upon society — as when her law inthe heart has been overborne by England'swretched law of pauperism ; and this violationof the natural order has been followed up, inconsequence,by a tenfold increase both ofpoverty and crime.The certainty of this operation is beautifully exemplified in apassage of Mr. Buxton's interesting book on prisons — from whichit appears that there is no allowance of food to the debtors, and avery inferior allowance of food to the criminals, who are confinedin the gaol at Bristol. The former live on their own means or thecasual charity of the benevolent. Instances have occurred whenboth of these resources failed them — and starvation would haveensued, had not the criminals, rather than endure the neighbourhoodof such a suffering, shared their own scanty pittance along withthem — thus affording an argumentum a fortiori for a like strengthof compassion throughout the land — seeing that it had survivedthe depraving process whirl leads to the malefactor's cc!.THE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 3114. It is interesting to pursue the outgoings ofsuch a system ; and to ascertain whether naturehath vindicated her wisdom, by the evil consequencesof a departure from her guidance on thepart of man — for if so, it will supply anotherproof, or furnish us with another sight of theexquisite adaptation which she hath establishedbetween the moral and the physical, or betweenthe Jk7o worlds of mind and matter. Certain, then,of the parishes of England have afforded a verynear exemplification of the ultimate state towhich one and all ij)f them are tending — a statewhich is consummated, when the poor rates formso large a deduction from the rents of the land,that it shall at length cease to be an object tokeep them in cultivation.* It is thus that sometracts of country are on the eve of being actuallyThe following is an extract from the report of a select committeeon the poor lav printed in 1817. "The consequenceswhich are likely to result from this state of things, are clearly setforth in the petition from the parish of Cambridge in Salop,which is fast approaching to this state. The petitioners statethat the annual value of lands, mines and houses in this parish,is not sufficient to maintain the numerous and increasing poor,even if the same were set free of rent ; and that these circumstanceswill inevitably compel the occupiers of lands and mines torelinquish them ; and the poor will be without relief, or anyknown mode of obtaining it, unless some assistance be speedilyafforded to them.' And your committee apprehend, from thepetition before them, that this is one of many parishes that arefast approaching to a state of dereliction."The inquiries of the present Poor law Commission have led to astill more aggravated and confirmed view of the evils of the system.32 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOvacated by their proprietors ; and as their placeof superintendence cannot be vacated by others,who have no right of superintendence — the resultniio-ht be, that whole estates shall be aseffectually lost to the wealth and resources of thecountry, as if buried by an earthquake underwater,or, as if some blight of nature had goneover them and bereft them of their powers ofvegetation. Now we know not, if the whole historyof the world furnishes a more striking demonstrationthan this, of the mischief that maybedone, by attempting to carry into practice atheoretical speculation, which, loiter the guiseand even with the real purpose of benevolence,has for its plausible object, to equalize amongthe children of one common humanity, the blessingsand the fruits of one common inheritance.The truth is that we have not been conducted tothe present state of our rights and arrangementsrespecting property, by any artificial process oflegislation at all. The state of property in whichwe find ourselves actually landed, is the result ofa natural process, under which, all that a manearns by his industry is acknowledged to be hisown — or, when the original mode of acquisitionis lost sight of, all that a man retains by longand undisturbed possession is felt and acknowledgedto be his own also. Legislation ought todono more than barely recognize these principles,and defend its subjects against the violationTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 33of them. And when it attempts more than thiswhen it offers to tamper with the great arrangementsof nature, by placing the rights andthe securities of property on a footing differentfrom that of nature — when, as in the case of theEnglish poor-laws, it does so, under the pretenceand doubtless too with the honest designof establishing between the rich and the poor anearer equality of enjoyment ; we know not inwhat way violated nature could have inflictedon the enterprize a more signal and instructivechastisement, than when the whole territory ofthis plausible but presumptuous experiment ismade to droop and to wither under it as if struckby a judgment from heaven — till at length thatearth out of which the rich draw all their wealthand the poor all their subsistence, refuses tonourish the children who have abandoned her ;and both parties are involved in the wTcck ofone common and overwhelming visitation.15. But we read the same lesson in all thelaws and movements of political economy. Thesuperior wisdom of nature is demonstrated in themischief which is done by any aberration therefrom— when her processes are disturbed or intermeddledwith by the wisdom of man. Thephilosophy of free trade is grounded on the principle,that society is most enriched or best served,when commerce is left to its own spontaneousevolutions ; and is neither fostered by the artificeAFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOcoal encouragements, nor fettered by the artificialrestraints of human policy. The greatesteconomic good is rendered to the community,by each man being left to consult and to labourfor his own particular good — or, in other words,a more prosperous result is obtained by thespontaneous play and busy competition of manythousand wills, each bent on the prosecution ofits own selfishness, than by the anxious superintendenceof a government, vainly attempting tomedicate the fancied imperfections of nature, orto improve on the arrangements of her previousand better mechanism. It is when eachman is left to seek, with concentrated and exclusiveaim, his own individual benefit — it is then,that markets are best supplied ; that commoditiesare furnished for general use, of best quality, andin greatest cheapness and abundance; that thecomforts of life are most multiplied ; and themost free and rapid augmentation takes place inthe riches and resources of the commonwealth.Such a result, which at the same time not asingle agent in this vast and complicated systemof trade contemplates or cares for, each caringonly for himself— strongly bespeaks a higheragent, by whose transcendental wisdom it is,that all is made to conspire so harmoniouslyand to terminate so beneficially. We are aptto recognize no higher wisdom than that ofman, in those mighty concerts of human agencyTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 35a battle, or a revolution, or the accomplishmentof some prosperous and pacific scheme ofuniversal education ; where each w ho sharesin the undertaking is aware of its object, oracts in obedience to some master-mind whomay have devised and who actuates the whole.But it is widely different, when, as in politicaleconomy, some great and beneficent end bothunlooked and unlaboured for, is the result, notof any concert or general purpose among thethousands who are engaged in it — but is thecompound effect, nevertheless, of each lookingseverally, and in the strenuous pursuit of individualadvantage, to some distinct object ofhis own. When we behold the working of acomplex inanimate machine, and the usefulnessof its products — we infer, from the unconsciousnessof all its parts, that there musthave been a planning and a presiding wisdomin the construction of it. The conclusion isnot the less obvious, we think it emphaticallymore so, when, instead of this, we behold inone of the animate machines of human society,the busy world of trade, a beneficent result,an optimism of public and economical advantage,wrought out by the free movements of avast multitude of men, not one of whom hadthe advantage of the public in all his thoughts.When good is effected by a combination of unconsciousagents incapable of all maun, we ascribe36 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOthe combination to an intellect that devised andgave it birth. When good is effected by a combinationof conscious agents capable of aim, butthat an aim wholly different with each from thecompound and general result of their unitedoperations — this bespeaks a higher will and ahigher wisdom than any by which the individuals,taken separately, are actuated. Whenwe look at each striving to better his own condition,we see nothing in this but the selfishnessof man. When we look at the effect of this universalprinciple, in cheapening and multiplyingto the uttermost all the articles of human enjoyment,and establishing a thousand reciprocities ofmutual interest in the world — we see in this thebenevolence and comprehensive wisdom of God.16. The whole science of Political Economyis full of those exquisite adaptations to the wantsand the comforts of human life, which bespeakthe skill of a master-hand, in the adjustmentof its laws, and the working of its profoundlyconstructed mechanism. We shall instance,first, that speciality in the law of prices, bywhich they oscillate more largely with thevarieties in the supply of the necessaries, thanthey do in the mere comforts or luxuries ofhuman life. The deficiency of one tenth inthe imports of sugar, would not so raise theprice of that article, as a similar deficiency inthe supply of corn, which might rise even aTHE ECONOMIC WELL-being OF SOCIETY. 37third ill price, by the diminution of a tenthfrom the usual quantity brought to market. It isnot with the reason, but with the beneficial effectof this phenomenon, that we at present haveto do — not with its efficient, but with its finalcause ; or the great and obvious utilities towhich it is subservient. Connected with thislaw of wider variation in the price than in thesupply of first necessaries, is the reason why apopulation survive so well those years of famine,when the prices perhaps are tripled. This doesnot argue that they must be therefore threetimes worse fed than usual. The food of thecountry may only, for aught we know, havebeen lessened by a fourth part of its usualsupply — or, in other words, the families mayat an average be served with three-fourths oftheir usual subsistence, at the very time thatthe cost of it is three times greater than usual.And to make out this large payment, they haveto retrench for the year in other articles — altogether,it is likely, to give up the use ofcomforts ; and to limit themselves more largelyin the second, than they can possibly do inthe first necessaries of life — to forego perhapsmany of the little seasonings, wherewith theywont to impart a relish to their coarse andhumble fare — to husband more strictly theirfuel ; and be satisfied for a time with vestmentsmore threadbare, and even more tattered, thanC, II, E.38 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOwhat ill better times they would choose toappear in. It is thus that even although thefirst necessaries should be tripled in price foraseason, and although the pecuniary incomeof the labouring classes should not at all beincreased — yet they are found to weather thehardships of such a visitation. The food isstill served out to them at a much larger proportionthan the cost of it would in the firstinstance appear to indicate. And in the secondinstance they are enabled to purchase at thiscost — because, and more especially if they beawell-habited and well-conditioned peasantry,with a pretty high standard of enjoyment inordinary years, they have more that they cansave and retrench upon in a year of severescarcity. They can disengage much of thatrevenue which before went to the purchase ofdress, and of various luxuries that might foraseason be dispensed with ; and so have themore to expend on the materials of subsistence.It is this which explains how roughly a populationcan bear to be handled, both by adverseseasons and by the vicissitudes of trade ; andhow after all, there is a stability about a people'smeans, which will keep its ground against manychecks, and amidst many fluctuations. It isa mystery and a marvel to many an observer,how the seemingly frail and precarious interestof the labouring classes should after all, haveTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 39the Stamina of such endurance, as to weatherthe most fearful reverses both of commerce andof the seasons ; and that, somehow or other,we find after an interval of gloomy sufferingand still gloomier fears, that the families doemerge again into the same state of sufficiencyas before. We know not a fitter study for thephilanthropist than the working of that mechanism,by which a process so gratifying is caused,or in which he will find greater reason to admirethe exquisite skill of those various adaptationsthat must be referred to the providence of Himwho framed society, and suited so wisely to eachother the elements of which it is composed.17. There is nought which appears morevariable than the operation of those elementsby which the annual supply of the nationalsubsistence is regulated. How unlike in characteris one season to another ; and betweenthe extremes of dryness and moisture, howexceedingly different may be the amount ofthat produce on A^hich the sustenance of manessentially depends. Even after that the promiseof abundance is well nigh realized, thehurricane of a single day, passing over theyet uncut but ripened corn ; or the rain of afew w weeks, to drench and macerate the sheavesthat lie piled together on the harvest-field,were enough to destroy the food of millions.We are aware of a compensation, in the varieties40 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOof soil and exposure, so that the weather whichis adverse to one part of the country might befavourable to another ; besides that the mischiefof a desolating tempest in autumn must onlybe partial, from the harvest of the plains anduplands falling upon different months. Still,with all these balancing causes, the produceof different years is very far from being equalized; and its fluctuations would come chargedwith still more of distress and destitution tofamilies — were there not a counterpoise to thelaws of nature, in what may be termed thelaws of political economy.18. The price of human food does not immediatelydepend on the quantity of it that isproduced, but on the quantity of it that isbrought to market ; and it is well that, in everyyear of scarcity, there should be instant causesput into operation for increasing the latterquantity to the uttermost — so as to repair asmuch as possible the deficiencies of the former.It is well that even a small short-coming inthe crop should be so surely followed by a greatadvance of prices ; for this has instantly theeffect of putting the families of the land uponthat shortness of allowance, which might causethe supply, limited as it is, to serve throughoutthe year. But, beside the wholesome restraintwhich is thus imposed on the general consumptionof families, there is encouragement givenTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY 41by this dearness to abridge the consumptionupon farms, and by certain shifts in theirmanagement to make out the greatest possiblesurprise, for the object of sale and supply tothe population at large. A¥ith a high price, thefarmer feels it a more urgent interest, to carryas much of his produce to market as he can ;and for this purpose, he will retrench to theuttermost at home. And he has much in hispower. More particularly, he can and doesretrench considerably upon the feed of hiscattle, and in as far as this wont to consistof potatoes or grain, there must an importantaddition be gained in this way to the suppliesof the market. One must often have beenstruck with the comparative cheapness of animalfood in a year of scarcity. This is becauseof the greater slaughter of cattle which takesplace in such a year, to save the heavy expenseof maintaining them ; and which, besides affordinga direct accession to the sustenance ofman, lightens still more the farm consumption,and disengages for sale a still greater amountof the necessaries of life. We do not say butthat the farm suffers a derangement by thischange of regimen, from which it might takeyears to recover fully. But the evil becomesmore tolerable by being spread. The horrorsof extreme scarcity are prevented. The extremityis weathered at its furthest point. The42 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOcountry emerges from the visitation, and without,in all probability, the starvation of one individual; and all because, from the operation ofthe causes that we have now explained, thesupply of the market is made to oscillate withinsmaller limits than the crop — insomuch thatthough the latter should be deficient by one-thirdof the whole, the former might not bedeficient by one-fifth or one-sixth of what isbrought to market annually.19. This effect is greatly increased by thesuspending of distillation in years of scarcity.And after all, should the supplies be yet veryshort, and the prices therefore far more than proportionallyhigh, this will naturally and of itself,bring on the importation of grain from foreignparts. If such be the variety of weather andsoil, even within the limits of a country, as insome measure to balance the scarcity which isexperienced in one set of farms, by the comparativeabundance of another set — this will applywith much greater force to a whole continent, orto the world at large. If a small deficiency in thehome supply of grain induce a higher price thanwith other articles of commerce, this is just aprovision for a securer and readier filling up ofthe deficiency by a movement from abroad— athing of far greater importance with the necessariesthan with the mere comforts or luxuriesof life. TJiat law of wider and more tremulousTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 43oscillation in the price of corn, which we haveattempted to expound, is in itself a security foramore equal distribution of it over the globe byman, in those seasons when nature has beenpartial — so as to diffuse the more certainly andthe more speedily through the earth that whichhas been dropped upon it unequally from Heaven.It is well that greater efficacy should thusbe given to that corrective force, by which theyearly supplies of food are spread over the worldwith greater uniformity than they at first descendupon it ; and, however much it may be thoughtto aggravate a people's hardships, that a slightfailure in their home supply should create sucha rise in the cost of necessaries — yet certainly itmakes the impulse all the more powerful, bywhich corn flows in from lands of plenty to aland of famine. But what we have long esteemedthe most beautiful part of this operation, is theinstant advantage, which a large importationfrom abroad gives to our export manufacturersat home. There is a limit in the rate of exchangeto the exportation of articles from anycountry ; but up to this limit, there is a class oflabourers employed in the preparation of thesearticles. Now the effect of an augmented importationupon the exchange is such as to enlargethis limit — so that our export traders can thensell with a larger profit, and carry out a greateramount of goods than before, and thus enlist a44 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOmore numerous population in the service of preparingthem. An increased importation alwaysgives an impulse to exportation, so as to makeemployment spring up in one quarter, at the verytime that it disappears in another. Or, rather,at the very time when the demand for a particularcommodity is slackened at home, it isstimulated abroad. We have already advertedto the way in which families shift their expenditurein a year of scarcity, directing a far greaterproportion of it than usual to the first necessariesof life, and withdrawing it proportionallyfrom the comforts, and even second necessariesof life. Cloth may be regarded as oneof the second necessaries ; and it were woefulindeed, if on the precise year when food wasdearest, the numerous workmen engaged in thisbranch of industry should find that employmentwas scarcest. But in very proportion as theyare abandoned by customers at home, do theyfind a compensation in the more quickened demandof customers from abroad. It is in thesevarious ways that a country is found to surviveso well its hardest and heaviest visitations ; andeven under a triple price for the first articles ofsubsistence, it has been found to emerge intoprosperity again, without an authentic instanceof starvation throughout all its families.*It is right to mention that the four preceding: paragraphs aretaken in substance, and very much in language, from a formerTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 4520. When any given object is anxiously caredfor by a legislature, and all its wisdom is putforth in devising measures for securing or extendingit^it forms a pleasing discovery to find,that what may have hitherto been the laboriousaim and effort of human policy, has already beenprovided for, with all perfection and entirenessin the spontaneous workings of humannature ; and that therefore, in this instance, thewisdom of the state has been anticipated by ahigher wisdom— or the wisdom which presidesover the ordinations of a human government, hasbeen anticipated by the wisdom which ordainedthe laws of the human constitution. Of thisthere are manifold examples in political economy— as in the object of population, for thekeeping up and increase of which, there was atonetime a misplaced anxiety on the part ofrulers ; and the object of capital for the preservationand growth of which there is a like misplacedanxiety, and for the decay and disappearanceof which there is an equally misplacedalarm. Both, in fact, are what may be termedself-regulating interests — or, in other words, interestswhich result with so much certaintyfrom the checks and the principles that naturehath already instituted, as to supersede allpublication — as presenting a notable adaptation of external to humannature which offered itself, in the course of other investigations,and at a time when we were not in quest of it.46 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOpublic or patriotic regulation in regard to eitherof them. This has now been long understood onthe subject of population ; but it holds equallytrue on the subject of capital. There is, on theone hand, throughout society, enough of theappetite for enjoyment, to secure us against itsneedless excess ; and, on the other, enough of theappetite for gain, to secure us against its hurtfuldeficiency. And, by a law of oscillation asbeautiful as that which obtains in the planetarysystem, and by which, amid all disturbancesand errors, it is upheld in its mean state indestructibleand inviolate — does capital, in likemanner, constantly tend to a condition of optimism,and is never far from it, amid all thevariations, whether of defect, or redundancy, towhich it is exposed. When in defect, by theoperation of high prices, it almost instantlyrecovers itself — when in excess, it, by the operationof low profits, or rather of losing speculations,almost instantly collapses into a rightmediocrity. In the first case, the inducementis to trade rather than to spend ; and there is aspeedy accumulation of capital. In the secondcase, the inducement is to spend rather than totrade ; and there is a speedy reduction of capital.It is thus that capital ever suits itself, in theway that is best possible, to the circumstances ofthe country — so as to leave uncalled for, anyeconomic regulation by the wisdom of man ; andTHE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 47that precisely because of a previous moral andmental regulation by the wisdom of God.21 . But if any thing can demonstrate the handof a righteous Deity in the nature and workingsof what may well be termed a mechanism, thevery peculiar mechanism of trade ; it is thehealthful impulse given to all its movements,wherever there is a reigning principle of sobrietyand virtue in the land — so as to ensure an inseparableconnection between the moral worthand the economic comfort of a people. Of thiswe should meet with innumerable verificationsin political economy — did we make a study ofthe science, with the express design of fixing andascertaining them. There is one very beautifulinstance in the effect, which the frugality andforesight of workmen would have, to control andequalize the fluctuations of commerce — actingwith the power of a fly in mechanics ; and soas to save, or at least indefinitely to shorten,those dreary intervals of suspended work ormiserable wages, which now occur so often, andwith almost periodic regularity in the trading-world.What constitutes a sore aggravation tothe wretchedness of such a season, is the necessityof overworking — so as, if possible, to compensateby the amount of about for the deficiencyof its remuneration ; aud yet the inverse effect ofthis in augmenting and perpetuating that glut, oroverproduction, which is the real origin of this48 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOwhole calamity. It would not happen in thehands of a people elevated and exempted abovethe urgencies of immediate want ; and nothingwill so elevate and exempt them, but their ownaccumulated w earth— the produce of a resoluteeconomy and good management in prosperoustimes. Would they only save during high wages,what they might spend during low wages— so aswhen the depression comes, to slacken, insteadof adding to their work, or even cease from italtogether — could they only afford to live, throughthe months of such a visitation, on their wellhusbanded means, the commodities of the overladenmarket would soon clear away ; when,with the return of a brisk demand on emptywarehouses, a few weeks instead of monthswould restore them to importance and prosperityin the commonwealth. This is but a singlespecimen from many others of that enlargementwhich awaits the labouring classes, after that bytheir own intelligence and virtue, they have wontheir way to it. With but wisdom and goodnessamong the common people, the whole of thiseconomic machinery would work most beneficentlyfor them — a moral ordination, containingin it most direct evidence for the wisdom andgoodness of that Being by w hose hands it is thatthe machinery has been framed and constituted ;and who, the Preserver and Governor, as well asthe Creator of His works, sits with presidingauthority over all its evolutions.THE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 4922. But this is only one specimen out of themany — the particular instance of a quality thatis universal, and which may be detected in almostall the phenomena and principles of thescience ; for throughout, political economy is butone grand exemplification of the alliance, whicha God of righteousness hath established, betweenprudence and moral principle on the one hand,and physical comfort on the other. Howeverobnoxious the modern doctrine of population,as expounded by Mr. Malthus, may have been,and still is, to weak and limited sentimentalists,it is the truth which of all others sheds thegreatest brightness over the earthly prospects ofhumanity — and this in spite of the hideous, theyet sustained outcry which has risen against it.This is a pure case of adaptation, between theexternal nature of the world in which we live,and the moral nature of man, its chief occupier.There is a demonstrable inadequacy in all thematerial resources which the globe can furnish,for the increasing wants of a recklessly increasingspecies. But over and against this, man isgifted with a moral and a mental power bywhich the inadequacy might be fully countervailed; and the species, in virtue of their restrainedand regulated numbers, be upholden onthe face of our world, in circumstances of largeand stable sufficiency, even to the most distantages. The first origin of this blissful consumesAFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOnation is in the virtue of the people ; but carriedinto sure and lasting elect by the laws ofpolitical economy, through the indissoluble connectionwhich obtains between the wages andthe supply of labour — so that in every given stateof commerce and civilization, the amount of theproduce of industry and of the produce of thesoil, which shall fall to the share of the workmen,is virtually at 'the determination of theAvork-men themselves, who, by dint of resoluteprudence and resolute principle together, mayrise to an indefinitely higher status than theynow occupy, of comfort and independence in thecommonwealth. This opens up a cheering prospectto the lovers of our race ; and not the lessso, that it is seen through the medium of popularintelligence and virtue— the only medium throughwhich it can ever be realized. And it sheds arevelation, not only on the hopeful destinies ofman, but on the character of God — in havinginstituted this palpable alliance between themoral and the physical ; and so assorted theeconomy of outward nature to the economy ofhuman principles and passions. The lightsof modern science have made us apprehendmore clearly, by what steps the condition andthe character of the common people rise andfall with each other — insomuch, that, while onthe one hand their general destitution is theinevitable result of their general worthlessness,THE ECONOMIC WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 51they, on the other, by dint of wisdom and moralstrength, can augment indefinitely, not theproduce of the earth, nor the produce of humanindustry, but that proportion of both which fallsto their own share. Their economic is sure tofollow by successive advances in the career oftheir moral elevation ; nor do we hold it impossible,or even unlikely — that gaining, every generation,on the distance which now separatesthem from the upper classes of society, theyshall, in respect both of decent sufficiency anddignified leisure, make perpetual approximationsto the fellowships and the enjoyments of cultivatedlife.Chapter VIII.On the Relation in which the special Affections ofour Nature stand to Virtue; and on the Demonstrationgiven forth by it, both to the Characterof Man and the Character of God.1 . There are certain broad and decisive indicationsof moral design, and so of a moral designer,in the constitution of our world, which instead ofexpounding at great length, we have only statedbriefly or incidentally — because, however effectRELATION OF THE SPECIAL AFFECTIONSlive as proofs, they possess a character of suchextreme obviousness, as to require no anxious orformal explanation ; but, on the instant of beingpresented to their notice, are read and recognizedby all men. One patent example of this in theconstitution of man, is the force and prevalenceof compassion — an endowment which could nothave proceeded from a malignant being ; butwhich evinces the Author of our nature to behimself compassionate and generous. Anotherexample may be given alike patent and recognizable,if not of a virtuous principle in the humanconstitution, at least of such an adaptationof the external world to that constitution — that,with the virtuous practice which that principlewould both originate and sustain, the outwardand general prosperity of man is indispensablyconnected. We mean the manifest and indispensablesubserviency of a general truth in the world,to the general well-being of society. It is difficultto imagine, that a God of infinite power,and consummate skill of workmanship, butwithal a lover of falsehood, would have devisedsuch a world ; or rather, that he would not, inpatronage to those of his own likeness, haveordered the whole of its system differently — soreversing its present laws and sequences, as that,instead of honour and integrity, duplicity disingenuousnessand fraud, should have been theusual stepping-stones to the possession both ofOF OUR NATURE TO VIRTUE. 53this world's esteem and of this world's enjoyments.How palpably opposite this is to theactual economy of things, the whole experienceof life abundantly testifies — making it evident,of individual examples, that the connection betweenhonesty and success in the world is therule ; the connection between dishonesty andsuccess is the exception. But perhaps, insteadof attempting the induction of particular cases,we should observe a still more distinct avowal ofthe character of God, of his favour for truth, andof the discountenance which he has laid uponfalsehood, by tracing, which could be easilydone in imagination, the effect it would have insociety, if, all things else remaining unaltered,there should this single difference be introduced,of a predominant falsehood, instead of a predominanttruth in the world. The consequencesof a universal distrust, in the almost universalstoppage that would ensue of the useful interchangesof life, are too obvious to be enumerated.The world of trade would henceforth break upinto a state of anarchy, or rather be paralyzedinto a state of cessation and stillness. Themutual confidence between man and man, ifnot the mainspring of commerce, is at least theoil, without which its movements were impracticable.And were truth to disappear, and alldependence on human testimony to be destroyed,this is not the only interest which wouldC. II. F54 K ILLATION Ob THE SPECIAL AFFECTIONSbe ruined by it. It would vitiate, and that incurably,every social and every domestic relationship; and all the charities as well as all thecomforts of life would take their departure fromthe world.2. Seeing then that the observation of honestyand truth is of such vital importance to society,that without it society would cease to keeptogether — it might be well to ascertain, bywhat special provision it is in the constitutionof nmn, that the practice of these virtues isupheld in the world. Did it proceed in everyinstance, from the natural power and love ofintegrity in the heart — we should rejoice incontemplating this alliance between the worthof man's character, on the one hand ; and thesecurity, as well as the abundance of his outwardcomforts upon the other. And such, in fact,is the habitual disposition to truth in the worldthat, in spite of the great moral depravationinto which our species has obviously fallen, weprobably do not overrate the proportion, whenwe affirm, that at least a hundred truths areuttered among men for one falsehood. Butthen, in the vast majority of cases, there is notemptation to struggle with, nothing by whichto try or to estimate the strength of the virtueso that, without virtue being at all concerned —in it, man's words might spontaneously flowin tl)e natural current of his ideas, of illic OUR NATURE TO VIRTUE. 55ledge or the convictions which belong to him.But more than this. Instead of selfishnessseducing man, which it often does, from theobservations of truth and honesty — it vastlyoftener is on the side of these observations.Generally speaking, it is not more his interestthat he should have men of integrity to dealwith — than that he himself should, in his owndealings, be strictly observant of this virtue.To be abandoned by the confidence of his fellows,he would find to be not more mortifying tohis pride, than ruinous to his prosperity inthe world. We are aware that many an occasionalharvest is made from deceit and injustice ;but, in the vast majority of cases, men wouldcease to thrive when they ceased to be trusted.A man's actual truth is not more beneficialto others, than the reputation of it is gainfulto himself. And therefore it is, that, throughoutthe mercantile world, men are as sensitive ofan aspersion on their name, as they would beof an encroachment on their property. The one,in fact, is tantamount to the other. It is thus,that, under the constraints of selfishness alone,fidelity and justice may be in copious andcurrent observation among men ; and while,perhaps, the principle of these virtues is exceedinglyfrail and uncertain in all hearts — humansociety may still subsist by the literal andoutward observation of them.50 RELATION OF THE SPECIAL AFFECTIONS3. Here then is the example, not of a virtuein principle, but of a virtue in performance, withallthe indispensable benefits of that performance,being sustained on the soil of selfishness.Were a profound observer of human life to takeaccount of all the honesties of mercantileintercourse, he would find, that, in the generalamount of them, they were mainly due to theoperation of this cause ; or that they were soprevalent in society, because each man wasbound to their observance, by the tie of hisown personal interest — insomuch, that if thisparticular tie were broken, it would as surelyderange or break up the world of trade, asthe world of matter would become an inert orturbid chaos, on the repeal or suspension ofthe law of gravitation. Confidence the verysoul of commercial enterprize, and withoutwhich the transactions of merchandize wereimpossible, is the goodly result, not of thatnative respect which each man has for another'srights, but of that native regard which eachman has for his own special advantage. Thisforms another example of a great and generalgood wrought out for society — while each componentmember is intently set, only on a distinctand specific good for himself — a high interest,which could not have been confided to humanvirtue ; but which has been skilfully extractedfrom the workings of human selfishness. In asOF OUR NATURE TO VIRTUE. 57far as truth and justice prevail in the world,not by the operation of principle but of policy,in so far the goodness of man has no sharein it : but so beneficent a result out of suchunpromising materials, speaks all the moreemphatically both for the wisdom and thegoodness of God.4. But in this there is no singularity. Otherexamples can be named, of God placing us insuch circumstances, as to enlist even our selfishnesson the side of virtuous conduct ; or implantingsuch special affections, as do, by theirown impulse, lead to that conduct, although virtuousnessis not in all our thoughts. We areoften so actuated, as to do what is best forsociety, at the very time that the good of societyis forming no part of our concern ; and ourfootsteps are often directed in that very path,which a moral regard to the greatest happinessof the species would dictate — without any moralpurpose having been conceived or any moralprinciple been in exercise within us. It is thusthat our resentment operates as a check on theinjuriousness of others, although our single aimbe the protection of our own interests — not thediminution of violence or injustice in the world :And thus too our own dread of resentment fromothers, works the same outward effect, whichhonour or a respect for their rights would havehad upon our transactions, which delicacy or58 RELATION OF THE SPECIAL AFFECTIONSa respect for their feelings would have had uponour converse v^^ith those around us. It is in thisway that God makes the wrath of man to praiseHim ; and the same is true of other affectionsof our nature, which have less the characterof selfishness, than either anger or fear. It isnot because prompted by a sense of duty, butunder the force of a mere natural proneness, thatmothers watch so assiduously over the helplessness,and fathers toil so painfully for the subsistenceof their children. Even compassion,with the speed and the discrimination of itsmovements, does for human life, more than manis capable of doing with his highest efforts ofmorality and reason — yet, not in the shape of aprinciple, but in the shape of a strong constitutionalpropensity. The good is rendered, not byman acting as he thinks that he ought, or underthe force of a moral suggestion ; but man actingbecause he feels himself constrained, as if bythe force of a physical necessity — not surelybecause, in the exercise of a sovereign liberty,he hath assumed a lordly ascendant over all theinferior passions of his nature ; but because himselfis lorded over by a law of his nature, havingin it all the might and mastery of a passion. Itis when, in the contemplation of phenomena likethese, we are enabled to view man as an instrument,that we are also led more clearly to perceivewho the agent is — not the being who isOF OUR NATURE TO VIRTUE. 59endowed, but the Being who has endowed him.The instinct of animals is a substitute for theirwisdom ; but, at the same time, a palpabledemonstration of the wisdom of God. Manalso has his instincts, which serve as thesubstitutes of moral goodness in him ; butwhich therefore mark all the more strongly, bytheir beneficial operation the goodness of hisMaker.*5. To see how widely these gifts or endowmentsof our nature by the hand of God, maystand apart from aught like proper goodness orvirtue in the heart of man — we have only towitness the similar provision which has beenmade for the care and preservation of the inferioranimals. The anger which arouses to defenceagainst injury, and the fear which promptsto an escape from it, and the maternal affectionwhich nourishes and rears forward the successiveyoung into a condition of strength and independencefor the protection of themselves—Dr. Smith in his Theory of Moral Sentiments has wellremarked that — " though in accounting for the operations ofbodies, we never fail to distinguish the efficient from the final cause,in accounting for those of the mind, we are very apt to confoundthese two different things with one another. When by naturalprinciples we are led to advance those ends which a refined andenlightened reason would recommend to us, we are very apt toimpute to that reason, as to their efficient cause, the sentimentsand actions by which we advance those ends, and to imagine thatto be the wisdom of man, which in reality is the wisdom of God."60 RELATION OF THE SPECIAL AFFECTIONSthese all have their indispensable uses, forupholding and perpetuating the various tribes ofliving creatures, who at the same time are alikeincapable of morality and reason. There is nomoral purpose served by these plantations, sofarat least as respects the creatures themselves,with whom virtue is a thing utterly incompetentand unattainable. In reference to them, theymay be viewed simply as beneficent contrivances,and as bespeaking no other characteristicon the part of the Deity than that ofpure kindness, or regard for the happiness andsafety, throughout their respective generations, ofthe creatures whom He has made. This mighthelp us to distinguish between those mentalendowments of our own species, which have butfor their object the comfort and protection ; andthose which have for their object the characterof man. The former we have in common withthe inferior animals ; and so far they only discoverto us the kindness of the divine nature, orthe parental and benevolent concern which Godtakes in us. The latter are peculiar to our race,and are indicated by certain phenomena of ourmental nature, in which the beasts of the fieldand the fowls of the air have no share with us —by the conscience within us, asserting its ownrightful supremacy over all our affections anddoings ; by our capacities for virtue and vice,along with the pleasures or the pains which areOF OUR NATURE TO VIRTUE. 61respectively blended with them ; and finally bythe operation of habit, whose office, like that ofa schoolmaster, is to perfect our education, andto fix, in one way or other, but at length immoveable,the character of its disciples. Thesepresent us with a distinct exhibition of the Deity,or a distinct and additional relation in which Hestands to us — revealing to us, not Him only asthe affectionate Father, and ourselves only as thefoundlings of His regard ; but Him also as thegreat moral Teacher, the Lawgiver, and moralGovernor of man, and ourselves in a state ofpupillage and probation, or as the subjects of amoral discipline.6. And here it may be proper to remark, thatwe understand by the goodness of God, not Hisbenevolence or His kindness alone. The term iscomprehensive of all moral excellence. Truth,and justice, and that strong repugnance to moralevil which has received the peculiar denominationof Holiness — these are all good moral properties,and so enter into the composition ofperfect moral goodness. There are some whohave analyzed, or, in the mere force of their ownwishfulness, would resolve the whole characterof the Deity into but one attribute — that ofa placid undistinguishing tenderness ; and, invirtue of this tasteful or sentimental but withalmeagre imagination, would they despoil Him ofall sovereignty and of all sacredness — holding()2 RELATION OF THE SPECIAL AFFECTIONSHim forth as but the indulgent Father, and notalso as the righteous Governor of men. But thisanalysis is as impracticable in the character ofGod, as we have already found it to be in thecharacter of man.* Unsophisticated consciencespeaks differently. The forebodings of thehuman spirit in regard to futurity, as well as thepresent phenomena of human life, point to truthand righteousness, as distinct and stable andindependent perfections of the divine nature —however glossed or disguised they may havebeen, by the patrons of a mild and easy religion.In the various provisions of nature forthe defence and security of the inferior animals,we may read but one lesson — the benevolence ofits Author. In the like provisions, whether forthe defence and prolongation of human life, orthe maintenance of human society — we read thatlesson too, but other lessons in conjunction withit. For in the larger capacities of man, andmore especially in his possession of a moralnature, do we regard him as born for somethinginterior and something higher than the passing-enjoymentsof a brief and ephemeral existence.And so when we witness in the provisions,whether of his animal or mental economy, a subserviencyto the protection, or even to the enjoymentsof his transition state — we cannot discordvii. Alt. 7.OF OUR NATURE TO VIRTUE. 03next this with subserviency to the remoter objectsof that climate state whither he is going. Inthe instinctive fondness of parents, and theaffinities of kindness from the fellows of ourspecies, and even the private affections of angerand fear, — we behold so many elements conjoinedinto what may be termed an apparatus ofguardianship ; and such an apparatus has beenreared by Providence in behalf of every creaturethat breathes. But in the case of man, with hislarger capacities and prospects, the terminatingobject, even of such an intermediate and temporaryapparatus, is not to secure for him, thesafety or happiness of the present life. It is tofulfil the period, and subserve the purposes ofa moral discipline. For meanwhile character isripening ; and, whether good or bad, settling bythe power and operation of habit into a state ofinveteracy — and so, as to fix and prepare thedisciples of a probationary state for their finaldestinations. What to the inferior animals arethe provisions of a life, are to man the accommodationsof a journey. In the one we singlybehold the indications of a divine benevolence.With the other, we connect the purposes of adivine administration ; and, beside the love andliberality of a Parent, we recognize the designsof a Teacher, and Governor, and Judge.7. And these special affections, though theirpresent and more conspicuous use be to uphold64 RELATION OF THE SPECIAL AFFECTIONSthe existing economy of life, are not withouttheir influence and their uses in a system ofmoral discipline. And it is quite obvious, that,ere we can pronounce on the strict and essentialvirtuousness of any human being, they must beadmitted into the reckoning. In estimating theprecise moral quality of any beneficence whichman may have executed, it is indispensable toknow, in how far he w as schooled into it at thebidding of principle, and in how far urgedforward to it by the impulse of a special affection.To do good to another because he feelsthat he ought, is an essentially distinct exhibitionfrom doing the same good, by the force ofparental love, or of an instinctive and spontaneouscompassion — as distinct as the strengthof a constitutionally implanted desire is from thesense of a morally incumbent obligation. In asfar as I am prompted to the relief of distress, bya movement of natural pity — in so far less isleft for virtue to do. In as far as I am restrainedfrom the out-breaking of an anger whichtumultuous within, by the dread of a counter-resentmentand retaliation from without — in sofarvirtue has less to resist. It is thus that thespecial affections may at once lighten the tasksand lessen the temptations of virtue ; and,whether in the way of help at one time or ofdefence at another, may save the very existenceof a principle, which in its own unaided frailty,OF OUR NATURE TO VIRTUE. 65might, among the rude conflicts of life, have elsebeen overborne. It is perhaps indispensable tothe very being of virtue among men, that, bymeans of the special affections, a certain forceof inclination has been superadded to the forceof principle — we doubt not, in proportions ofhighest wisdom, of most exquisite skill anddelicacy. But still the strength of the one mustbe deducted, in computing the real amount andstrength of the other ; and so the special affectionsof our nature not only subserve a purposein time, but are of essential and intimate effectin the processes of our moral preparation, andwill eventually tell on the high retribution andjudgments of eternity.8. Man is not a utilitarian either in his propensitiesor in his principles. When doing whathe likes — it is not always, it is not generally,because of its perceived usefulness, that he solikes it. But his inclinations, these propertiesof his nature, have been so adapted both to thematerial world and to human society, that agreat accompanying or great resulting usefulness,is the effect of that particular constitutionwhich God hath given to him. And when doingwhat he feels that he ought, it is far from alwaysbecause of its perceived usefulness, that he sofeels. But God hath so formed our mental constitution,and hath so adapted the whole economyof external things to the stable and everlasting06 RELATION OF THE SPECIAL AFFECTIONSprinciples of virtue, that, in effect and historicalfulfilment, the greatest virtue and the greatesthappiness are at one. But the union of thesetwo does not constitute their unity. Virtue isnot right, because it is useful ; but God hathmade it useful, because it is right. He bothloves virtue, and wills the happiness of hiscreatures — this benevolence of will, being itself,not the whole, but one of the brightest moralitiesin the character of the Godhead. He wills thehappiness of man, but wills his virtue more ;and accordingly, hath so constructed both thesystem of humanity, and the system of externalnature, that, only through the medium of virtue,can any substantial or lasting happiness berealized. The utilitarians have confounded thesetwo elements, because of the inseparable yetcontingent alliance, which a God of virtue hathestablished between them. The Cosmopolitesare for merging all the particular affections intoone ; and would substitute in their place ageneral desire for the greatest possible amountof good to others, as the alone guide and impellentof human conduct. And the Utilitariansare for merging all the particular virtues intoone ; and would substitute in their place thegreatest usefulness, as the alone principle towhich every question respecting the morality ofactions should be referred. The former woulddo away friendship, and ]patriotism, and all theOF OUR NATURE TO VIRTUE. 67partialities or even instincts of relationship, fromthe system of human nature. The latter Mouldat least degrade, if not do away, truth and justicefrom the place which they now hold in the systemof Ethics. The desolating effect of suchchanges on the happiness and security of sociallife, would exhibit the vast superiority of theexistent economy of things, over that speculativeeconomy into which these theorists would transformit ; or, in other words, would prove by howmighty an interval, the goodness and the wisdomof God transcended both the goodness and thewisdom of man.9. The whole of this speculation, if followedout into its just and legitimate consequences,would serve greatly to humble and reduce ourestimate of human virtue. Nothing is virtuous,but what is done under a sense of duty ; or done,simply and solely because it ought. It is onlyin as far as this consideration is present to themind, and is of practical and prevalent operationthere — that man can be said to feel virtuously,or to act virtuously. We should not think ofaffixing this moral characteristic to any performancehowever beneficial, that is done under themere impulse of a headlong sensibility, withoutany sense or any sentiment of a moral obligation.In every good action, that is named goodbecause useful to society, we should subduct orseparate all which is due to the force of a spesRELATION OF THE SPECIAL AFFECTIONS, ETC.coal affection, that we might precisely ascertainhow much or how little remains, which may bedue to the force of principle. The inferior animals,destitute though they be of a moral natureand therefore incapable of virtue, share with usin some of the most useful and amiable instinctswhich belong to humanity ; and when we stopto admire the workings of nature's sensibility —whether in the tears that compassion sheds overthe miseries of the unfortunate, or in the smilesand endearments which are lavished by a motherupon her infant family, we seldom reflecthow little of the real and proper character ofvirtue is there. We accredit man, as if theywere his own principles, with those instinctswhich the divinity hath implanted within him ;and it aggravates the error, or rather the guiltof so perverse a reckoning — that, while we offerthis incense to humanity, we forget all the whilethe hand of Him, by whom it is that humanityis so bountifully gifted and so beauteouslyadornedChapter IX.Miscellaneous Evidences of virtuous and benevolentDesign, in the Adaptation of External Natureto the 3Ioral Constitution of tian.1. It will be enough, if, after having led the wayon a new territory of investigation, we shallselect one or two out of the goodly number ofinstances, as specimens of the richness and fertilityof the land. We have already endeavouredto prove, why a number of distinct benefits, eventhough reducible by analysis into one principleor law, still affords, not a solitary, but a multipleevidence, of the wise and benevolent Creator.*This evidence, in fact, is proportioned to thenumber, not of efficient but final causes in nature— so that each separate example of a goodrendered to humanity, in virtue of its actualconstitution, may be regarded as a separate andadditional evidence, of its having been formedby an artificer, at once of intelligent deviceand kind purposes. The reduction of these examplesinto fewer laws does not extenuate theargument for His goodness ; and it may enhancethe argument for His wisdom.'&"Introductory Chapter, Art. 27, 28, 29.C. II. G70 MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.2. The first instance which occurs to us is thatlaw of affection, by which its intensity or strengthis proportioned to the helplessness of its object.It takes a direction downwards ; descending, forexample, with much greater force from parentsto children, than ascending from children toparents back again — save when they lapse againinto second infancy, and the duteous devotedattendance by the helpful daughters of a family,throughout the protracted ailments and infirmityof their declining years, instead of an exception,is in truth a confirmation of the law — as muchso, as the stronger attraction of a mother's hearttowards the youngest of the family; or, moreimpressive still, her more special and concentratedregard towards her sickly or decrepit oreven idiot boy. It is impossible not to recognizein this beautiful determination of nature, the benevolenceof nature's God.3. Such instances could be greatly multiplied ;and we invite the future explorers of this untroddenfield to the task of collecting them. Wehasten to instances of another kind, which we allthe more gladly seize upon, as being cases ofpurest and strictest adaptation, not of the externalmental, but of the external material world,to the moral constitution of man.4. The power of speech is precisely such anadaptation. Whether we regard the organs ofutterance and hearing in man, or the aerialMISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 7!medium by which sounds are conveyed — do webehold a pure subserviency of the material to themental system of our world. It is true that thegreat object subserved by it, is the action andreaction between mind and mind — nor can weestimate this object too highly, when we thinkof the mighty influence of language, both on themoral and intellectual condition of our species.Still it is by means of an elaborate material constructionthat this pathway has been formed,from one heart and from one understanding toanother. And therefore it is, that the faculty ofcommunication by words, with all the power andflexibility which belong to it, by which thecountless benefits of human intercourse aresecured, and all the stores of sentiment andthought are turned into a common property forthe good of mankind, may well be rankedamong the highest of the examples that we arenow in quest of — it being indeed as illustriousan adaptation as can be named of ExternalNature to the Moral and Intellectual Constitutionof Man. Of the converse of disembodiedspirits we know nothing. But to man cased inmaterialism, certain material passages or ductsof conveyance, for the interchange of thoughtand feeling between one mind and another seemindispensable. The exquisite provision whichhas been made for these, both in the powers ofarticulation and hearing, as also in that interMISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.mediate element, by the pulsations of which, ideasare borne forward, as on so many winged messengersfrom one intellect to another — bespeaks,and perhaps more impressively than any otherphenomena in nature, the contrivance of asupreme artificer, the device and finger of aDeity.*5. But articulate and arbitrary sound is notthe only vehicle, either of meaning or sentiment.There is a natural as well as artificial language,consisting chiefly of expressive tones — thoughgreatly reinforced both by expressive looks andexpressive gestures. The voice, by its intonationsalone, is a powerful instrument for the propagationof sympathy between man and man ;and there is similarity enough between us andthe inferior animals, in the natural signs ofvarious of the emotions, as anger and fear andgrief and cheerfulness, for the sympathy beingextended beyond the limits of our own species,and over a great part of the sentient creation.We learn by experience and association the sightwill at once l)e seen that the same observations may beextended to written language, and to the fitness of those materialswhich subserve through its means, the wide and rapid communicationof human thoughts. We in truth could have multipliedindefinitely such instances of adaptation as we are nowgiving — but we judge it better to have confined ourselves throughoutthe volume, to matters of a more rudimental and generalcharacter — leaving the manifold detail and fuller developmentsof the argument to future labourers in the field.MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 73significancy of the merely vocal apart from vocables; for almost each shade of meaning, at leasteach distinct sensibility, has its own appropriateintonation — so that, without catching one syllableof the utterance, we can, from its melodyalone, often tell what are the workings of theheart, and even what are the workings of theintellect. It is thus that music, even thoughaltogether apart from words, is so powerfullyfitted, both to represent and to awaken themental processes — insomuch that, without theaid of spoken characters, many a story of deepestinterest is most impressively told, many a nobleor tender sentiment is most emphatically conveyedby it. It says much for the native andoriginal predominance of virtue — it may bedeemed another assertion of its designed preeminencein the world, that our best and highestmusic is that which is charged with loftiest principle,whether it breathes in orisons of sacredness,or is employed to kindle the purposes andto animate the struggles of resolved patriotism ;and that never does it fall with more exquisitecadence on the ear of the delighted listener, thanwhen attuned to the home sympathies of nature,it tells in accents of love or pity, of its woes andits wishes for all humanity. The power and expressivenessof music may well be regarded as amost beauteous adaptation of External Nature tothe Moral Constitution of Man — for what can be74 IMlSCELLAiNEOUS ADAPTATIONS.more adapted to his moral constitution, thanthat which is so helpful as music eminently is,to his moral culture? Its sweetest sounds arethose of kind affection. Its sublimest sounds arethose most expressive of moral heroism ; or mostfitted to solemnize the devotions of the heart,and prompt the aspirations and resolves ofexalted piety.6. A philosophy of taste has been founded onthis contemplation ; and some have contendedthat both the beauty and the sublimity of soundsare derived from their association with moralqualities alone. Without affirming that associationis the only, or the universal cause, it mustat least be admitted to have a very extensiveinfluence over this class of our emotions. Ifeach of the mental affections have its own appropriateintonation ; and there be the same orsimilar intonations given forth, either by theinanimate creation or by the creatures havinglife which are inferior to man — then, frequentand familiar on every side of him, must be manyof those sounds by which human passions aresuggested, and the memory of things awakenedwhich are fitted to affect and interest the heart.And thus it is, that, to the ear of a poet, allnature is vocal with sentiment ; and he can fancya genius or residing spirit, in the ocean, or in thetempest, or in the wishing waterfall, or in theMISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 75stream whose softer murmurs would lull him torepose — or in the mighty forest, when he hearsthe general sigh emitted by its innumerableleaves as they rustle in the wind, and fromwhose fitful changes he seems to catch theimport of some deep and mysterious soliloquy.But the imagination will be still more readilyexcited by the notes and the cries of animals,as when the peopled grove awakens to harmony ;or when it is figured, that, amid the amplitudesof savage and solitary nature, the lioness robbedof her whelps, calls forth the echoes of the wilderness— making it to ring with the proclamationof her wrongs. But, without conceiving anysuch rare or extreme sensibility as this, there isa common, an every-day enjoyment which allhave in the sounds of nature ; and, as far assympathy with human emotions is awakened bythem, and this forms an ingredient of the pleasure,it affords another fine example, of an adaptationin the external world to the mental constitutionof its occupiers.7. But the same philosophy has been extendedto sights as well as sounds. The interchangeof mind with mind is not restricted tolanguage. There is an interchange by looksalso; and the ever-varying hues of the mindare represented, not by the complexion of theface alone or the composition of its features,76 MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.but by the attitude and gestures of the body.*It is thus that human sentiment or passionmay come to be expressed by the colour andform and even the motion of visible things ;by a kindred physiognomy for all the likeemotions on the part of the inferior animals —nay, by a certain countenance or shape in theobjects of mute and unconscious nature. It isthus that a moral investment sits on the aspectsof the purely material world ; and we accordinglyspeak of the modesty of the violet, theinnocence of the lily, the commanding mountain,the smiling landscape. Each materialobject has its character, as is amply set forthin the beautiful illustrations of Mr. Alison ; andso to the poet's eye, the whole panorama ofnature is one grand personification, lighted upthroughout by consciousness and feeling. Thisis the reason why in all languages, materialimages and moral characteristics are so blendedand identified. It is the law of associationwhich thus connects the two worlds of sense andWe may here state that as the air is the medium by whichsounds are conveyed — so light may be regarded as standing inthe same rehition to those natural signs whether of colour gestureor attitude which are addressed to the eye. Much could be saidrespecting the adaptation of light to the moral constitution ofman — arising from the power which the very observation of ourfellow-men has in repressing, so long as we are under it, indecencyor crime. The works of iniquity arc called works of darkness.MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 77of sentiment. Sublimity in the one is thecounterpart to moral greatness in the other ;and beauty in the one is the counterpart tomoral delicacy in the other. Both the gracefuland the grand of human character are as effectuallyembodied in the objects and sceneryof nature, as in those immortal forms whichhave been transmitted by the hand of sculptorsto the admiration of distant ages. It is a nobletestimony to the righteousness of God, that themoral and the external loveliness are thus harmonized— as well as to the wisdom which hasso adapted the moral and the material systemto each other, that supreme virtue and supremebeauty are at one.Mind, mind alone, bear witness earth and heaven !The living fountain, in itself containsOf beauteous and sublime.There hand in hand sit paramount the graces ;There enthroned, celestial Venus with divinest airsInvites the soul to never fading joy."AKENSIDE.8. And we may here remark a certainneglect of external things and external influences,which, however enlightened or transcendentallyrational it may seem, is at variancewith truth of principle and sound philosophy.We would instance the undervaluing of thenatural signs in eloquence, although their effect78 MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.makes all the difference in point of impressionand power between spoken and written language— seeing that, superadded to articulateutterance, the eye and the intonations and thegestures also serve as so many signals of conveyancefor the transmission of sentiment fromone mind to another. It is thus that indifferenceto manner or even to dress, may be as grievousa dereliction against the real philosophy ofsocial intercourse — as indifference to the attitudeand the drapery of figures would beagainst the philosophy of the fine arts. Bothproceed on the forgetfulness of that adaptation,in virtue of which materialism is throughoutinstinct with principle, and both in its colouringand forms, gives forth the most significantexpressions of it. On this ground too wewould affirm, both of state ceremonial andprofessional costume, that neither of them isinsignificant; and that he who in the spirit ofrash and restless innovation would upset them,as if they were the relics of a gross and barbaricage, may be doing violence not only to theusages of venerable antiquity, but to the stillolder and more venerable constitution of humannature — weakening in truth the bonds of socialunion, by dispensing with certain of thoseinfluences which the Great Author of our constitutiondesigned for the consolidation andgood order of society. This is not accordantMISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 79with the philosophy of Butler, who wrote on theuse of externals in matters of religion," — norwith the philosophy of those who prefer thefindings of experience, however irreducible tosystem they may be, to all the subtleties orsignifications of unsupported theory.*9. Before quitting this subject, we remark,that it is no proof against the theory whichmakes taste a derivative from morality, that ouremotions of taste may be vivid and powerful,while our principles of morality are so weakas to have no ascendant or governing influenceover the conduct. This is no unusual phenomenonof our mysterious nature. There is ageneral homage rendered to virtue in the world ;but it is the homage, more of a dilettanti thanof an obedient and practical devotee. This isnot more surprising, than that the man ofprofligate habits should have a tasteful admirationof sacred pictures and sacred melodies ;or that, with the heart of a coward, he shouldnevertheless catch the glow of at least a momentaryinspiration from the music of war andpatriotism. It seems the effect and evidenceI of some great moral derangement, that thereThe perusal of those works which treat scientifically of thefine arts, as Sir Joshua Reynolds' Discourses, is well adapted torebuke and rectify the light estimation, in which all sensible accompanimentsare apt to be held by us.HO MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.should be such an incongruity in subjectivenuiii between his taste and his principles ;and the evidence is not lessened but confirmed,when we observe a like incongruity in theobjective nature by which he is surrounded —Ave mean, between the external mental and theexternal material world. We have only to openour eyes and see how wide, in point of loveliness,the contrast or dissimilarity is, betweenthe moral and the material of our actual contemplation— the one coming immediately fromthe hand of God ; the other tainted and transformedby the spirit of man. We believe withAlison and others, that, to at least a very greatextent, much of the beauty of visible things liesin association ; that it is this which gives itsreigning expression to every tree and lakeand waterfall, and which may be said to haveimpregnated with character the whole of thesurrounding landscape. How comes it then,that, in the midst of living society, where wemight expect to meet with the originals of allthis fascination, we find scarcely any otherthing than a tame and uninteresting level of theflat and the sordid and the ordinary — whereas,in that inanimate scenery, which yields butthe faint and secondary reflection of moralqualities, there is, on every line and on everyfeature, so vivid an impress of loveliness andglory? One cannot go forth of the crowdedMISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 81city to the fresh and the fair of rural nature,without the experience, that, while in the moralscene, there is so much to thwart and to revoltand to irritate — in the natural scene, all isgracefulness and harmony. It reminds us ofthe contrast which is sometimes exhibited,between the soft and flowery lawn of a cultivateddomain, and the dark or angry spirit ofits owner — of whom we might almost imagine,that he scowls from the battlements of his castle,on the intrusion of every unlicensed visitor.And again the question may be put — whenceis it that the moral picturesque in our worldof sense, as it beams upon us from its woods andits eminences and its sweet recesses of crystalstream or of grassy sunshine, should yield adelight so unqualified — while the primary moralcharacteristics, of which these are but theimagery or the visible representation, should,in our world of human spirits, be so whollyobliterated, or at least so woefully deformed ?Does it not look as if a blight had come overthe face of our terrestrial creation, which hathleft its materialism in a great measure untouched,while it hath inflicted on man a soreand withering leprosy ? Do not the very opennessand benignity which sit on the aspect ofnature reproach him, for the cold and narrowand creeping jealousies that be at work in hisown selfish and suspicious bosom ; and most82 MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.impressively tell the difference between whatman is, and what he ought to be ?10. There are certain other adaptations; buton which we forbear to expatiate.* Some ofthem indeed border on a territory distinct fromour own, if they do not altogether belong to it.The relation between food and hunger, betweenthe object and the appetite, is an instance ofthe adaptation between external nature andman's physical constitution — yet the periodicalrecurrence of the appetite itself, with its imperiousdemand to be satisfied, viewed as an impellentto labour even the most irksome andsevere, has an important effect both on themoral constitution of the individual and on theIt must be obvious that we cannot exhaust the subject, butonly exemplify it, by means of a few specimens. There is anadaptation, which, had it occurred in time, might have beenstated in the text — suggested by the celebrated question respectingthe liberty of the human will. We cannot but admit howmuch it would have deteriorated the constitution of humanity, orrather destroyed one of its noblest and most essential parts, hadit been so constructed, as that either man was not accountablefor his own actions, or that these actions were free in the sensecontended for by one of the parties in the controversy — that is,were so many random contingencies which had no parentage inany events or influences that went before them, or occupied noplace in a train of causation. Of the reasoners on the oppositesides of this sorely agitated question — the one contending for themoral liberty, and the other for the physical necessity of humanactions — it is clear that there are many who hold the one to bedestructive of the other. But what the wisdom of man cannotargumentatively harmonize in the world of speculation, the powerMISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 83state of society. The siiperfices of the humanbody, in having been made so exquisitely aliveat every pore to the sensations of pain, may beregarded as nature's defensive covering againstthose exposures from without, which else mightinjure or destroy it. This is purely a physicaladaptation, but it involves a moral adaptationalso ; for this shrinking and sensitive avoidance,at the first approaches of pain, affords a similarprotection against certain hazards from within —as self-mutilation in the moment of the spirit'swantonness, or even self-destruction in themoment of its despair. But, without enlargingfurther on specific instances, we shall nowadvert to one subject, furnished by the historyof moral science ; and replete, we have longand wisdom of God, have executively harmonized in the world ofrealities — so that man, on the one hand, irresistibly feels himselfto be an accountable creature ; and yet, on the other, his doingsare as much the subject of calculation and of a philosophy, as manyof those classes of phenomena in the material world, which, fixedand certain in themselves, are only uncertain to us, not because oftheir contingency but because of their complication. We are notsure if the evolutions of the will are more beyond the reach of predictionthan the evolutions of the weather. It is this union of themoral character with the historical certainty of our volitions,which has proved so puzzling, to many of our controversialists ;but in proportion to the ditEculty felt by us in the adjustmentof these two elements, should be our admiration of that profoundand exquisite skill which has mastered the apparent incongruity —so that while every vokintaiy action of man is, in point ofreckoning, the subject of a moral, it is, in point of result, no lessthe subject of a physical law.84 MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.thought, with the materials of a very strong andcomprehensive argument.11. We have already adverted to the objectivenature of virtue, and the subjective natureof man, as forming two wholly distinct objectsof contemplation. It is the latter and not theformer which indicates the moral character ofGod. The mere system of ethical doctrine is nomore fitted to supply an argument for this character,than would the system of geometry. Itis not geometry in the abstract, but geometry asembodied in the Heavens, or in the exquisitestructures of the terrestrial physics — which bespeaksthe skill of the artificer who framedthem. In like manner it is not moral science inthe abstract — but the moral constitution of beingsso circumstanced and so made, that virtue is theonly element in which their permanent individualor social happiness can be realized, whichbespeaks the great Parent of the human familyto be Himself the lover and the exemplar ofrighteousness. In a word, it is not from anabstraction, but from the facts of a creation, thatour lesson respecting the divine character, itselfa fact, is to be learned ; and it is by keeping thisdistinction in view, that we obtain one importanthelp for drawing from the very conflict anddiversity of moral theories on the nature ofvirtue, a clear, nay a cumulative argument forthe virtuous nature of the Godhead.MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 8512. The painful suspicion is apt to intrudeupon us, that virtue may not be a thing of anysubstance or stab city at all — when we witnessthe confusion and the controversy into whichmoralists have fallen, on the subject of its elementaryprinciples. But, to allay this feeling,it should be observed, in the first place, that,with all the perplexity which obtains on thequestion of what virtue, in the abstract or in itsown essential and constituting quality, is — thereis a pretty general agreement among moralists,as to what the separate and specific virtues ofthe human character are. According to theselfish system, temperance may be a virtue,because of its subservience to the good of theindividual ; while by the system of utilityit is a virtue, because through its observation,our powers and services are kept entire forthe good of society. But again, beside thiscontroversy which relates to the nature of virtuein itself, and which may be termed the objectivequestion in morals — there is a subjective or anorganic question which relates, not to the existence,but to the origin and formation of thenotion or feeling of virtue in the human mind.The question, for example, whether virtue be athing of opinion or a thing of sentiment, belongsto this class. Now, in regard to all those questionswhich respect the origin or the pedigree ofour moral judgments, it should not be forgotten,C. II. H8(5 MISC ELl.ANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.that, while the controversies are a. issue uponthis, they are nearly unanimous, as to moralityitself being felt by the mind as a matterof supreme obligation. They dispute about themoral sense in man, or about the origin and constitutionof the court of conscience ; but theyhave no dispute about the supreme authority ofconscience — even as, in questions of civil polityand legislation, there may be no dispute aboutthe rightful authority of some certain court,while there may be antiquarian doubts anddifferences on the subject of its origin and formation.Dr. Smith, for example, while he hashis own peculiar views on the origin of our moralprinciples, never questions their authority. Hediffers from others, in regard to the rationale, orthe anterior steps of that process, which at lengthterminates in a decision of the mind, on themerit or demerit of a particular action. Therightness and the supremacy of that decision arenot in the least doubted by him. There may beametaphysical controversy about the mode ofarriving at our moral judgment, and at the sametime a perfect concurrence in it as the guideand the regulator of human conduct — just asthere may be an anatomical controversy aboutthe structure of the eye or the terminations ofthe optic nerve, and a perfect confidence withallparties, in the correctness of those intimationswhich the eye gives, of the position of externalMISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 87objects and their visible properties. By attendingto this we obtain a second important help foreliciting from the diversity of theories on thenature of virtue, a cumulative argument for thevirtuous nature of the Godhead.13. When the conflict then of its opposingtheories, would seem to bring fearful insecurityon moral science, let it not be forgotten, that thevery multitude of props and securities, by whichvirtue is upholden, is that which has given riseto the conflict. There is little or no scepticism,in regard to the worth or substantive being ofmorality, but chiefly in regard to its sustainingprinciple ; and it is because of so much to sustainit, or of the many distinct and firm propswhich it rests upon, that there has been such anamount of ethical controversy in the world.There has been many a combat, and many acombatant — not because of the baselessness ofmorality, but because it rests on a basis of somany goodly pillars, and because of such avaried convenience and beauty in the elevationof the noble fabric. The reason of so muchcontroversy is, that each puny controversialist,wedded to his own exclusive view of an edificetoo mighty and majestic for his grasp, has eitherselected but one of the upholding props, andaffirmed it to be the only support of the architecture; or attended to but one of its gracesand utilities, and affirmed it to be the alone purseMISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.pose of the magnificent building. The argumentof each, whether on the foundation of virtue oron its nature, when beheld aright, will be founda distinct trophy to its worth — for each can pleadsome undoubted excellence or good effect ofvirtue in behalf of his own theory. Each mayhave so magnified the property Avhicli himselfhad selected — as that those properties of virtuewhich others had selected, were thrown into theshade, or at most but admitted as humble attendants,in the retinue of his own great principle.And so the controversy is not, whether moralitybe a solidly constituted fabric ; but what thatis which constitutes its solidity, and whichshould be singled out as the keystone of thefabric. Each of the champions in this warfarehas fastened on a different keystone ; and eachpushes the triumph against his adversary by ademonstration of its firmness. Or in other words,virtue is compassed about with such a numberof securities, and possesses such a superabundanceof strength, as to have given room for thequestion that was raised about Samson of old —M hat that is, wherein its great strength lies. Itis like the controversy which sometimes arisesabout a building of perfect symmetry — whensides are taken, and counter-explanations areadvanced and argued, about the one characteristicor constituting charm, which hath conferredupon it so much gracefulness. It is evenMISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 89SO of morality. Each partisan hath advocatedhis own system ; and each, in doing so, hathmore fully exhibited some distinct property orperfection of moral rectitude. Morality is notneutralized by this conflict of testimonies ; butrises in statelier pride, and with augmented security,from the foam and the turbulence whichplay around its base. To her, this conflict yields,not a balance, but a summation of testimonies ;and, instead of an impaired, it is a cumulativeargument, that may be reared out of the manifoldcontroversies to which she has given rise.For when it is asserted by one party in the strife,that the foundation of all morality is the right ofGod to the obedience of his creatures — let God'sabsolute right be fully conceded to them. Andwhen others reply, that, apart from such right,there is a native and essential rightness in morality,let this be conceded also. There is indeedsuch a rightness, which, anterior to law, hathhad everlasting residence in the character of theGodhead ; and which prompted him to a law, allwhose enactments bear the impress of purestmorality. And when the advocates of the selfishsystem affirm, that the good of self is thesole aim and principle of virtue ; while we refusetheir theory, let us at least admit the fact towhich all its plausibility is owing — that noughtconduces more surely to happiness, than thestrict observation of all the recognised moralities90 MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.of human conduct. And when a fourth partyaffirms that nought but the useful is virtuous ;and, in support of their theory, can state the unvaryingtendencies of virtue in the world towardsthe highest good of the human family — let itforthwith be granted, that the same God, whoblends in his own person both the rightness ofmorality and the right of law, that He hath sodevised the economy of things and so directs itsprocesses, as to make peace and prosperity followin the train of righteousness. And when theposition that virtue is its own reward, is cast asanother dogma into the whirlpool of debate, letit be fondly allowed, that the God, who delightsin moral excellence himself, hath made it thedirect minister of enjoyment to him, who, formedafter his own image, delights in it also. Andwhen others, expatiating on the beauty of virtue,would almost rank it among the objects of tasterather than of principle— let this be followed upby the kindred testimony, that, in all its exhibitions,there is indeed a supreme gracefulness ;and that God, rich and varied in all the attestationswhich He has given of His regard to it,hath so endowed His creatures, that, in moralworth, they have the beatitudes of taste as wellas the beatitudes of conscience. And shouldthere be philosophers who say of morality that itis \\ holly founded upon the emotions — let it atleast be granted, that He whose hand did frameMISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 91our internal mechanism, has attuned it in themost correct and delicate despondency, with allthe moralities of which human nature is capable.And should there be other philosophers whoaffirm that morality hath a real and substantiveexistence in the nature of things, soas to make it as much an object of judgmentdistinct from him who judges, as arethe eternal and immutable truths of geometrylet it with gratitude be acknowledged thatthe mind is so constituted as to have the samefirm hold of the moral which it has of themathematical relations ; and if this prove nothingelse, it at least proves, that the Authorof our constitution hath stamped there, a clearand legible impress on the side of virtueWe should not exclude from this argument eventhe degrading systems of Hobbes and Mandeville; the former representing virtue as thecreation of human policy, and the latter representingits sole principle to be the love of humanpraise — for even they tell thus much, the onethat virtue is linked with the well-being of thecommunity, the other that it has an echo inevery bosom. We would not dissever all thesetestimonies ; but bind them together into the sumand strength of a cumulative argument. Thecontroversialists have lost themselves, but it is inawilderness of sweets — out of which the materialsmight be gathered, of such an incense at92 MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.the shrine of morality, as should be altogetheroverpowering. Each party hath selected butone of its claims ; and, in the anxiety to exaltit, AYOuld shed a comparative obscurity over allthe rest. This is the contest between them — notwhether morality be destitute of claims ; butwhat, out of the number that she possesses, isthe great and pre-eminent claim on which manshould do her homage. Their controversy perhapsnever may be settled ; but to make thecause of virtue suffer on this account, would beto make it suffer from the very force and abundanceof its recommendations.14. But this contemplation is pregnant withanother inference, beside the worth of virtue —even the righteous character of Him, who, forthe sake of upholding it hath brought such anumber of contingencies together. When welook to the systems of utility and selfishness, letus look upwards to Him, through whose ordinationalone it is, that virtue hath such power toprosper the arrangements of life and of society.Or when told of the principle that virtue is itsown reward, let us not forget Him, who so constitutedour moral nature, as to give the feelingof an exquisite charm, both in the possession ofvirtue and in the contemplation of it. Or whenthe theory of a moral sense offers itself to ourregards, let us bear regard along with it to thatGod, who constricted this organ of the innerMISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 93man, and endowed it with all its perceptions andall its feelings. In the utility wherewith Hehath followed up the various observations ofmoral rectitude ; in the exquisite relish whichHe hath infused into the rectitude itself; in thelaw of conformity thereto which He hath writtenon the hearts of all men ; in the aspect ofeternal and unchangeable fitness, under whichHe hath made it manifest to every conscience —in these, we behold the elements of many acontroversy, on the nature of virtue ; but inthese, when viewed aright, we also behold aglorious harmony of attestations to the nature ofGod. It is thus that the perplexities of thequestion, when virtue is looked to as but a thingof earthly residence, are all done away, whenwe carry the speculation upward to heaven.They find solution there ; and cast a radianceover the character of Him who hath not onlyestablished in righteousness His throne, but,by means of a rich and varied adaptation, hathprofusely shed over the universe that He hathformed, the graces by which He would adorn,and the beatitudes by which He would reward it.15. Although the establishment of a moraltheory is not now our proper concern, we maynevertheless take the opportunity of expressingour dissent from the system of those, who wouldresolve virtue, not into any native or independentrightness of its own, but unto the will of94 MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.Him who has a right to all our services. Withoutdisparagement to the Supreme Being, it isnot His law which constitutes virtue ; but, farhigher homage both to Him and to His law, thelaw derives all its authority and its being from avirtue of anterior residence in the character ofthe Divinity. It is not by the authority of anylaw over Him, that truth and justice and goodnessand all the other perfections of suprememoral excellence, have, in His person, had theireverlasting residence. He had a nature, beforethat He uttered it forth into a law. Previous tocreation, there existed in His mind, all thoseconceptions of the great and the graceful, whichHe hath embodied into a gorgeous universe ;and of which every rude sublimity of the wilderness,or every fair and smiling landscape,gives such vivid representation. And in likemanner, previous to all government, there existedin His mind, those principles of righteousness,which afterwards, with the right of an absolutesovereign, He proclaimed into a law. Thosevirtues of which we now read on a tablet ofjurisprudence were all transcribed and taken otFfrom the previous tablet of the divine character.The law is but a reflection of this character.In the fashioning of this law, He pictured forthHimself; and we, in the act of observing Hislaw, are only conforming ourselves to His likeness.It is there that we are to look for theMISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS. 95primeval seat of moral goodness. Or, in otherwords, virtue has an inherent character of herown — apart from law, and anterior to all jurisdiction.16. Yet the right of God to command, and therightness of His commandments, are distinct elementsof thought, and should not be merged intoone another. We should not lose sight of the individualityof each, nor identify these two things —because, instead of antagonists, they do in factstand side by side, and act together in friendlycooperation. Because two influences are conjoinedin agency, that is no reason why theyshould be confounded in thought. Their uniondoes not constitute their unity — and though, inthe conscience of man, there be an approbationof all rectitude ; and all rectitude, be an obligationlaid upon the conduct of man by the divinelaw — yet still, the approbation of man's moralnature is one thing, and the obligation of God'sauthority is another.17. That there is an approval of rectitude,apart from all legal sanctions and legal obligations,there is eternal and unchangeable demonstrationin the character of God Himself. He isunder no law, and owns the authority of nosuperior. It is not by the force of sanctions,but by the force of sentiments that the divinityis moved. Morality with Him is not of prescription,but of spontaneous principle alone; and96 MISCELLANEOUS ADAPTATIONS.He acts virtuously, not because He is bidden ;but because virtue hath its inherent and eternalresidence in His own nature. Instead of derivingmorality from law, we should derive law,even the law of God, from the primeval moralityof His own character ; and so far fromlooking upwards to His law as the fountain ofmorality, do we hold it to be the emanation froma higher fountain that is seated in the depths ofHis unchangeable essence, and is eternal as thenature of the Godhead.18. The moral hath antecedent over thejuridical, God acts righteously, not because ofjurisdiction by another, but because of a primaryand independent justice in Himself. It was notlaw which originated the moralities of the divinecharacter ; but these moralities are self-existentand eternal as is the being of the Godhead. Thevirtues had all their dwelling-place in the constitutionof the Divinity — ere He stamped theimpress of them on a tablet of jurisprudence.There was an inherent, before there was a preceptivemorality ; and righteousness, and goodness,and truth, which all are imperative enactmentsof law, were all prior characteristics, inthe underived and uncreated excellence of theLawgiver.Chapter X.On the Capacities of the World for making avirtuous Species happy ; and the Argument this, both for the Character of God,and the Immortality of 3IaH.1. We have already stated the distinction, betweenthe theology of those, who would makethe divine goodness consist of all moral excellence; and of those, who would make it consistof benevolence alone. Attempts have been madeto simplify the science of morals, by the reductionof its various duties or obligations into oneelement — as when it is alleged, that the virtuousnessof every separate morality is reducibleinto benevolence, which is regarded as thecentral, or as the great master and generic virtuethat is comprehensive of them all. There is atheoretic beauty in this imagination — yet itcannot be satisfactorily established, by all ourpowers of moral or mental analysis. We cannotrid ourselves of the obstinate impression, thatthere is a distinct and native virtuousness, bothin truth and in justice, apart from their subserviencyto the good of men ; and accordingly, inthe ethical systems of all our most orthodox THE CAPACITIES OF THE WORLD FORpounders, they are done separate homage to—as virtues standing forth in their own independentcharacter, and having their own independentckiinis both on the reverence andobservation of mankind. Now, akin with thisattempt to generale the whole of virtue intoone single morality, is the attempt to generalizethe character of God into one singlemoral perfection. Truth and justice have beenexposed to the same treatment, in the one contemplationas in the other — that is, regardedmore as derivatives from the higher characteristicof benevolence, than as distinct and primarycharacteristics themselves. The love ofphilosophic simplicity may have led to this inthe abstract or moral question ; but somethingmore has operated in the theological question.It falls in with a still more urgent affection thanthe taste of man ; it falls in with his hope andhis sense of personal interest, that the truth andjustice of the Divinity should be removed, as itwere, to the back-ground of his perspective.And accordingly, this inclination to soften, if notto suppress, the sterner perfections of righteousnessand holiness, appears, not merely in thepleasing and poetic effusions of the sentimental,but also in the didactic expositions of the academictheism. It is thus that Paley, so full andeffective, and able in his demonstrations of thenatural, is yet so meagre in his demonstration ofthe moral attributes. It is, in truth, the generalMAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 9.9defect, not of natural theology in itself — but ofnatural theology, as set forth at the terminationof ethical courses, or as expounded in the schools.In this respect, the natural theology of the heart,is at variance, with the natural theology of ourpopular and prevailing literature. The one takesits lesson direct from conscience, which deponesto the authority of truth and justice, as distinctfrom benevolence ; and carries this lesson upwards,from that tablet of virtue which it readson the nature of man below, to that higher tabletupon which it reads the character of God above.The other again, of more lax and adventurousspeculation, would fain amalgamate all the qualitiesof the Godhead into one ; and would makethat one the beautiful and undistinguishingquality of tenderness. It would sink the venerableor the awful into the lovely ; and to this itis prompted, not merely for the sake of theoreticsimplicity — but in order to quell the alarms ofnature, the dread and the disturbance whichsinners feel, when they look to their sovereign inheaven, as a God of judgment and of unspottedholiness. Nevertheless the same consciencewhich tells what is sound in ethics, is ever andanon suggesting what is sound in theology — thatAve have to do with a God of truth, that we haveto do with a God of righteousness ; and thislesson is never perhaps obliterated in any breast,by the imagery, however pleasing, of a universalparent, throned in soft and smiling radiance, and100 THE CAPACITIES OF THE WORLD FORwhose supreme delight is to scatter beatitudesinnumerable through a universal family. Wecannot forget, although we would, that justiceand judgment are the habitation of His throne ;and that His dwelling-place is not a mere blissfulelysium or paradise of sweets, but an augustand inviolable sanctuary. It is an elysium, butonly to the spirits of the holy ; and this sacredness,we repeat, is immediately forced upon theconsciousness of every bosom, by the moral sensewhich is within it — however fearful a topic itmay be of recoil to the sinner, and of reticence inthe demonstrations of philosophy. The sense ofheaven's sacredness is not a superstitious fear.It is the instant suggestion of our moral nature.AVhat conscience apprehends virtue to be initself, that also it will apprehend virtue to be inthe Author of conscience ; and if truth andjustice be constituent elements in the one, theseit will regard as constituent elements in theother also. It is by learning direct of God fromthe phenomena of human conscience ; or takingwhat it tells us to be virtues in themselves, forthe very virtues of the Godhead, realized inactual and living exemplification upon His charactersis thus that we escape from the illusionof poetical religionists, w ho, in the incensewhich they offer to the benign virtues of theparent, are so apt to overlook the virtues of theLawgiver and Judge.MAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 1012. When we take this fuller view of God'smoral nature — when we make account of therighteousness as well as the benevolence — whenwe yield to the suggestion of our own hearts,that to Him belongs the sovereign state, and, ifneedful, the severity of the lawgiver, as well asthe fond affection of the parent — when we assignto Him the character, which, instead of but onevirtue, is comprehensive of them all — we arethen on firmer vantage-ground for the establishmentof a Natural Theology, in harmony, bothwith the lessons of conscience, and with thephenomena of the external world. Many ofour academic theists have greatly crippled theirargument, by confining themselves to but onefeature in the character of the Divinity — as ifHis only wish in reference to the creatures thatHe had made, was a wish for their happiness ;or as if, instead of the subjects of a righteousand moral government, they were but thenurslings of His tenderness. They have exiledand put forth every thing like jurisprudencefrom the relation in which God stands to man ;and by giving the foremost place in their demonstrationsto the mere beneficence of the Deity,they have made the difficulties of the subjectfar more perplexing and resolvable than theyneeded to have been. For with benevolencealone we cannot even extenuate and much lessextricate ourselves, from the puzzling difficulty ofC. II. I102 THE CAPACITIES OF THE AVORLl) FORthose physical sufferings to which the sentientcreation, as far as onr acquaintance extends withit, is universally liable. It is only by admittingthe sanctities along with what may be termedthe humanities of the divine character, that thisenigma can be at all alleviated. Whereas, if,apart from the equities of a moral government,we look to God in no other light, than meretasteful and sentimental religionists do, or asbut a benign and indulgent Father whose soledelight is the happiness of His family — there arecertain stubborn anomalies which stand in theway of this frail imagination, and would renderthe whole subject a hopeless and utterly intractablemystery.3. A specimen of the weakness which attachesto the system of Natural Theology, when theinfinite benevolence of the Deity is the onlyelement which it will admit into its explanationsand its reasonings, is the manner in which itsadvocates labour to dispose of the numerous ills,wherewith the world is infested. They haverecourse to arithmetic — balancing the phenomenaon each side of the question, as they would thecolumns of a ledger. They institute respectiveruminations of the good and the evil ; and bythe preponderance of the former over the latter,hold the difficulty to be resolved. The computationis neither a sure nor an easy one ; buteven under the admission of its justness, itMAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 103remains an impracticable puzzle — why undera Being of infinite power and infinite benevolence,there should be suffering at all. This isan enigma which the single attribute of benevolencecannot un-riddle, or rather the veryenigma which it has created — nor shall we evenapproximate to the solution of it, without the aidof other attributes to help the explanation.4. It is under the pressure of these difficultiesthat refuge is taken in the imagination of afuture state — where it is assumed that all thedisorders of the present scene are to be repaired,and full compensation made for the sufferingsof our earthly existence. It is affirmed, thatalthough the body dies the soul is imperishable,and, after it hath burst its unfettered way fromthe prison-house of its earthly tabernacle, thatit will expatiate for ever in the full buoyancyand delight of its then emancipated energies —that, even as from the lacerated shell of theinert chrysalis the winged insect rises in allthe pride of its now expanded beauty amongthe fields of light and ether which are above it,so the human spirit finds its way through theopening made by death upon its corporealframework among the glories of the upperElysium. It is this immortality which issupposed to unriddle all the difficulties thatattach to our present condition ; which convertsthe evil that is in the world, into the instrument104 THE CAPACITIES OK THE WORLD FORof a greatly over-passing good ; and affordsa scene for the imagination to rest upon, whereall the anomalies which now exercise us shallbe rectified, and where, from the larger prospectswe shall then have of the whole marchanddestiny of man, the ways of God to Hiscreatures shall appear in all the lustre of theirfull and noble vindication.5. But as the superiority of the happinessover the misery of the world, affords insufficientpremises on which to conclude the benevolenceof God, so long as God is conceived of under thepartial view of possessing but this as his alonemoral attribute — when that benevolence is employedas the argument for some ulterior doctrinein Natural Theology, it must impart to this latterthe same inconclusiveness by which itself ischaracterized. The proof and the thing provedmust be alike strong or alike weak. If theexcess of enjoyment over suffering in the lifethat now is, be a matter of far too doubtfulcalculation, on which to rest a confident inferencein favour of the divine benevolence ; then, letthis benevolence have no other prop to leanupon, and in its turn, it is far too doubtful apremise, on which to infer a coming immortality.Accordingly, to help out the argument, manyof our slender and sentimental theists, whowill admit of no other moral attribute for thedivinity, than the paternal attribute of kindMAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 105affection for the creatures who have sprungfrom Him do, in fact, assume the thing to beproved, and reason in a circle. The merebalance of the pleasures and pains of thepresent life, is greatly too uncertain, for whatmay be called an initial footing to this argument.But let a future life be assumed, in which allthe defects and disorders of the present areto be repaired ; and this may reconcile thedoctrine of the benevolence of God, with theotherwise stumbling fact of the great actualwretchedness that is now in the world. Outof the observed phenomena of life and anassumed immortality together, a tolerable argumentmay be raised for this most pleasing andamiable of all the moral characteristics; but it isobvious that the doctrine of immortality entersinto the premises of this first argument. Buthow is the immortality itself proved? not bythe phenomena of life alone, but by these phenomenataken in conjunction with the divinebenevolence— which benevolence, therefore, entersinto the premise of the second argument.In the one argument, the doctrine of immortalityis required to prove the benevolence ofGod. In the other, this benevolence is requiredto prove the immortality. Each is used as anassumption for the establishment of the other ;and this nullifies the reasoning for both.Either of these terms — that is, the divine bene()THE C:AI'A( Cities OF THE WOULD FORviolence, or a future state of compensation for theevils and inequalities of the present one — eitherof them, if admitted, may be held a very sufficient,or, at least, likely consideration on whichto rest the other. But it makes very bad reasoningto vibrate between both — first to go forthwiththe assumption that God is benevolent,and therefore it is impossible that a scene sodark and disordered as that immediately beforeus can offer to our contemplation the full andfinal development of all his designs for thehuman family ; and then, feeling that thisscene does not afibrd a sufficient basis on whichto rest the demonstration of this attribute, tostrengthen the basis and make it broader bythe assertion, that it is not from a part of Hisways, but from their complete and comprehensivewhole, as made up both of timeand eternity, that we draw the inference ofa benevolent Deity. There is no march ofargument. We swing as it were between twoassumptions. It is like one of those cases ingeometry, which remains indeterminate for thewant of data. And the only effectual methodof being extricated from such an ambiguity,would be the satisfactory assurance either ofa benevolence independent of all considerationsof immortality, or of an immortality independentof all the considerations of the benevolence.a. But then it should be recollected that it isMAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 107the partiality of our contemplation, and it alonewhich incapacitates this whole argument. Thereis a sickly religion of taste which clings exclusivelyto the parental benevolence of God ;and will not, cannot, brave the contemplationof His righteousness. It is this which makesthe reasoning as feeble, as the sentiment isflimsy. It, in fact, leaves the system of naturaltheology without a groundwork — first to arguefor immortality on the doubtful assumptionof a supreme benevolence, and then to argue thisimmortality in proof of the benevolence. Thewhole fabric, bereft of argument and strength,is ready to sink under the weight of unresolveddifficulties. The mere benevolence of theDeity is not so obviously or decisively thelesson of surrounding phenomena, as, of itself,to be the foundation of a solid inference regardingeither the character of God or the prospectsof man. If we would receive the full lesson —if we would learn all which these phenomena,when rightly and attentively regarded, arecapable of teaching — if along with the presentindications of a benevolence, we take thepresent indications of a righteousness in God —out of these blended characteristics, we shouldhave materials for an argument of firmertexture. It is to the leaving out of certaindata, even though placed within the reach ofobservation, that the infirmity of the argument is108 THE CAPACITIES OF THE WOULD FORowiiig^ — whereas, did we employ aright all thedata in our possession, we might incorporatethem together into the sold ground-work of asolid reasoning. It is by our sensitive avoidanceof certain parts in this contemplation, that weenfeeble the cause. We should find a stablebasis in existing appearances, did we give thema fair and full interpretation — as indicatingnot only the benevolence of God, but, bothby the course of nature and the laws of man'smoral economy, indicating His love of righteousnessand hatred of iniquity. It might notresolve, but it would alleviate the mystery ofthings, could we within the sphere of actualobservation, collect notices, not merely of aGod who rejoiced in the physical happiness ofHis creatures, but of a God who had respectunto their virtue. Now the great evidencefor this latter characteristic of the Divinity,lies near at hand — even among the intimaciesof our own felt and familiar nature. It is notfetched by imagination from a distance, forevery man has it within himself. The supremacyof conscience is a fact or phenomenonof man's moral constitution ; and from this lawof the heart, we pass, by direct and legitimateinference, to the character of Him who establishedit there. In a law, we read the characterof the law-giver ; and this, whether it be a feltor a written hwv. We learn from the pheno-MAKING A VIRTUOUS Sl'EClES HAPPY. 109mena of conscience, that, however God maywill the happiness of his creatures, His paramountand peremptory demand is for theirvirtue. He is the moral governor of a kingdom,as well as the father of a family ; and it isa partial view that we take of Him, unless,along with the kindness which belongs to Himas a parent, we have respect unto that authoritywhich belongs to Him as a sovereign and ajudge. We have direct intimation of this inour own bosoms, in the constant assertionwhich is made there on the side of virtue, inthe discomfort and remorse which attend itsviolation.7. But though conscience be our original andchief instructor in the righteousness of God, thesame lesson may be learned in another way. Itmay be gathered from the phenomena of humanlife — even those very phenomena, which soperplex the mind, so long as in quest of but oneattribute and refusing to admit the evidence oreven entertain the notion of any other, — it cherishesa partial and prejudiced view of the Deity.Those theists, who, in this spirit, have attemptedto strike a balance between the pleasures andthe pains of sentient nature, and to ground thereuponthe very doubtful inference of the divinebenevolence — seldom or never think of connectingthese pleasures and pains with the moralcauses, which, whether proximately or remotely,lit) THE CAPACITIES OF THE AVOItLD Forgobefore them. Without adverting to these,they rest their conclusion on the affirmed superiority,however ill or uncertainly made out, ofthe physical enjoyments over the physical sufferingsof life. Now we hold it of capital importancein this argument, that, in our ownspecies at least, both these enjoyments and thesesufferings are mainly resolvable into moralcauses — insomuch that, in the vast majority ofcases, the deviation from happiness, can betraced to an anterior deviation from virtue ; andthat, apart from death and accident and unavoidabledisease, the wretchedness of humanityis due to a vicious and ill-regulated morale.When we thus look to the ills of life in their immediateorigin, though it may not altogetherdissipate, it goes far to reduce, and even toexplain the mystery of their existence. Thoseevils which vex and agitate man, emanate, inthe great amount of them, from the fountain ofhis own heart ; and come forth, not of a distemperedmaterial, but of a distempered moraleconomy. Were each separate infelicity referredto its distinct source, we should, generallyspeaking, arrive at some moral perversity,whether of the affections or of the temperso that but for the one, the other would nothave been realized. It is true, that, perhapsin every instance, some external cause may beassigned, for any felt annoyance to which ournature is liable ; but then, it is a cause without,MAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 1 1 1operating on a sensibility within. So that in allcomputations, whether of suffering or of enjoyment,the state of the subjective or recipientmind must be taken into account, as well as theinfluences which play upon it from the surroundingworld ; and what we affirm is, that, to arightly conditioned mind, the misery would bereduced and the happiness augmented tenfold.When disappointment agonizes the heart ; or avery slight, perhaps unintentional neglect, lightsup in many a soul the fierceness of resentment ;or coldness, and disdain, and the mutual glancesof contempt and hatred, circulate a prodigiousmass of infelicity through the world — these areto be ascribed, not to the untowardness of outwardcircumstances, but to the untowardness of man'sown constitution, and are the fruits of a disorderedspiritual system. And the same may besaid of the poverty which springs from indolenceor dissipation ; of the disgrace which comes onthe back of misconduct ; of the pain or uneasinesswhich festers in every heart that is theprey, whether of licentious or malignant passions:in short, of the general restlessness and unhinge-mentof every spirit, which, thrown adrift fromthe restraints of principle, has no well-spring ofsatisfaction in itself, but precariously vacillates,in regard to happiness, with the hazard and thecasual fluctuation of outward things. Thereare, it is true, sufferings purely physical, whichbelong to the sentient and not to the moral112 THE CAPACITIES OF THE WORLD FORnature — as the maladies of infant disease, andthe accidental inflictions wherewith the materialframe is sometimes agonized. Still it will befound, that the vast amount of human wretchedness,can be directly referred to the waywardnessand morbid state of the human will — to thecharacter of man, and not to the condition Whichhe occupies.8. Now what is the legitimate argument forthe character of God, not from the mere existenceof misery, but from the existence ofmisers thus originated ? Wretchedness, of itself,were fitted to cast an uncertainty, even a suspicion,on the benevolence of God. But wretchednessas the result of wickedness, may notindicate the negation of this one attribute. Itmay only indicate the reality or the presence ofanother. Suffering without a cause and withoutan object, may be the infliction of a malignantbeing. But suffering in alliance with sin, shouldlead to a very different conclusion. When thusrelated it may cast no impeachment on the benevolence,and only bespeak the righteousness ofGod. It tells us that however much He maylove the happiness of His creatures. He lovestheir virtue more. So that, instead of extinguishingthe evidence of one perfection, it mayleave this evidence entire, and bring out intoopen manifestation another perfection of theGodhead.MAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 1 139. In attempting to form our estimate of thedivine character from the existing phenomena,the fair proceeding would be, not to found it onthe actual miseries which abound in the world,peopled with a depraved species — but on thewitnesses which abound in the world, to make avirtuous species happy. We should try to figureits result on human life, were perfect virtue torevisit earth, and take up its abode in everyfamily. The question is, are we so constructedand so accommodated, that, in the vast majority ofcases we, if morally right, should be physicallyhappy. What, we should ask, is the real tendencyof nature's laws — whether to ministerenjoyment to the good or the evil ? It were avery strong, almost an unequivocal testimony tothe righteousness of Him, who framed thesystem of things and all its adaptations — if,while it secured a general harmony between thevirtue of mankind and their happiness or peace,it as constantly impeded either the prosperity orthe heart's ease of the profligate and the lawless.Now of this we might be informed by an actualsurvey of human life. We can justly imaginethe consequences upon human society — wereperfect uprightness and sympathy and goodwillto obtain universally ; were every man to lookto his fellow with a brother's eye ; were auniversal courteousness to reign in our streetsand our houses and our market-places, and this114 THE CAPACITIES OF THE WORLD FORto be the spontaneous emanation of a universalcordiality ; were each man's interest and reputationas safe in the custody of another, as henow strives to make them by a jealous guardianshipof his own; were, on the one hand, aprompt and eager benevolence on the part of therich, ever on the watch to meet, nay, to overpassall the wants of humanity, and, on the otherhand, an honest moderation and independenceon the part of the poor, to be a full defence fortheir superiors against the encroachments ofdeceit and rapacity ; were liberality to walkdiffusive abroad among men, and love to settlepure and unruffled in the bosom of families;were that moral sunshine to arise in every heart,which purity and innocence and kind affectionare ever sure to kindle there ; and, even whensome visitation from without was in painfuldissonance with the harmony within, were athousand sweets ready to be poured into the cupof tribulation from the feeling and the friendshipof all the good who were around us — on thissingle transition from vice to virtue among men,does there not hinge the alternative between apandemonium and a paradise? If the moralelements were in place and operation amongstus, should we still continue to fester and beunhappy from the want of the physical ? Or, isit not rather true, that all nature smiles in beauty,or wantons in righteousness for our enjoymentMAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 115were but the disease of our spirits medicated,were there but moral soundness in the heart ofman ?10. And what must be the character of theBeing who formed such a world, where themoral and the physical economies are so adjustedto each other, that virtue, if universal,would bring ten thousand blessings and beatitudesin its train, and turn our earth into anelysium — whereas nothing so distempers thehuman spirit, and so multiplies distress in society,as the vice and the violence and thevarieties of moral turpitude wherewith it isinfested. Would a God who loved iniquity andwho hated righteousness have created such aworld ? Would He have so attuned the organismof the human spirit, that the consciousness ofworth should be felt through all its recesses, likethe oil of gladness ? Or would He have so constructedthe mechanism of human society, thatit should never work prosperously for the generalgood of the species, but by means of truth andphilanthropy and uprightness ? Would thefriend and patron of falsehood have let sucha world out of his hands ? Or would an unholybeing have so fashioned the heart of man — that,wayward and irresolute as he is, he never feelsso ennobled, as by the high resolve that wouldspurn every base allurement of sensuality awayfrom him ; and never breathes so eternally, as110 THE CAPACITIES OF THE WORLD FORwhen he inaintahis that chastity of spirit whichwould recoil even from one unhallowed imagination; and never rises to such a sense of grandeurand godlike elevation, as when principlehath taken the direction, and is vested with fullascendency over the restrained and regulatedpassions? What other inference can be drawnfrom such sequences as these, but that our moralarchitect loves the virtue He thus follows upwith the delights of a high and generous complacency; and execrates the vice He thusfollows up with disgust and degradation ? If welook but to misery unconnected and alone, wemay well doubt the benevolence of the Deity.But should it not modify the conclusion, tohave ascertained — that, in proportion as virtuemade entrance upon the world, misery wouldretire from it? There is nothing to spoil Himof this perfection, in a misery so originated ;but, leaving this perfection untouched, it attachesto Him another, and we infer, that He is notmerely benevolent, but benevolent and holy.After that the moral cause has been discoveredfor the un happiness of man, we feel Him to beaGod of benevolence still ; that He wills thehappiness of his creatures, but with this reservation,that the only sound and sincere happinessHe awards to them, is happiness throughthe medium of virtue ; that still He is willingto be the dispenser of joy substantial and unmakingA VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 117fading, but of no such joy apart from moral excellence; that He loves the gratification of Hischildren, but He loves their righteousness more ;that dear to Him is the happiness of all Hisoffspring, but dearer still their worth ; and thattherefore He, the moral governor will so conductthe affairs of His empire, as that virtue andhappiness, or that vice and misery shall be associated.1 1 . We have already said, that, by inspectinga mechanism, we can infer both the originaldesign of Him who framed it, and the derangementit has subsequently undergone — even asby the inspection of a watch, we can infer, fromthe place of command which its regulator occupies,that it was made for the purpose of movingregularly ; and that, notwithstanding the stateof disrepair and aberration into which it mayhave fallen. And so, from the obvious place ofrightful supremacy which is occupied by theconscience of man in his moral system, we caninfer that virtue was the proper and primarydesign of his creation ; and that, notwithstandingthe actual prevalence of obviously inferiorprinciples, over the habits and history of his life.Connect this with the grand and general adaptationof External Nature for which we have nowbeen contending — even the capacity of thatworld in which we are placed for making avirtuous species happy ; and it were surely farC. II. K118 THE CAPACITIES OF THE WORLD FORjuster, in arguing for the divine character, thatwe founded our interpretation on the happinesswhich man's original constitution is fitted tosecure for him, than on the misery which hesuffers by that constitution having been in somewayperverted. It is from the native and propertendency of aught which is made, that we concludeas to the mind and disposition of themaker; and not from the actual effect, whenthat tendency has been rendered abortive, bythe extrinsic operation of some disturbing forceon an else goodly and well-going mechanism.The original design of the Creator may be readin the natural, the universal tendency of things ;and surely, it speaks strongly both for His benevolenceand His righteousness that nothing is sofitted to ensure the general happiness of societyas the general virtue of them who compose it.And if, instead of this, we behold a world, ill atease, with its many heart-burnings and manydisquietudes — the fair conclusion is, that thebeneficial tendencies which have been establishedtherein, and which are therefore due tothe benevolence of God, have all been thwartedby the moral perversity of man. The compoundlesson to be gathered from such a contemplationis, that God is the friend of human happinessbut the enemy of human vice — seeing, He hathset up an economy in which the former wouldMAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 119have grown up and prospered universally, hadnot the latter stepped in and overborne it.12. We are now on a ground work of morefirm texture, for an argument in behalf of man'simmortality. But it is only by a more comprehensiveview both of the character of God, andthe actual state of the Avoid — that we obtainas much evidence both for His benevolence andHis righteousness, as might furnish logicalpremises for the logical inference of a futurestate.13. We have already stated that the miseriesof life, in their great and general amount, areresolvable into moral causes ; and did each mansuffer here, accurately in proportion to his ownsins, there might be less reason for the anticipationof another state hereafter. But this proportionis, in no individual instance perhaps,ever realized on this side of death. The miseriesof the good are still due to a moral perversity —though but to the moral perversity of others, notof his own. He suffers from the injustice andcalumny and violence and evil tempers of thosewho are around him. On the large and opentheatre of the world, the cause of oppression isoften the triumphant one ; and, in the bosom offamilies, the most meek and innocent of thehousehold, are frequently the victims for life,of a harsh and injurious though unseen tyranny.120 THE CAPACITIES OF THE WORLD FORIt is this inequality of fortune, or rather ofenjoyment, between the good and the evil,Vhichforms the most popular, and enters as a constituentpart at least, into the most powerfulargument, which nature furnishes, for the immortalityof the soul. We cannot imagine of aGod of righteousness, that He will leave anyquestion of justice unsettled ; and there isnothing which more powerfully suggests to thehuman conscience the apprehension of a life tocome, than that in this life, there should he somany unsettled questions of justice — first betweenman and man, secondly between man andhis Maker.14. The strength of the former considerationlies in the multiplicity, and often the fearfulaggravation, of the unredressed wrongs inflictedevery day by man upon his fellows. The historyof human society teems with these ; and theunappeased cry, whether for vengeance or reparation,rises to heaven because of them. Wemight here expatiate on the monstrous, thewholesale atrocities, perpetrated on the defencelessby the strong ; and which custom has almostlegalized — having stood their ground against theindignation of the upright and the good for manyages. Perhaps for the most gigantic exampleof this, in the dark annals of our guilty world,we should turn our eyes upon injured Africa —that devoted region, where the lust of gain hasMAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 121made the fiercest and fullest exhibition of its hardihood; and whose weeping families are brokenup in thousands every year, that the familiesof Europe might the more delicately and luxuriouslyregale themselves. It is a picturesque,and seems a powerful argument for some futureday of retribution, when we look, on the onehand, to the prosperity of the lordly oppressor,Wrung from the sufferings of a captive and subjugatedpeople ; and look, on the other, to thetears and the untold agony of the hundredsbeneath him, Avhose lives of dreariness and hardlabour are ten fold embittered, by the imagery ofthat dear and distant land, from which they havebeen irrecoverably torn. But, even within theconfines of civilized society, there do existmaterials for our argument. There are crueltiesand wrongs innumerable, in the conduct ofbusiness ; there are even cruelties and wrongs,in the bosom of families. There are thetriumphs of injustice ; the success of deep-laidand malignant policy on the one side, on theother the ruin and the overthrow of unprotectedweakness. Apart from the violence of the midnightassault, or the violence of the high way —there is, even under the forms of law, and amidthe blandness of social courtesies, a moralviolence that carries as grievous and substantialiniquity in its train ; by which friendless andconfiding simplicity may at once be bereft of its122 THE CAPACITIES OF THE WORLD FORrights, and the artful oppressor be enriched bythe spoliation. Have we never seen the bankruptrise again with undiminished splendour,from amid the desolation and despair of thefamilies that have been ruined by him? Or,more secret though not less severe, have we notseen the inmates of a wretched home doomed toa hopeless and unhappy existence, under thesullen brow of the tyrant who lorded over them ?There are sufferings from which there is noredress or rectification upon earth ; inequalitiesbetween man and man, of which there is no adjustmenthere — but because of that very reason,there is the utmost desire, and we might addexpectancy of our nature, that there shall beanadjustment hereafter. In the unsated appetencyof our hearts for justice, there is all theforce of an appeal to the Being who planted theappetite within us ; and we feel that if Death isto make sudden disruption, in the midst of allthese unfinished questions, and so to leave themeternally — we feel a violence done both to ourown moral constitution, and to the high jurisprudenceof Him who framed us.15. But there are furthermore, in this life,unfinished questions between man and hisMaker. The same conscience which assertsits own supremacy within the breast, suggeststhe God and the Moral Governor who placedMAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 123it there. It is thus that man not only takescognizance of his own delinquencies; but heconnects them with the thought of a law-giverto whom he is accountable. He passes by onestep, and with rapid inference, from the feelingof a judge who is within, to the fear of a Judgewho sits in high authority over him. With thesense of a reigning principle in his own constitution,there stands associated the sense ofa reigning power in the universe — the one challengingthe prerogatives of a moral law, the otheravenging the violation of them. Even the hardiestin guilt are not insensible to the force ofthis sentiment. They feel it, as did Catilineand the worst of Roman emperors, in the horrorsof remorse. There is, in spite of themselves,the impression of an avenging God — not theless founded upon reasoning, that it is thereasoning of but one truth or rather of but onetransition, from a thing intimately known to athing immediately concluded, from the reckoningof a felt and a present conscience within,to the more awful reckoning of a God who isthe author of conscience and who knoweth allthings. Now, it is thus, that men are ledirresistibly to the anticipation of a future statenot by their hopes, we think, but by theirfears ; not by a sense of unfulfilled promises,but bv the sense and the terror of unfulfilled124 THE CAPACITIES OF THE WORLD FORpenalties ; by their sense of a judgment notyet executed, of a wrath not yet dischargedupon them. Hence the impression of a futurityupon all spirits, whither are carried forwardthe issues of a jurisprudence, which bears nomarks but the contrary of a full and finalconsummation on this side of death. The prosperityof many wicked who spend their daysin resolute and contemptuous irreligion ; thepractical defiance of their lives to the biddingof conscience, and yet a voice of remonstranceand of warning from this said conscience whichthey are unable wholly to quell ; the manyemphatic denunciations, not uttered in audiblethunder from above, but uttered in secret andimpressive whispers from within — these all pointto accounts between God and His creatures thatare yet unfinished. If there be no future state,the great moral question between heaven andearth, broken off" at the middle, is frittered intoa degrading mockery. There is violence doneto the continuity of things. The moral constitutionof man is stript of its significancy andthe Author of that constitution is stript of Hiswisdom and authority and honour. That consistentmarch which we behold in all the cycles,and progressive movements of the naturaleconomy, is, in the moral economy, brought tosudden arrest and disruption — if death annihilatethe man, instead of only transforming him.MAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 1*25And it is only the doctrine of his immortalityby which all can be adjusted and harmonized.*16. And there is one especial proof for theimmortality of the soul, founded on adaptation ;and therefore so identical in principle withthe subject and main argument of our essay —that we feel its statement to be our best andmost appropriate termination of this especialenquiry. The argument is this. For everydesire or every faculty, whether in man or inthe inferior animals, there seems a counterpartobject in external nature. Let it be either anappetite or a power ; and let it reside eitherin the sentient or in the intellectual or inthe moral economy — still there exists a somethingwithout that is altogether suited to it,and which seems to be expressly providedfor its gratification. There is light for the eye ;there is air for the lungs ; there is food forthe ever-recurring appetite of hunger ; there iswater for the appetite of thirst ; there is societyfor the love, whether of fame or of fellowship ;there is a boundless field in all the objectsof all the sciences for the exercise of curiosity —in a word, there seems not one affection in theIt is well said by Mr. Davison, in his profound and originalwork on Prophecy — that " Conscience and the present constitutionof things are not corresponding terms. The one is notthe object of perception to the other. It is conscience and theissue of things which go together."126 THE CAPACITIES OF THE WORLD FORliving creature, which is not met by a counterpartand a congenial object in the surroundingcreation. It is this, in fact, which forms animportant class of those adaptations, on whichthe argument for a Deity is founded. Theadaptation of the parts to each other withinthe organic structure, is distinct from the adaptationof the whole to the things of circumambientnature ; and is well unfolded in aseparate chapter by Paley, on the relationof inanimate bodies to animated nature. Butthere is another chapter on prospective contrivances,in which he unfolds to us other adaptations,that approximate still more nearly toour argument. They consist of embryo arrangementsor parts, not of immediate use, but tobe of use eventually — preparations going onin the animal economy, whereof the full benefitis not to be realized, till some future and oftenconsiderably distant development shall havetaken place ; such as the teeth buried in theirsockets, that would be inconvenient during thefirst months of infancy, but come forth whenit is sufficiently advanced for another and anew sort of nourishment ; such as the manifoldpreparations, anterior to the birth, that are ofno use to the foetus, but are afterwards to beof indispensable use in a larger and freerstate of existence ; such as the instructive tendenciesto action that appear before even theMAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 127instruments of action are provided, as in the calfof a day old to butt with its head before it hasbeen furnished with horns. Nature abounds,not merely in present expedients for an immediateuse, but in providential expedients for afuture one ; and, as far as we can observe, wehave no reason to believe, that, either in thefirst or second sort of expedients, there hasever aught been noticed, which either bearson no object now, or lands in no result afterwards.We may perceive in this, the glimpseof an argument for the soul's immortality. Wemay enter into the analogy, as stated by Dr.Ferguson, when he says — "whoever considersthe anatomy of the foetus, will find, in thestrength of bones and muscles, in the organsof respiration and digestion, sufficient indicationsof a design to remove his being into adifferent state. The observant and the intelligentmay perhaps find in the mind of manparallel signs of his future destination.*Dr. Ferguson's reasoning' upon this subject is worthy ofbeing extracted more largely than we have room for in the text —If the human foetus," he observes, " were qualified to reasonof his prospects in the womb of his parent, as he may afterwardsdo in his range on this terrestrial globe, he might no doubtapprehend in the breach of his umbilical chord, and in hisseparation from the womb a total extinction of life, for how couldhe conceive it to continue after his only supply of nourishmentfrom the vital stock of his parent had ceased ? He might indeedobserve many parts of his organization and frame which should128 THE CAPACITIES OF THE WORLD FOR17. Now what inference shall we draw fromthis remarkable law in nature, that there isnothing waste and nothing meaningless in thefeelings and faculties wherewith living creaturesare endowed ? For each desire there is a counterpartobject, for each faculty there is room andopportunity of exercise — either in the present, orinthe coming futurity. Now, but for the doctrineof immortality, man would be an exceptionto this law. He would stand forth as an anomalyin nature — with aspirations in his heart for whichthe universe had no antitype to offer, with capacitiesof understanding and thought, that neverseem to have no relation to his state in the womb. For whatpurpose, he might say, this duct which leads from the mouth tothe intestines ? Why these bones that each apart become hard andstiff, while they are separated from one another by so manyflexures or joints ? Why these joints in particular made to moveupon hinges, and these germs of teeth, which are pushing to befelt above the surface of the gums ? Why the stomach throughwhich nothing is made to pass? And these spungy lungs, so wellfitted to drink up the fluids, but into which the blood that passesevery where else is scarcely permitted to enter ?To these queries, which the foetus was neither qualified tomake nor to answer, we are now well apprized the proper answerwould be — the life which you now enjoy is but temporary ; andthose particulars which now seem to you so preposterous, are aprovision which nature has made for a future course of life whichyou have to run, and in which their use and propriety will appearsufficiently evident.Such are the prognostic of a future destination that might becollected from the state of the foetus; and similar prognostic of adestination still future might be collected from present appearancesin the life and condition of man."MAKING A VIRTUOUS SPECIES HAPPY. 1*29were to be followed, by objects of correspondinggreatness, through the Avhole history of hisbeing. It were a violence to the harmony ofthings, whereof no other example can be given ;and, in as far as an argument can be foundedon this harmony for the wisdom of Him whomade all things — it were a reflection on oneof the conceived, if not one of the ascertainedattributes of the Godhead. To feel the force ofthis argument, we have only to look to theobvious adaptation of his powers to a larger andmore enduring theatre — to the dormant facultieswhich are in him for the mastery and acquisitionof all the sciences, and yet the partial ignoranceof all, and the profound or total ignorance ofmany, in which he spends the short-lived yearsof his present existence — to the boundless, buthere, the unopened capabilities which lie up inhim, for the comprehension of truths that neveronce draw his attention on this side of death,for the contemplative enjoyment both of moraland intellectual beauties which have never hererevealed themselves to his gaze. The wholelabour of this mortal life would not suffice, fortraversing in full extent any one of the sciences ;and yet, there may lie undeveloped in his bosom,a taste and talent for them all — none of which hecan even singly overtake ; for each science,though definite in its commencement, has itsout-goings in the infinite and the eternal. There130 CAPACITIES OF THE WORLD, ETC.is in man, a restlessness of ambition ; an interminablelonging after nobler and higher things,which nought but immortality and the greatnessof immortality can satiate ; a dissatisfaction withthe present, which never is appeased by all thatthe world has to offer ; an impatience and distastewith the felt littleness of all that he finds,and an unsated appetency for something largerand better, which he fancies in the perspectivebefore him — to all which there is nothing likeamong any of the inferior animals, with whom,there is a certain squareness of adjustment, if wemay so term it, between each desire and its correspondentgratification. The one is evenly metby the other ; and there is a fullness and definitenessof enjoyment, up to the capacity ofenjoyment. Not so with man, who both fromthe vastness of his propensities and the vastnessof his powers, feels himself straitened and besetin a field too narrow for him. He alone laboursunder the discomfort of an incongruity betweenhis circumstances and his powers ; and, unlessthere be new circumstances awaiting him in amore advanced state of being, he, the noblest ofNature's products here below, would turn out tobe the greatest of her failures.PART II.ON THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOTHE INTELLECTUAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN.Chapter I.Chief Instances of this Adaptation.1. (1.) The law of most extensive influence overthe phenomena and processes of the mind, isthe law of association, or, as denominated by Dr.Thomas Brown, the law of suggestion. If twoobjects have been seen in conjunction, or in immediatesuccession, at any one time — then thesight or thought of one of them afterwards, is aptto suggest the thought of the other also ; and thesame is true of the objects of all the senses. Thesame smells or sounds or tastes which haveoccurred formerly, when they occur again, willoften recal the objects from which they thenproceeded, the occasions or other objects withwhich they were then associated. When onemeets with a fragrance of a particular sort, itmay often instantly suggest a fragrance of thesame kind experienced months or years ago;132 THE INTELLECTUALthe rose-bush from which it came ; the gardenwhere it grew ; the friend with whom we thenwalked ; his features, his conversation, his relatives,his history. When two ideas have beenonce in juxta-position, they are apt to presentthemselves in juxta-position over again — anaptitude which ever increases the oftener thatthe conjunction has taken place, till, as ifby an invincible necessity, the antecedentthought is sure to bring its usual consequentalong with it; and, not only single sequences,but lengthened trains or progressions of thought,may in this manner be explained.2. And such are the great speed and facilityof these successions, that many of the intermediateterms, though all of them undoubtedlypresent to the mind, flit so quickly and evanescent,as to pass unnoticed. This will themore certainly happen, if the antecedents areof no further use than to introduce the consequents; in which case, the consequents remainas the sole objects of attention, and the antecedentsare forgotten. In the art of reading,the ultimate object is to obtain possession ofthe author's sentiments or meaning ; and allmemory of the words, still more of the componentletters, though each of them must havebeen present to the mind, pass irrecoverablyaway from it. In like manner, the anteriorsteps of many a mental process may actuallyCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 133be described, yet without consciousness — theattention resting, not on the fugitive means,but on the important end in which they terminate.It is thus that we seem to judge, on theinstant, of distances, as if under a guidancethat was immediate and instinctive, and notby the result of a derivative process — becauseinsensible to the rapid train of inference whichled to it. The mind is too much occupied withthe information itself, for looking back on thelight and shadowy footsteps of the messengerwho brought it, which it would find difficultif not impossible to trace — and besides, havingno practical call upon it for making such aretrospect. It is thus that, when lookingintensely on some beautiful object in Nature,we are so much occupied With the resultingenjoyment, as to overlook the intermediate trainof unbidden associations, which connects thesight of that which is before us, with the resultingand exquisite pleasure, that we feel in theact of beholding it. The principle has beenmuch resorted to, in expounding that process,by which the education of the senses is carriedforward ; and, more especially, the way in whichthe intimations of sight and touch are made tocorrect and to modify each other. It has alsobeen employed with good effect, in the attemptto establish a philosophy of taste. But theserapid and fugitive associations, Awhile they formC. II. L134 THE INTELLECTUALa real, form also an unseen process ; and wearenot therefore to wonder, if, along with manysolid explanations, they should have been soapplied in the investigation of mental phenomena,as occasionally to have given rise tosubtle and fantastic theories.3. But our proper business at present is withresults, rather than with processes ; and insteadof entering on the more recondite inquiriesof the science, however interesting and howeverbeautiful or even satisfactory the conclusions maybeto which they lead — it is our task to pointout those palpable benefits and subserviencies ofour intellectual constitution, which demonstrate,without obscurity, the benevolent designs of Himwho framed us. There are some of our mentalphilosophers, indeed, who have theorised andsimplified beyond the evidence of those factswhich lie before us ; and our argument shouldbe kept clear, for in reality it does not partake,in the uncertainty or error of their speculations.The law of association, for example, has been oflate reasoned upon, as if it were the sole parentand predecessor of all the mental phenomena.Yet it does not explain, however largely it mayinfluence, the phenomena of memory. Whenby means of one idea, anyhow awakened inthe mind, the whole of some past transactionor scene is brought to recollection, it is associationwhich recalls to our thoughts this portionCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 135of our former history. But association cannotexplain our recognition of its actual and historicaltruth — or what it is, which, beside an actof conception, makes it also an act of remembrance.By means of this law we may understandhow it is, that certain ideas, suggestedby certain others which came before it, are nowpresent to the mind. But superadded to themere presence of these ideas, there is such aperception of the reality of their archetypes, asdistinguishes a case of remembrance from acase of imagination — insomuch that over andabove the conception of certain objects, thereis also a conviction of their substantive beingat the time which we connect with thethought of them ; and this is what the law ofassociation cannot by itself account for. Itcannot account for our reliance upon memory —not as a conjurer of visions into the chamberof imagery, but as an informer of stable andobjective truths which had place and fulfilmentin the actual world of experience.4. And the same is true of our believinganticipations of the future, which we have nowaffirmed to be true of our believing retrospectsof the past. The confidence wherewithwe count on the same sequences in future,that we have observed in the course of ourpast experience, has been resolved by somephilosophers, into the principle of association136 THE INTELLECTUALalone. Now when we have seen a certainantecedent followed up by a certain consequent,the law of association does of itself afford asufficient reason, why the idea of that antecedentshould be followed up by the idea ofits consequent ; but it contains within it noreason, why, on the actual occurrence again ofthe antecedent, we should believe that the consequentwill occur also. That the thought of theantecedent should suggest the thought of theconsequent, is one mental phenomenon. Thatthe knowledge of the antecedent having anewtaken place, should induce the certainty, thatthe consequent must have taken place also, isanother mental phenomenon. We cannot confoundthese two, without being involved inthe idealism of Hume or Berkeley. Were themere thought of the consequent all that wasto be accounted for, we need not go fartherthan to the law of association. But when to theexistence of this thought, there is superaddeda belief in the reality of its archetype, a distinctmental phenomenon comes into view, which thelaw of association does not explain ; and which,for aught that the analysts of the mind have yetbeen able to trace or to discover, is an ultimateprinciple of the human understanding. Thisbelief, then, is one thing. But ere we canmake out an adaptation, we must be able toallege at least tMo things. And they areready to our hands — for, in addition to theCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 137belief in the subjective mind, there is a correspondentand counterpart reality in objectivenature. If we have formerly observed that agiven antecedent is followed by a certain consequent,then, not only does the idea of theantecedent suggest the idea of the consequent ;but there is a belief, that, on the actual occurrenceof the same antecedent, the same consequentwill follow over again. And the consequentdoes follow ; or, in other words, this our instinctivefaith meets with its unexpected fulfilment,in the actual course and constancy of nature.The law of association does of itself, andwithout going further, secure this general convenience— that the courses of the mind arethereby conformed, or are made to quadrateand harmonize With the courses of the outerworld. It is the best possible construction forthe best and most useful guidance of the mind,as in the exercise of memory for example, thatthought should be made to follow thought,according to the order in which the objects andevents of nature are related to each other. Butabelief in the certainty and uniformity of thisorder, with the counterpart verification of thisbelief in the actual history of things, is thatwhich we now are especially regarding. It formsour first instance, perhaps the most strikingand marvellous of all, of the adaptation ofexternal nature to the intellectual constitution ofman.138 THE INTELLECTUAL5. This disposition to count on the uniformityof Nature, or even to anticipate the same consequentsfrom the same antecedents — is not thefruit of experience, but anterior to it ; or at leastanterior to the very earliest of those of herlessons, which can be traced backward in thehistory of an infant mind. Indeed it has beenwell observed by Dr. Thomas Brown, that thefuture constancy of Nature, is a lesson, which noobservation of its past constancy, or no experiencecould have taught us. Because we haveobserved A a thousand times to be followed inimmediate succession by B, there is no greaterlogical connection between this proposition andthe proposition that A will always be followedby B ; than there is between the propositions thatwe have seen A followed once by B, and thereforeA will always be followed by B. At whateverstage of the experience, the inference may bemade, whether longer or shorter, whether ofteneror seldom repeated — the conversion of thepast into the future seems to require a distinctand independent principle of belief ; and it is aprinciple which, to all appearance, is as vigorousin childhood, as in the full maturity of thehuman understanding. The child who strikesthe table with a spoon for the first time, and isregaled by the noise, will strike again, withas confident an expectation of the same result,as if the succession had been familiar to it forCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 139years. There is the expectation before theexperience of Nature's constancy ; and still thetopic of our wonder and gratitude is, that thisinstinctive and universal faith in the heart,should be responded to by objective nature, inone wide and universal fulfilment.6. The proper office of experience, in thismatter, is very generally misapprehended ; andthis has mystified the real principle and philosophyof the subject. Her office is not to tell,or to reassure us of the constancy of Nature ;but to tell, what the terms of her unalterableprogressions actually are. The luunan mindfrom its first outset, and in virtue of a constitutionalbias coeval with the earliest dawn of theunderstanding, is prepared, and that beforeexperience has begun her lessons, to count onthe constancy of nature's sequences. But atthat time, it is profoundly ignorant of thesequences in themselves. It is the proper businessof experience to give this information ; butit may require many lessons before that herdisciples be made to understand, what be thedistinct terms even of but one sequence. Naturepresents us with her phenomena in complexassemblages ; and it is often difficult, in thework of disentangling her trains from eachother, to single out the proper and causal antecedentwith its resulting consequent, from amongthe crowd of accessary or accidental circuitsTHE INTELLECTUALstances by which they are surrounded. Thereis never any uncertainty, as to the invariablenessof nature's successions. The only uncertaintyis as to the steps of each succession ; and thedistinct achievement of experience, is to ascertainthese steps. And many mistakes are committedin this course of education, from our dispositionto confound the similarities with thesameness of Nature. We never misgive in ourgeneral confidence, that the same antecedentwill be followed by the same consequent ; butwe often mistake the semblance for the reality,and are as often disappointed in the expectationsthat we form. This is the real account of thatgrowing confidence, wherewith we anticipate thesame results in the same apparent circumstances,the oftener that that result has in these circumstancesbeen observed by us — as of a high waterabout twice every day, or of a sun-rise everymorning. It is not that we need to be moreassured than we are already of the constancy ofNature, in the sense that every result mustalways be the sure effect of its strict and causalantecedent. But we need to be assured of thereal presence of this antecedent, in that mass ofcontemporaneous things under which the resulthas taken place hitherto ; and of this we aremore and more satisfied, with every new occurrenceof the same event in the same apparentcircumstances. This too is our real object inCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 141the repetition of experiments. Not that wesuspect that Nature will ever vacillate from herconstancy— for if by one decisive experimentwe should fix the real terms of any succession,this experiment were to us as good as a thousand.But each succession in nature is so liable to beobscured and complicated by other influences,that we must be quite sure, ere we can proclaimour discovery of some new sequence, that wehave properly disentangled her separate trainsfrom each other. For this purpose, we haveoften to question Nature in many different Avays ;we have to combine and apply her elementsvariously ; we have sometimes to detach oneingredient, or to add another, or to alter theproportions of a third — and all in order, notto ascertain the invariableness of Nature, for ofthis we have had instinctive certainty from thebeginning ; but, in order to ascertain what theactual footsteps of her progressions are, so as toconnect each effect in the history of Nature'schanges with its strict and proper cause. Meanwhile,amid all the suspense and the frequentdisappointments which attend this search intothe processes of nature, our confidence in therigid and inviolable uniformity of these processesremains unshaken — a confidence notlearned from experience, but amply confirmedand accorded to by experience. For this instinctiveexpectation is never once refuted, in the142 THE INTELLECTUALwhole course of our subsequent researches.Nature though stretched on a rack, or put to thetorture by the inquisitions of science, neverfalters from her immutability ; but persists,unseduced and unwearied, in the same responseto the same question ; or gives forth, by a spark,or an explosion, or an effervescence, or someother definite phenomenon, the same result tothe same circumstances or combination of data.The anticipations of infancy meet with theirglorious verification, in all the findings of manhood; and a truth which would seem to requireOmniscience for its grasp, as coextensive withallNature and all History, is deposited by thehand of God, in the little cell of a nursling'scogitations.7. Yet the immutability of Nature has ministeredto the atheism of some spirits, as impressingon the universe a character of blind necessity,instead of that spontaneity, which might markthe intervention of a willing and a living God.To refute this notion of an unintelligent fate,as being the alone presiding Divinity, thecommon appeal is to the infinity and exquisiteskill of nature's adaptations. But to attack thisinfidelity in its fortress, and dislodge it thence,the more appropriate argument would be thevery, the individual adaptation on which we havenow insisted — the immutability of Nature, inconjunction with the universal sense and expectOF MAN. 143nation, even from earliest childhood, that allmen have of it; being itself one of the mostmarvellous and strikingly beneficial of theseadaptations. When viewed aright, it leads toa wiser and sounder conclusion than that ofthe fatalists. In the instinctive, the universalfaith of Nature's constancy, we behold a promise.In the actual constancy of Nature, webehold its fulfilment. When the two are viewedin connection, then, to be told that Nature neverrecedes from her constancy, is to be told thatthe God of Nature never recedes from his faithfulness.If not by a whisper from His voice,at least by the impress of His hand. He hathdeposited a silent expectation in every heart ;and He makes all Nature and all History conspireto realize it. He hath not only enabled manto retain in his memory a faithful transcriptof the past ; but by means of this constitutionaltendency, this instinct of the understanding asit has been termed, to look with prophetic eyeupon the future. It is the link by which weconnect experience with anticipation — a poweror exercise of the mind coeval with the firstdawning of consciousness or observation, becauseobviously that to which we owe theconfidence so early acquired and so firmlyestablished, in the information of our senses.*It is from our tactual sensations that we obtain our first originalperceptions of distance and magnitude ; and it is only because of144 THE INTELLECTUALThis disposition to presume on the constancyof nature, commences with the faculty ofthought, and keeps by it through life, and enablesthe mind to convert its stores of memory intothe treasures of science and wisdom ; and so toelicit from the recollections of the past, boththe doctrines of a general philosophy, and thelessons of daily and familiar conduct — and that,the invariable connection which subsists between the same tactualand the same visual sensations, that by means of the latter weobtain secondary or acquired perceptions of distance and magnitude.It is obvious that without a faith in the uniformity ofnature, this rudimental education could not have taken effect ; andfrom the confidence wherewith we proceed in very early childhoodon the intimations of the eye, we may infer how strongly thisprinciple must have been at work throughout the anterior stage ofour still earlier infancy. The lucid and satisfactory demonstrationupon this subject in that delightful little work, the Theory ofVision, by Bishop Berkeley, has not been superseded, because ithas not been improved upon, by the lucubrations of any subsequentauthor. The theology which he would found on thebeautiful process which he has unfolded so well, is somewhattinged with the mysticism of that doctrine which represents ourseeing all things in God. Certain it is, however, that the processcould not have been advanced or consummated, without anaboriginal faith on the part of the infant mind in the uniformity ofnature's sequences, a disposition to expect the same consequentsfrom the same antecedents — an inference which is at length made,and that in very early childhood, with such rapidity as well asconfidence, that it leads all men to confound their acquired withtheir original perceptions ; and it requires a subtle analysis todisentangle the two from each other. Without partaking in themetaphysics of Berkeley, we fully concur in the strength andcertainty of those atheistical conclusions which are expressed byhim in the follovvino- sentences — " Something" there is of divineCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 145by means of prognostic, not one of which canfail, for, in respect of her steadfast uniformity.Nature never disappoints, or, which is equivalentto this, the Author of Nature never deceives us.The generality of Nature's laws is indispensable,both to the formation of any system of truthfor the understanding, and to the guidance ofour actions. But ere we can make such useand admirable in this language addressed to our eyes, that maywell awaken the mind, and deserve its utmost attention ; it islearned with so little pains, it expresses the difference of things soclearly and aptly, it instructs with such facility and dispatch, byone glance of the eye conveying a greater variety of advices, anda more distinct knowledge of things, than could be got by adiscourse of several hours : and, while it informs, it amuses andentertains the mind with such singular pleasure and delight ; it isof such excellent use in giving a stability and permanency tohuman discourse, in recording sounds and bestowing life on deadlanguages, enabling us to converse with men of remote ages andcountries ; and it answers so apposite to the uses and necessitiesof mankind, informing us more distinctly of those objects, whosenearness or magnitude qualify them to be of greatest detrimentor benefit to our bodies, and less exactly in proportion as theirlittleness or distance make them of less concern to us. But thesethings are not strange, they are familiar, and that makes them tobe overlooked. Things which rarely happen strike ; whereasfrequency lessens the admiration of things, though in themselvesever so admirable. Hence a common man who is not used tothink and make reflections, would probably be more convinced ofthe being of a God by one single sentence heard once in his lifefrom the sky, than by all the experience he has had of this visuallanguage, contrived with such exquisite skill, so constantlyaddressed to his eyes, and so plainly declaring the nearness,wisdom, and providence of Him with whom we have to do."Minute Philosopher. Dialogue IV. Art. XV.146 THE INTELLECTUAL ^of it, the sense and the confident expectationof this generality must be previously in ourminds ; and the concurrence, the contingentharmony of these two elements ; the exquisiteadaptation of the objective to the subjective,with the manifest utilities to which it is subservient; the palpable and perfect meetnesswhich subsists, between this intellectual propensityin man, and all the processes of theoutward universe — while they afford incontestableevidence to the existence and unity ofthat design, which must have adjusted themental and the material formations to eachother, speak most decisively in our estimationboth for the truth and the wisdom of God.8. We have long felt this close and unexpected,while at the same time, contingentharmony, between the actual constancy ofNature and man's faith in that constancy, to beaneffectual preservative against that scepticism,which would represent the whole system of ourthoughts and perceptions to be founded on anillusion. Certain it is, that beside an indefinitenumber of truths received by the understandingas the conclusions of a proof more or lesslengthened, there are truths recognized withoutproof by an instant act of intuition — not theresults of a reasoning process, but themselvesthe first principles of all reasoning. At everystep in the train of argumentation, we affirmCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 147one thing to be true, because of its logicalconnection with another thing known to betrue ; but as this process of derivation is noteternal, it is obvious, that, at the commencementof at least some of these trains, there must betruths, which, instead of borrowing their evidencefrom others, announce themselves immediatelyto the mind in an original and independentevidence of their own. Now they are theseprimary convictions of the understanding, thesecases of a belief without reason, which ministerto the philosophical infidelity of those, who,professing to have no dependance on an instinctivefaith, do in fact alike discard all truth,whether demonstrated or demonstrated —seeing that underived or unreasoned truth mustnecessarily form the basis, as well as thecontinuous cement of all reasoning. Theychallenge us to account for these native andoriginal convictions of the mind ; and affirmthat they may be as much due to an arbitraryorganization of the percipient faculty, as tothe objective trueness of the things which areperceived. And we cannot dispute the possibilityof this. We can neither establish byreasoning those truths, whose situation is, notany where in the stream, but at the fountainof ratiocination ; nor can we deny that beingsmight have been so differently constituted, asthat, with reverse intuitions to our own, they148 THE INTELLECTUALmight have recognized as truths what weinstantly recoil from as falsehoods, or felt tobe absurdities our first and foremost principlesof truth. And when this suspicion is onceadmitted, so as to shake our confidence in thejudgments of the intellect, it were but consistentthat it should be extended to the departmentsboth of morality and taste. Ourimpressions of what is virtuous or of what isfair, may be regarded as alike accidental andarbitrary with our impressions of what is tiiie —being referable to the structure of the mind,and not to any objective reality in the thingswhich are contemplated. It is thus that theabsolutely true, or good, or beautiful, may beconceived of, as having no stable or substantivebeing in nature ; and the mind, adrift from allfixed principle, may thus lose itself in universalPyrrhonism.9. Nature is fortunately too strong for thisspeculation ; but still there is a comfort in beingenabled to vindicate the confidence which shehas inspired — as in those cases, where someoriginal principle of hers admits of being clearlyand decisively tested. And it is so of our faithin the constancy of nature, met and respondedto, throughout all her dominions by nature'sactual constancy — the one being the expectation,the other its rigid and invariable fulfilment.This perhaps is the most palpable instanceCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 149which can be quoted, of a belief anterior toexperience, yet of which experience affords awide and unexpected verification. It proves atleast of one of our implanted instincts, that itis unerring; and that, over against a subjectivetendency in the mind, there is a great objectivereality in circumambient nature to which itcorresponds. This may well convince us, thatwe live, not in a world of imaginations — butina world of realities. It is a noble exampleof the harmony which obtains, between theoriginal make and constitution of the humanspirit upon the one hand, and the constitutionof external things upon the other; and noblyaccredited the faithfulness of Him, who, as theCreator of both, ordained this happy and wondrousadaptation. The monstrous suspicion ofthe sceptics is, that we are in the hands ofa God, who, by the insertion of falsities intothe human system, sports himself with a laboriousdeception on the creatures whom He hasmade. The invariable order of nature, in conjunctionwith the apprehension of this invariablenessexisting in all hearts ; the universalexpectation with its universal fulfilment, is atriumphant refutation of this degrading mockeryevincing, that it is not a phantasmagoria inwhich we dwell, but a world peopled with realities.That we are never misled in our instinctivebelief of nature's uniformity, demonstratesC. II. M150 THE INTELLECTUALthe perfect safety wherewith we may commitourselves to the guidance of our original principles,whether intellectual or moral — assured,that, instead of occupying a land of shadows,a region of universal doubt and derision, theyare the stabilities, both of an everlasting truthand an everlasting righteousness with whichwe have to do.10. This lesson obtains a distinct and additionalconfirmation from every particular instanceof adaptation, which can be found, ofexternal nature, either to the moral or intellectualconstitution of man.11. (2.) To understand our second adaptationwe must advert to the difference that obtainsbetween those truths which are so distinct andindependent, that each can only be ascertainedby a separate act of observation ; and thosetruths which are either logically or mathematicallyinvolved in each other.* For example.See this distinction admirably expounded in Lately's Logica work of profound judgment, and which effectually vindicatesthe honours of a science, that since the days of Bacon, or rather(which is more recent) since the days of his extravagant becauseexclusive authority, it has been too much the fashion to depreciate.The author, if I might use the expression without irreverence, hasgiven to Bacon the things which are Bacon's, and to Aristotle thethings which are Aristotle's. He has strengthened the pretensionsof logic by narrowing them — that is, instead of placing all theintellectual processes under its direction, by assigning to it as itsproper subject the art of deduction alone. He has made mostCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 151there is no such dependence between the colourof a flower and its smell, as that the one canbe reasoned from the other ; and, in every differentspecimen therefore, we, to ascertain thetwo facts of the colour and the smell, must haverecourse to two observations. On the otherhand, there is such a dependence between theproposition that self-preservation is the strongestand most general law of our nature, and theproposition that no man will starve if able andin circumstances to work for his own maintenance— that the one proposition can be deducedby inference from the other, as the conclusionfrom the premises of an argument. And stillmore there is such a dependence between theproposition, that the planet moves in an ellipticalorbit round the sun, having its focus in thecentre of that luminary, and a thousand otherpropositions — so that without a separate obser-correct distinction between the inductive and the logical ; and itis by attending to the respective provinces of each, that we cometo perceive the incompetency of mere logic for the purpose ofdiscovery strictly so called. The whole chapter on discovery isparticularly valuable — leading us clearly to discriminate betweenthat which logic can, and that which it cannot achieve. It isan instalment, not for the discovery of truth properly new, butfor the discovery of truths which are enveloped or virtuallycontained in propositions already known. It instructs but doesnot inform ; and has nought to do in syllogism with the truthof the premises, but only with the truth of the connection betweenthe premises and the conclusion.152 THE INTELLECTUALnation for each of the latter, they can be reasonedfrom the former ; just as an infinity oftruths and properties can, without observation,be satisfactorily demonstrated of many a curvefrom the simple definition of it. We do notaffirm, that, in any case, we can establish adogma, or make a discovery independently ofall observation — any more than in a syllogismwe are independent of observation for the truthof the premises — both the major and the minorpropositions being generally verified in thisway ; while the connection between these andthe conclusion, is all, in the syllogism, wherewiththe art of logic has properly to do. In noneof the sciences, is the logic of itself availablefor the purposes of discovery ; and it can onlycontribute to this object, when furnished withsound data, the accuracy of which is determinedby observation alone. This holds particularlytrue of the mixed mathematics, where the conclusionsare sound, only in as far as the firstpremises are sound — which premises, in likemanner, are not reasoned truths, but observedtruths. Even in the pure mathematics, someobscurely initial or rudimental process ofobservation may have been necessary, ere themind could arrive at its first conceptions, eitherof quantity or number. Certain it is, however,that, in all the sciences, however dependenton observation for the original data, we can,CONSTITUTION OF MAX. 153by reasoning on the data, establish an indefinitenumber of distinct and important and usefulpropositions — which, if soundly made out, observationwill afterwards verify; but which,anterior to the application of this test, the mind,by its own excogitations, may have made theobjects of its most legitimate conviction. It isthus that, on the one hand, we, by the inferencesof a sound logic, can, on an infinity of subjects,discover what should for ever have remainedunknown, had it been left to the endings ofdirect observation ; and that, on the other hand,though observation could not have made thediscovery, it never fails to attest it. Visionaries,on the one hand, may spurn at the ignoblepatience and drudgery of observers ; and ignorantpractitioners, whether in the walks ofbusiness or legislation, may, on the other, raisetheir senseless and indiscriminate outcry againstthe reasoners — but he who knows to distinguishbetween an hypothesis based on imagination,and a theory based on experience, and perceiveshow helpless either reason or observation is,when not assisted by the other, will know howto assign the parts, and to estimate the prerogativesof both.12. When the mind has retired from directconverse With the external world, and broughtto its own inner chamber of thought the materialswhich it has collected there, it then delivers154 THE INTELLECTUALitself up to its own processes — first ascendinganalytically from observed phenomena to principles,and then descending synthetically fromprinciples to yet unobserved phenomena. Wecannot but recognize it as an exquisite adaptationbetween the subjective and the objective,between the mental and the material systems —that the results of the abstract intellectualprocess and the realities of external natureshould so strikingly harmonize.* It is exemplifiedin all the sciences, in the economical,and the mental, and the physical, and mostof all in the physic-mathematical — as whenNewton, on the calculations and profoundmusings of his solitude, predicted the oblatespheroidal figure of the earth, and the predictionwas confirmed by the mensurations of theacademicians, both in the polar and equatorialThere are some fine remarks by Sir John Herschelll in hispreliminary discourse on the study of Natural Philosophy on thisadaptation of the abstract ideas to the concrete realities, of thediscoveries made in the region of pure thought to the facts andphenomena of actual nature — as when the properties of conicsections, demonstrated by a laborious analysis, remained inapplicabletill they came to be embodied in the real masses and movementsof astronomy.These mai-fellows computations might almost seem to havebeen devised on purpose to show how closely the extremes ofspeculative refinement and practical utility can be brought toapproximate." Herschelll's Discourse, p. 28.*' They show how large a part pure reason has to perform in theexamination of nature, and how implicit our reliance ought to beon that powerful and methodical system of rules and processes,CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 155regions ; or as, when abandoning himself tothe devices and the diagrams of his own construction,he thence scanned the cycles of thefirmament, and elicited from the scroll of enigmaticalcharacters which himself had framed,the secrets of a sublime astronomy, that highfieldso replete with wonders, yet surpassed bythis greatest wonder of all, the intellectualmastery which man has over it. That such afeeble creature should have made this conquestthat a light struck out in the little cell ofhis own cogitations should have led to a disclosureso magnificent — that by a calculus ofhis own formation, as with the power of atalisman, the heavens, with their stupendousmasses and untrodden distances, should havethus been opened to his gaze — can only beexplained by the intervention of a Being havingsupremacy over all, and who has adjusted thewhich constitute the modern mathematical analysis, in all themore difficult applications of exact calculation to her phenomena."p. 33.Almost all the great combinations of modern mechanism andmany of its refinements and nicer improvements, are creations ofpure intellect, grounding its exertion upon a very moderate numberof elementary' propositions, in theoretical mechanics and geometry."p. 63.The discovery of the principle of the achromatic telescope,is termed by Sir John " a memorable case in science, though not asingular one, where the speculative geometer in his chamber,apart from the Avorld, and existing among abstractions, hasoriginated views of the noblest practical application." p. 255.156 THE INTELLECTUALlaws of matter and the properties of mind toeach other. It is only thus we can be madeto understand, how man by the mere workingsof his spirit, should have penetrated so farinto the workmanship of Nature ; or that, restrictedthough he be to a spot of earth, heshould nevertheless tell of the suns and thesystems that be afar — as if he had travelledwith the line and plummet in his hand to theoutskirts of creation, or carried the torch ofdiscovery round the universe.13. (3.) Our next adaptation is most notablyexemplified in those cases, when some isolatedphenomenon, remote and having at first noconceivable relation to human affairs, is neverthelessconverted by the plastic and productiveintellect of man, into some application of mightyand important effect on the interests of theworld. One example of this is the use that hasbeen made of the occultations and emersions ofJupiter's satellites, in the computation of longitudes,and so the perfecting of navigation.When one contemplates a subserviency of thissort fetched to us from afar, it is difficult not toimagine of it as being the fruit of some specialadjustment, that came within the purpose ofHim, who, in constructing the vast mechanism ofNature, overlooked not the humblest of its partsbut incorporated the good of our species, withthe wider generalities and laws of a universalCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 157system.* The conclusion is rather enhancedthan Otherwise by the seemingly incidental wayin which the telescope was discovered. Theobservation of the polarity of the magnet is anexample of the same kind— and with the sameresult, in multiplying, by an enlarged commercethe enjoyments of life, and speeding onward thescience and civilization of the globe. Therecannot a purer instance be given, of adaptationbetween external nature and the mind of man —The author of the Natural History of Enthusiasm, in hisedition of Edward's treatise on the will, presents us with the followingenergetic sentences on this subject.Every branch of modern science abounds with instances ofremote correspondences between the great system of the world,and the artificial the truly natural) condition to which knowledgeraises him. If these correspondences were single or rare theymight be deemed merely fortuitous ; like the drifting of a plankathwart the track of one who is swimming from a wreck. Butwhen they meet us on all sides and invariably, we must be resolutein atheism not to confess that they are emanations from one andthe same centre of wisdom and goodness. Is it nothing* more thanalucky accommodation which makes the polarity of the needle tosubserve the purposes of the mariner ? or may it not safely beaffirmed, both that the magnetic influence (whatever its primaryintention may be) had reference to the business of navigation — areference incalculably important to the spread and improvement ofthe human race ; and that the discover' and the application of thisinfluence arrived at the destined moment in the revolution ofhuman affairs, when in combination with other events, it wouldproduce the greatest effect ? Nor should we scruple to affirm thatthe relation between the inclination of the earth's axis and theconspicuous star which, without a near rival, attracts even the eyeof the vulgar, and shows the north to the wanderer on the wildernessTHE INTELLECTUALthan when some material, that would have re-named for ever useless in the hands of the unintelligentand unthoughtful, is converted, by thefertility and power of the human understanding,into an instrument for the further extensionof our knowledge or our means of gratification.The prolongation of their eyesight to the agedby means of convex lenses, made from a substanceat once transparent and colourless — theness or on the ocean, is in like manner a beneficent arrangement.Those who would spurn the supposition that the celestial localityof a sun immeasurably remote from our system, should havereference to the accommodation of the inhabitants of a planet soinconsiderable as our own, forget the style of the Divine Works,which is, to serve some great or principal end, compatibly with tenthousand lesser and remote interests. Man if he would secure thegreater, must neglect or sacrifice the less ; not so the OmnipotentContriver. It is a fact full of meaning, that those astronomicalphenomena (and so others) which offer themselves as available forthe purposes of art, as for instance of navigation, or geography,do not fully or effectively yield the end they promise, until afterlong and elaborate processes of calculation have disentangled themfrom variations, disturbing forces and apparent irregularities.To the rude fact, if so Ave might designate it, a mass of reconditescience must be appended, before it can be brought to bear withprecision upon the arts of life. Thus the polarity of the needle orthe eclipses of Jupiter's moons are as nothing to the mariner, orthe geographer, without the voluminous commentary furnished bythe mathematics of astronomy. The fact of the expansive forceof steam must employ the intelligence and energy of the mechaniciansof an empire, during a century, before the whole of itsbeneficial powers can be put in activity. Chemical, medical, andbotanical science is filled with parallel instances ; and they allaffirm, in an articulate manner, the two-fold purpose of theCreator — to benefit man and to educate him.ICONSTITUTION OF MAN. 159force of steam with the manifold and ever growingapplications which are made of it — the discoveryof platina, which, by its resistance to thefiercest heats, is so available in prosecuting theulterior researches of chemistry* — even the veryabundance and portability of those materials bywhich written characters can be multiplied, and,through the impulse thus given to the quick andcopious circulation of human thoughts, mindacts with rapid diffusion upon mind though atthe distance of a hemisphere from each other,conceptions and informations and reasoningsthese products of the intellect alone being madeto travel over the world by the intervention ofmaterial substances — these, while but themselvesonly a few taken at random from the multitudeof strictly appropriate specimens which could bealleged of an adaptation between the systemsThis among' many such lessons will teach us that the mostimportant uses of natural objects are not those which offer themselvesto us most obviously. The chief use of the moon for man'simmediate purposes remained unknown to him for five thousandyears from his creation. And since it cannot but be that innumerableand most important uses remain to be discovered amongthe materials and objects already known to us, as well as amongthose which the progress of science must hereafter disclose, wemay here conceive a well grounded expectation, not only of constantincrease in the physical resources of mankind, and the consequentimprovement of their condition, but of continual accessionsto our power of penetrating into the arcana of nature, andbecoming acquainted with her highest laws. Sir John Herschelll'sDiscourse, p. 308, 309.160 THE INTELLECTUALof mind and matter, are sufficient to mark anobvious contrivance and forth-putting of skill inthe adjustment of the systems to each other.Enough has been already done to prove of mind,with its various powers, that it is the fittestagent which could have been employed forworking upon matter ; and of matter, with itsvarious properties and combinations, that it isthe fittest instrument which could have beenplaced under the disposal of mind. Every newtriumph achieved by the human intellect overexternal nature, whether in the way of discoveryor of art, serves to make the proof more illustrious.In the indefinite progress of science andinvention, the mastery of man over the elementswhich surround him is every year becomingmore conspicuous — the pure result of adaptation,or of the way in which mind and matter havebeen conformed to each other ; the first endowedby the Creator with those powers which qualifyit to command ; the second no less evidentlyendowed with those corresponding susceptibilitieswhich cause it to obey.14. (4.) The way is now prepared for our nextadaptation which hinges upon this — that thehighest efforts of intellectual power, and towhich few men are competent ; the most difficultintellectual processes, requiring the utmostabstraction and leisure for their development,are often indispensable to discoveries, which,CONSTITUTION OF MAN. Italwhen once made, are found capable of thoseuseful applications, the value of which is feltand recognized by all men. The most previousmathematics had to be put into requisition, forthe establishment of the lunar theory — withoutwhich our present lunar observations could havebeen of no use for the determination of thelongitude. This dependence of the popular andthe practical on an anterior profound scienceruns through much of the business of life, in themechanics and chemistry of manufactures aswell as in navigation ; and indeed is more orless exemplified so widely, or rather universally,throughout the various departments of humanindustry and art, that it most essentially contributesto the ascendancy of mind over muscularforce in society — beside securing for mental qualities,the willing and reverential homage of themultitude. This peculiar influence stands complicatedwith other arrangements, requiring amultifarious combination, that speaks all themore emphatically for a presiding intellect,which must have devised and calculated thewhole. We have already stated,* by what peculiarityin the soil it was, that a certain numberof the species was exempted from the necessityof labour ; and without w which, in fact,all science and civilization would have been impartI. c. VI. 29.162 THE INTELLECTUALpossible. We have also expounded in somedegree the principle, which both originated theexisting arrangements of property, and led mento acquiesce in them. But still it is a precariousacquiescence, and liable to be disturbed bymany operating causes of distress and discontentin society. If there be influences on theside of the established order of things, there arealso counteractive influences on the oppositeside, of revolt and irritation against it ; and bywhich, the natural reverence of men for rankand station, may at length be overborne. In theprogress of want and demoralization among thepeople, in the pressure of their increasing numbers,by which, they at once outgrow the meansof instruction, and bear more heavily on theresources of the land than before ; in the feltstraitness of their condition, and the proportionatevehemence of their aspirations after enlargement— nothing is easier than to give thema factitious sense of their wrongs, and to inspirethem with the rankling imagination of a heartlessand haughty indifference on the part oftheir lordly superiors towards them, whose veryoccupation of wealth, they may be taught toregard as a monopoly, the breaking down ofwhich were an act of generous patriotism.Against these brooding elements of revolutionin the popular mind, the most effectual preservativecertainly, were the virtue of the upperCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 163classes, — or that our great men should be goodmen.But a mighty help to this, and next toitin importance were, that to the power whichlies in wealth, they should superadd the powerwhich lies in knowledge — or that the vulgarsuperiority of mere affluence and station, shouldbe strengthened in a way that would commandthe willing homage of all spirits, that is, by themental superiority Which their opportunities oflengthened and laborious education enable themto acquire. By a wise ordination of Nature, thepossessors of rank and fortune, simply as such,have a certain ascendant power over theirfellows ; and, by the same ordination, the possessorsof learning have an ascendency also —and it wovdd mightily conduce to the strengthand stability of the commonwealth, if these influenceswere conjoined, or, in other words, if thescale of wealth and the scale of intelligence, inas far as that was dependent on literary culture,could be made to harmonize. The constitutionof science, or the adaptation which obtains betweenthe objects of knowledge and the knowingfaculties, is singularly favourable to thealliance for which we now plead — insomuch that,to sound the depths of philosophy, time andindependence and exemption from the cares andlabours of ordinary life seem indispensable ; and,on the other hand, profound discoveries, or aprofound acquaintance with them, are sure tolb*4 THE INTELLECTUALcommand a ready deference even from the multitude,whether on account of the natural respectwhich all men feel for pre-eminent understanding,or on account of the palpable utilities to which,in a system of things so connected as ours, eventhe loftiest and most recondite science is foundto be subservient. On the same principle that,in a ship, the skilful navigation of its captain,will secure for him the prompt obedience of thecrew to all his directions ;* or that, in an army,We have before us an anecdote communicated to us by anaval officer, (Captain Basil Hall) distinguished for the extent andvariety of his attainments, which shows how impressive suchresults may become in practice. He sailed from San Bias on thewest coast of Mexico, and after a voyage of 8000 miles, occupyingeighty-nine days, arrived off Rio Janeiro, having, in this intervalpassed through the Pacific Ocean, rounded Cape Horn, and crossedthe South Atlantic, without making any land, or even seeing asingle sail, with the exception of an American whaler off CapeHorn. Arrived within a week's sail of Rio, he set seriously aboutdetermining, by lunar observations, the precise line of the ship'scourse, and its situation in it at a determinate moment, andhaving ascertained this within from five to ten miles, ran the restof the way by those more ready and compendious methods, knownto navigators, which can be safely employed for short trips betweenone known point and another, but which cannot be trusted in long*voyages, where the moon is their only guide. The rest of the talewe are enabled by his kindness to state in his own words : — " Westeered towards Rio Janeiro for some days after taking the lunarsabove described, and having arrived within fifteen or twenty milesof the coast, I hove-to till four in the morning when the dayshould break, and then bore up; for although it was very hazy,we could see before us a couple of miles or so. About eighto'clock it became so foggy that I did not like to stand in farther,CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 165the consummate generalship of its commanderwill subordinate all the movements of the immensehost, to the power of one controlling andactuating will so, in general society, did wealthby means of a thorough scholarship on the partof the higher classes, but maintain an intimatefellowship with wisdom and sound philosophy-then,with the same conservative influence asin these other examples, would the intellectualascendency thus acquired, be found of mightyeffect, to consolidate and maintain all the gradationsof the commonwealth.15. It is thus that a vain and frivolous aristocracy,averse to severe intellectual discipline,and beset with the narrow prejudices of anorder, let themselves down from that high van-andwas just bringing the ship to the wind again before sendingthe people to breakfast, when it suddenly cleared off, and I hadthe satisfaction of seeing the great sugar loaf peak, which stands onone side of the harbour's mouth, so nearly right a-head that we hadnot to alter our course above a point, in order to hit the entrance ofRio. This was the first land we had seen for three months, aftercrossing so many seas, and being set backwards and forwards byinnumerable currents and foul wands." " The effect on all on boardmight well be conceived to have been electric ; and it is needlessto remark how essentially the authority of a commanding officerover his crew may be strengthened by the occurrence of suchincidents, indicative of a degree of knowledge and consequentpower beyond their reach." — Herschelll's Discourse, p. 28, 29.It is an extreme instance of the connection between mental powerand civil or political ascendency, though often verified in thehistory of the world — that military science has often led to theestablishment of a military' despotism.C. II. N166 THE INTELLECTUALtake ground on which fortune hath placedthem — where, by a right use of the capabilitiesbelonging to the state in which they were born,they might have kept their firm footing to thelatest generations. Did all truth lie at the surfaceof observation, and was it alike accessibleto all men, they could not with such an adaptationof external nature to man's intellectual constitution,have realized the peculiar advantageon which we are now insisting. But it isbecause there is so much of important andapplicable truth, which lies deep and hiddenunder the surface, and which can only be appropriatedby men, who combine unboundedleisure with the habit or determination of strenuousmental eftbrt — it is only because of suchan adaptation, that they who are gifted withproperty are, as a class, gifted with the means,if they would use it, of a great intellectualsuperiority over the rest of the species. Thereis a strong natural veneration for wealth, andalso a strong natural veneration for wisdom. Itis by the union of the two that the horrors ofrevolutionary violence, might for ever be avertedfrom the land. Did our high-born children ofaffluence, for every ten among them, the mereloungers of effeminacy and fashion, or themere lovers of sport and sensuality and splendour— did they, for every ten of such, furnishbut one enamoured of higher gymnastics, theCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 167gymnastics of the mind ; and who accomplishedhimself for the work and warfare of the senate,by his deep and comprehensive views in all theproper sciences of a statesman, the science ofgovernment, and politics, and commerce, andeconomics, and history, and human nature, —by a few gigantic men among them, thus girdedfor the services of patriotism, a nation mightbe saved — because arrested on that headlong-descent,which, at the impulse of the popularwill, it might else have made, from one measureof fair but treacherous promise, from one ruinousplausibility to another. The thing most to bedreaded, is that hasty and superficial legislation,into which a government may be hurried bythe successive onsets of public impatience, andunder the impulse of a popular and prevailingcry. Now the thing most needed, as a counteractiveto this evil, is a thoroughly intellectualparliament, where shall predominate that masculinesense which has been trained for act andapplication by masculine studies ; and wherethe silly watch word of theory shall not beemployed, as heretofore, to overbear the lessonsof soundly generalized truth — because instead ofbeing discerned at a glance, they are fetchedfrom the depths of philosophic observation, orshone upon by lights from afar, in the accumulatedexperience of ages. We have infinitelymore to apprehend from the demagogues than168 THE INTELLECTUALfrom the doctrinaires of our present crisis ; andit will require a far profounder attention to theprinciples of every question than many deem tobe necessary, or than almost any are found tobestow, to save us from the crudities of a blindfoldlegislation.*16. And it augurs portentously for the comingdestinies of our land, that, in the present ragefor economy, such an indiscriminate havockshould have been made — so that pensions andendowments for the reward or encouragement ofscience, should have had the same sentence ofextinction passed upon them, as the most worth-thismental superiority which the higher classes might andought to cultivate, is not incompatible, but the contrary, with ageneral ascent in the scholarship of the population at large.On this subject we have elsewhere said — that " there is abigotry on the side of endowed seminaries which leads thosewhom it actuates to be jealous of popular institutions. And,on the other hand, there is a generous feeling towards these institutions,which is often accompanied with a certain despite towardsthe endowed and established seminaries. We think that a morecomprehensive consideration of the actings and reacting whichtake place in society, should serve to abate the heats of thispartisanship, and that what in one view is regarded as the conflictof jarring and hostile elements,, should, in another, be rejoiced inas a luminous concourse of influences, tending to accomplish thegrand and beneficent result of an enlightened nation. It is justbecause we wish so well to colleges, that we hail the prosperity ofmechanic institutions. The latter will never outrun the former,but so stimulate them onwards, that the literature of our higherclasses shall hold the same relative advancement as before over theliterature of our artizans. It will cause no derangement and nodisproportion. The light which shall then overspread the floor ofCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 169less sinecures. The difficulties of our mostsublime, and often too our most useful knowledge,make it inaccessible to all but to thosewho are exempt from the care of their ownmaintenance — so that unless a certain, thoughtruly insignificant portion of the country'swealth, be expended in this way, all high andtranscendental philosophy, however conduciveas it often is to the strength as well as glory ofa nation must vanish from the land. When theoriginal possessors of wealth neglect individuallythis application of it ; and, whether from indolenceor the love of pleasure, fall short of thatthe social edifice, will only cause the lustres which are in the higherapartments to blaze more gorgeously. The basement of the fabricwill be greatly more elevated, yet without violence to the symmetryof the whole architecture ; for the pinnacles and upper storiesof the building will rise as proudly and as gracefully as ever abovethe platform which sustains them. There is indefinite room intruth and science for an ascending movement, and the taking upof higher positions ; and if, in virtue of a popular philosophy nowtaught in schools of art, we are to have more lettered mechanics,this will be instantly followed up by a higher philosophy incolleges than heretofore ; and in virtue of which we shall alsohave a more accomplished gentry, a more intellectual parliament,a more erudite clergy, and altogether a greater force and fulnessof mind throughout all the departments of the commonwealth.The whole of society will ascend together, and therefore withoutdisturbance to the relation of its parts. But, in every stage ofthis progress, the endowed colleges will continue to be the highestplaces of intellect ; the country's richest lore and its most solidand severest philosophy will always be found in them." Useand abuse of Literary and Ecclesiastical Endowments.170 THE INTELLECTUALsuperiority in mental culture, of which the meanshave been put into their hands — we can onlyreproach their ignoble preference, and lamentthe ascendant force of sordid and merely animalpropensities, over the principles of their betterand higher nature. But when that which individualsdo in slavish compliance with their indolenceand passions, the state is also found to doin the exercise of its deliberative wisdom, andon the maxims of a settled policy — when insteadof ordaining any new destination of wealth infavour of science, it would divorce and breakasunder the goodly alliance by a remorselessattack on the destinations of wiser and betterdays — such a gothic spoliation as this, not a deedof lawless cupidity but the mandate of a senate-house,were a still more direct and glaring contraventionto the wisdom of Nature, and to thelaws of that economy which Nature hath instituted.The adaptation of which we now speak,between the external system of the universe, andthe intellectual system of man, were grosslyviolated by such an outrage ; and it is a violencewhich Nature would resent by one of thosesignal chastisements, the examples of which areso frequent in history. The truth is that, viewedas a manifestation of the popular will, whichtumultuous against all that wont to commandthe respect and admiration of society, and isstrong enough to enforce its dictations — it mayCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 171well be regarded, as one of the deadliest symptomsof a nation ripening for anarchy, that dreadconsummation, by which however, the socialstate, relieved of its distempers, is at lengthrenovated like the atmosphere by a storm, afterthrowing off from it, the dregs and the degeneracyof an iron age.*17. (5.) We shall do little more than state twoother adaptations, although more might benoticed, and all do admit of a much fullerelucidation than we can bestow upon them.And first, there is a countless diversity ofsciences, and correspondent to this, a like diversityin the tastes and talents of men, presenting,therefore, a most beneficial adaptation, betweenthe objects of human knowledge and the powersof human knowledge. Even in one sciencethere are often many subdivisions, each requiringa separate mental fitness, on the part ofthose, who might select it as their own favouritewalk, which they most love, and in which theyare best qualified to excel. In most of thephysical sciences, how distinct the business ofthe observation is from that of the philosophy ;and how important to their progress, that, foreach appropriate work, there should be men ofappropriate faculties or habits, who in the exe-The same effect is still more likely to ensue from the spoliationand secularization of ecclesiastical property.17*2 THE INTELLECTUALcutioii of their respective tasks, do exceedinglymultiply and enlarge the products of the mind —even as the grosser products of human industryare multiplied by the subdivision of employment.*It is well, that, for that infinite varietyof intellectual pursuits, necessary to explore allthe recesses of a various and complicated externalnature, there should be a like variety ofintellectual predilections and powers scatteredover the species — a congruity between the worldof mind and the world of matter, of the utmostimportance, both to the perfecting of art, and tothe progress and perfecting of science. Yet it ismarvellous of these respective labourers, thoughin effect they work simultaneously and to eachother's hands, how little respect or sympathy, orsense of importance, they have for any departmentof the general field, for any section in thewide encyclopaedia of human learning, but thaton which their own faculties are concentratedand absorbed. We cannot imagine aught moredissimilar and uncongenial, than the intentnessof a mathematician on his demonstrations anddiagrams, and the equal intentness, nay delight,There is no accounting for the difference of minds or inclinations,which leads one man to observe with interest the developmentof phenomena, another to speculate on their causes ; butwere it not for this happy disagreement, it may be doubtedwhether the higher sciences could ever have attained even theirpi-sent degree of perfection." Sir John Herschelll's Discourses,p. 131.CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 17oof a collector or antiquarian on the faded manuscriptsand uncial characters of other days. Yetin the compound result of all these multiformlabours, there is a goodly and sustained harmony,between the practitioners and the theorists ofscience, between the pioneers and the monarchsof literature — even as in the various offices of awell-arranged household, although there shouldbe no mutual intelligence between the subordinateswho fill them, there is a supreme andconnecting wisdom, which presides over and animatesthe whole. The goodly system of philosophy,when viewed as the product of innumerablecontributions, by minds of all possiblevariety and men of all ages — bears like evidenceto the universe being a spacious household, underthe one and consistent direction of Him who isat once the Parent and the Master of a universalfamily.*18. And here it is not out of place to remark,that it is the very perfection of the DivineWorkmanship, which leads every enquirer toimagine a surpassing worth and grace anddignity in his own special department of it.The fact is altogether notorious, that in orderThe benefit of subdivision in science should lead to the multiplicationof professorships in our literary institutes, and at allevents should prevent the parsimonious suppression of them, orthe parsimonious amalgamation of the duties of two or more intoone.174 THE INTELLECTUALto attain a high sense of the importance ofany science, and of the worth and beauty ofthe objects which it embraces — nothing moreis necessary than the intent and perseveringstudy of them. Whatever the walk of philosophymay be on which man shall enter, that isthe walk which of all others he conceives tobe most enriched, by all that is fitted to entertainthe intellect, or arrest the admiration ofthe enamoured scholar. The astronomer whocan unravel the mechanism of the heavens,or the chemist who can trace the atomic processesof matter upon earth, or the metaphysicianwho can assign the laws of humanthought, or the grammarian who can discriminatethe niceties of language, or the naturalistwho can classify the flowers and the birds andthe shells and the minerals and the insectswhich so teem and multiply in this world ofwonders — each of these respective enquirersis apt to become the worshipper of his owntheme, and to look with a sort of indifference,bordering on contempt, towards what he imaginesthe far less interesting track of his fellow-labourers.Now each is right in the admirationhe renders to the grace and grandeur of thatfield which himself has explored; but all arewrong in the distaste they feel, or rather inthe disregard they cast on the other fieldswhich they have never entered. We shouldCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 175take the testimony of each to the worth ofthat which he does know, and reject thetestimony of each to the comparative worthlessnessof that which he does not know ; andthen the unavoidable inference is that thatmust be indeed a replete and a gorgeousuniverse in which we dwell — and still moreglorious the Eternal Mind, from whose conceptionit arose, and whose prolific fiat gavebirth to it, in all its vastness and variety. Andinstead of the temple of science having beenreared, it were more proper to say, that thetemple of nature had been evolved. The archetypeof science is the universe ; and it is in thedisclosure of its successive parts, that scienceadvances from step to step — not properly raisingany new architecture of its own, but ratherunveiling by degrees an architecture that isold as the creation. The labourers in philosophycreate nothing ; but only bring out into exhibitionthat which m as before created. And thereis a resulting harmony in their labours, howeverwidely apart from each other they may havebeen prosecuted— not because they have adjustedone part to another, but because theadjustment has been already made to theirhands. There comes forth, it is true, of theirlabours, a most magnificent harmony, yetnot a harmony which they have made, but apre-existent harmony which they have only176 THE INTELLECTUALmade visible — so that when tempted to idolizephilosophy, let us transfer the homage to Himwho both formed the philosopher's mind, andfurnished his philosophy with all its materials.19. (6.) The last adaptation that we shallinstance is rather one of mind to mind, anddepends on a previous adaptation in each mindof the mental faculties to one another. For theright working of the mind, it is not enough thateach of its separate powers shall be providedwith adequate strength — they must be mixedin a certain proportion — for the greatest inconveniencemight be felt, not in the defect merely,but in the excess of some of them. We haveheard of too great a sensibility in the organof hearing, giving rise to an excess in the faculty,which amounted to disease, by exposingthe patient to the pain and disturbance of toomany sounds, even of those so faint and low, asto be inaudible to the generality of men. Inlike manner we can imagine the excess of aproperty purely mental, of memory for example,amounting to a malady of the intellect, by exposingthe victim of it to the presence andthe perplexity of too many ideas, even of thosewhich are so insignificant, that it would lightenand relieve the mind, if they had no place thereatall.* Certain it is that the more full andIt has been said of Sir James Macintosh, that the excess ofhis memory was felt by him as an incumbrance in the writing ofCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 177circumstantial is the memory, the more is givenfor the judgment to do — its proper work ofselecting and comparing becoming the moreoppressive, with the number and distractionof irrelevant materials. It would have beenbetter that these had found no original admittancewithin the chamber of recollection ; orthat only things of real and sufficient importancehad left an enduring impression upon its tablet.In other words, it would have been better,that the memory had been less susceptible orless retentive than it is ; and this may enableus to perceive the exquisite balancing thatmust have been requisite, in the constructionof the mind — when the very defect of onefaculty is thus made to aid and to anticipatethe operations of another. He who aloneknoweth the secrets of the spirits, formed themwith a wisdom to us unsearchable.20. Certain it is however that variety in theproportion of their faculties, is one chief causeof the difference between the minds of men.And whatever the one faculty may be, in anyindividual, which predominates greatly beyondthe average of the rest — that faculty is selectedhistory — adding as it did to the difficulty of selection. It is onthe same principle that the very multitude of one's ideas andwords may form an obstacle to extemporaneous speaking, as hasbeen illustrated by Dean Swift under the comparison of a thinchurch emptying faster than a crowded one.178 THE INTELLECTUALas the characteristic by which to distinguishhim ; and thus he may be designed as a manof judgment, or information, or fancy, or wit,or oratory. It is this variety in their respectivegifts, which originates so beautiful a dependenceand reciprocity of mutual services amongmen ; and, more especially, when any unitedmovement or united counsel is requisite, thatcalls forth the co-operation of numbers. Noman combines all the ingredients of mentalpower; and no man is wanting in all of themso that, while none is wholly independentof others, each possesses some share of importancein the commonwealth. The defects,even of the highest minds, may thus need tobe supplemented, by the counterpart excellenciesof minds greatly inferior to their ownand, in this way, the pride of exclusivesuperiority is mitigated ; and the respect whichis due to our common humanity is more largelydiffused throughout society, and shared moreequally among all the members of it. Nature hathso distributed her gifts among her children,as to promote a mutual helpfulness, and, whatperhaps is still more precious, a mutual humilityamong men.21 . In almost all the instances of mental superiority,it will be found, that it is a superiorityabove the average level of the species, in but onething — or that arises from the predominance ofCONSTITUTION OF MAN. 179one faculty above all the rest. So much is thisthe case, that when the example does occur, ofan individual, so richly gifted as to excel in twoof the general or leading powers of the mind, hisreputation for the one will impede the establishmentof his reputation for the other. Thereoccurs to us one very remarkable case of theinjustice, done by the men who have but onefaculty, to the men who are under the misfortuneof having two. In the writings of EdmundBurke, there has at length been discovered, arich mine of profound and strikingly just reflection,on the philosophy of public affairs. But hefelt as well as thought, and saw the greatnessand beauty of things, as well as their relations ;and so, he could at once penetrate the depths,and irradiate the surface of any object that hecontemplated. The light which he flung fromhim, entered the very innermost shrines andrecesses of his subject; but then it was lighttinged with the hues of his own brilliant imagination,and many gazing at the splendour, recognizednot the weight and the wisdom underneath.They thought him superficial, but just becausethemselves arrested at the surface ; and eitherbecause With the capacity of emotion but withoutthat of judgment, or because with the capacityof judgment but without that of emotion —they, from the very meagreness and mutilation oftheir own faculties, were incapable of that com-180 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEplea homage, due to a complex object which hadboth beauty and truth for its ingredients. Thusit was that the very exuberance of his genius,injured the man, in the estimation of the pygmiesaround him ; and the splendour of his imaginationdetracted from the credit of his wisdom.Fox had the sagacity to see this ; and posteritynow see it. Now that, instead of a passingmeteor, he is fixed by authorship in the literaryhemisphere, men can make a study of him ; andbe at once regaled by the poetry, and instructedby the profoundness of his wondrous lucubrations.Chapter II .On the Connection hetiveen the Intellect and theEmotions1. The intellectual states of the mind, and itsstates of emotion, belong to distinct provinces ofthe mental constitution — the former to the percipient,and the latter to what Sir James Macintoshwould term the emotive or pathetic partof our nature. Bentham applies the term pathologyto the mind in somewhat the same sense —not expressive, as in medical science, of states ofINTELLECT AND THE Emotions. 181disease, under which the body suffers ; but expressive,in mental science, of states of susceptibility,under which the mind is in any wayaffected, whether painfully or pleasurably. Hadit not been for the previous usurpation or engagementof this term by medical writers, whorestrict the application of it to the distempers ofour corporeal frame, it might have been convenientlyextended to all the susceptibilities of themental constitution — even when that constitutionis in its healthful and natural state. Accordingto the medical use of it, the Greek waayjio fromwhich it is derived, is understood in the sense ofthe Latin translation, pathos, to suffer. Accordingto the sense which we now propose for it, intreatingof mental phenomena, the Greek Traay^o)would be understood in the sense of the Latintranslation, officier, to be affected. When treatingof the mental pathology, we treat, not ofmental sufferings, but, more general, of mentalsusceptibilities. The iraayu) of the Greek, whencethe term comes, is equivalent, either to the*' pathos" or the " officier" of Latin, — the formersignifying " to suffer," and the latter simply " tobe affected," — the former sense being the onethat is retained in medical, and the latter inmental pathology. The two differ as much theone from the other as passion does from affection,or the violence of a distempered does fromthe due and pacific effect of a natural influence.C. II. o182 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEEven the Latin pathos might be translated, notmerely into " suffer" but into " the being actedupon" or into " the being passive." Medicalpathology is the study of those diseases underwhich the body suffers. Mental pathology is thestudy of all those phenomena that arise from influencesacting upon the mind viewed as passive,or as not putting forth any choice or activity atthe time. Now, when thus defined, it will embraceall that we understand by sensations, andaffections, and passions. It is not of my willthat certain colours impress their appropriatesensations upon my eye, or that certain soundsimpress their sensations upon my ear. It is notof my will, but of an organization which I oftencannot help, that I am so nervously irritable,under certain disagreeable sights and disagreeablenoises. It is not of my will, but of anaggressive influence which I cannot withstand,that, when placed on an airy summit, I forthwithswim in giddiness, and am seized with theimagination, that if I turn not my feet and myeyes from the frightful precipice's margin, Ishall topple to its base. Neither is it of my willthat I am visited with such ineffable disgust atthe sight of some loathsome animal. But theseare strong instances, and perhaps evince a statebordering upon disease. Yet we may gatherfrom them some general conception of whatis meant by mental pathology, whose design itis to set forth all those states of feeling, intoINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 183which the mind is thrown, by the influence ofthose various objects that are fitted to excite,either the emotions or the sensitive affections ofour nature. And, to keep the subject of mentalpathology pure, we shall suppose these states offeeling to be altogether modified by the will,and to be the very states which result from thelaw of the external senses, or the laws of emotion,operating upon us at the time, when the mind iseither wholly powerless or wholly inactive. Tobe furnished with one comprehensive term, bywhich to impress a mark on so large an order ofphenomena, must be found very commodious ;and though we have adverted to the etymologyof the term, yet, in truth, it is of no consequencewhether the process of derivation be accurate ornot — seeing that the most arbitrary definition, ifit only be precise in its objects, and have a preciselyexpressed sense affixed to it, can serve allthe purposes for which a definition is desirable.2. The emotions enter largely into the pathologicaldepartment of our nature. They aredistinguishable both from the appetites andthe external affections, in that they are mentaland not bodily — though, in common withthese, they are characterized by a peculiarvividness of feeling, which distinguishes themfrom the intellectual states of the mind. Itmay not be easy to express the difference inlanguage ; but we never confound them in specificinstances— being at no loss to which of184 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEthe two classes we should refer the acts ofmemory and judgment ; and to which we shouldrefer the sentiments of fear, or gratitude, orshame, or any of the numerous affections anddesires of which the mind is susceptible.3. The first belonging to this class that weshall notice is the desire of knowledge, or theprinciple of curiosity — having all the appearanceand character of a distinct and original tendencyin the mind, implanted there for the purpose towhich it is so obviously subservient. This principleevinces its reality and strength in veryearly childhood, even anterior to the faculty ofspeech — as might be observed in the busy manipulationsand exploring looks of the little infant,on any new article that is placed within itsreach ; and afterwards, by its importunate andnever-ending questions. It is this avidity ofknowledge which forms the great impellent tothe acquisition of it — being in fact the hungerof the mind, and strikingly analogous to thecorresponding bodily appetite, in those respects,by which each is manifested, to be the productof a higher wisdom than ours, the effect of amore providential care than man would havetaken of himself. The corporeal appetencyseeks for food as its terminating object, withoutregard to its ulterior effect in the sustainingof life. The mental appetency seeks for knowledge,the food of the mind, as its terminatingINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 185object, without regard to its ulterior benefits,both in the guidance of life, and the endlessmultiplication of its enjoyments. The prospectivewisdom of man could be trusted with neitherof these great interests ; and so the urgent appetiteof hunger had to be provided for the one,and the like urgent principle of curiosity had tobe provided for the other. Each of them bearsthe same evidence of a special contrivance for aspecial object — and that by one who took amore comprehensive view of our welfare, thanwe are capable of taking for ourselves ; andmade his own additions to the mechanism, forthe express purpose of supplementing the deficiencyof human foresight. The resemblancebetween the two cases goes strikingly to demonstrate,how a mental constitution might as effectuallybespeak the hand of an intelligentMaker, as does a physical or material constitution.It is true, that, with the great majority ofmen, the intellectual is not so urgent or imperious,as is the animal craving. But even forthis difference, we can perceive a reason, whichwould not have been found, under a randomeconomy of things. Each man's hunger wouldneed to be alike strong, or at least strong enoughto ensure the taking of food for himself — forto this effect, he will receive no benefit fromanother man's hunger. But there is not thesame reason why each mans curiosity should be186 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEalike strong — for the curiosity of one man mightsubserve the supply of information and intellectualfood to the rest of the species. Toenlarge the knowledge of the world, it is notneeded, that all men should be endowed withsuch a strength of desire for it, as to bear themonward through the toils of original investigation.The dominant, the aspiring curiosity,which impels the adventurous traveller to untroddenregions, will earn discoveries, notfor himself alone, but for all men — if theircuriosity be but strong enough for the perusal ofhis agreeable record, under the shelter, andamid the comforts of their own home. And it isso in all the sciences. The unquenchable thirstof a few, is ever drawing supplies of new truth,which are shared in by thousands. There is anobvious meaning in this variety, between thestronger curiosity of the few who discover truth,and the Weaker curiosity of the many whoacquire it. The food which hunger impels manto take, is for his own aliment alone. The fruitof that study to which the strength of his owncuriosity impels him, may become the propertyof all men.4. But, apart from this singularity, we beholdin curiosity, viewed as a general attribute, a manifestadaptation to the circumstances in whichman is placed. If, on the one hand, we lookto the rich and exhaustless variety of truth, inINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 187a universe fraught with the materials of a moststupendous and ever-growing philosophy, andeach department of which is fitted to stimulateand regale the curiosity of the human mind —we should say of such an external nature asthis, that, presenting a most appropriate fieldto the inquisitive spirit of our race, it was signallyadapted to the intellectual constitutionof man. Or if, on the other hand, besideslooking to the world as a theatre for the delightfulentertainment of our powers, we behold it,in the intricacy of its phenomena and laws,in its recondite mysteries, in its deep anddifficult recesses yet conquerable to an indefiniteextent by the perseverance of man, andtherefore as a befitting theatre for the busyand most laborious exercise of his powers — weshould say of such an intellectual constitutionas ours, that it was signally adapted to thesystem of external nature. It would requirea curiosity as strong and steadfast as Naturehath given us, to urge us onward, through theappalling difficulties of a search so laborious.Hunger is the great impellent to corporeal labour,and the gratification of this appetite isits reward. Curiosity is a great impellent tomental labour, and, whether we look to thedelights or the difficulties of knowledge, wecannot fail to perceive, that this mental appetencyin man, and its counterpart objects in188 Connection BETWEEN THENature, are suited with marvellous exactnessto each other.5. But the analogy between the mental andthe corporeal affections does not stop here.The appetite of hunger would, of itself, impelto the use of food — although no additional pleasurehad been annexed to the use of it, in thegratifications of the palate. The sense of taste,with its various pleasurable sensations, has everbeen regarded, as a distinct proof of the benevolenceand care of God. And the same istrue of the delights which are felt by the mind,in the acquisition of knowledge — as when truthdiscloses her high and hidden beauties to theeye of the enraptured student ; and he breathesan ethereal satisfaction, having in it the verysubstance of enjoyment, though the world atlarge cannot sympathize with it. The pleasuresof the intellect, though calm, are intense ; insomuch,that a life of deep philosophy were alife of deep emotion, when the understandingreceives of its own proper aliment — havingfound its way to those harmonies of principle,those goodly classifications of phenomena, whichthe disciples of science love to gaze upon. Andthe whole charm does not lie in the ultimatediscovery. There is a felt triumph in the marchandalong the footsteps of the demonstrationwhich leads to it ; in the successive evolutionsof the reasoning,, as well as its successful con-intellectAND THE EMOTIONS. 189elusion. Like every other enterprize of man,there is a happiness in the current and continuouspursuit, as well as in the final attainment— as every student in geometry can tell,who will remember, not only the delight hefelt on his arrival at the landing place, but thedelight he felt when guided onward by thetraces and concatenations of the pathway. Evenin the remotest abstractions of contemplativetruth, there is a glory and a transcendentalpleasure, which the world knoweth not ; butwhich becomes more intelligible, because moreembodied, when the attention of the enquireris directed to the realities of substantive nature.And though there be few who comprehend orfollow Newton in his gigantic walk, yet allmay participate in his triumphant feeling, whenhe reached that lofty summit, where the wholemystery and magnificence of Nature stood submittedto his gaze — an eminence won by himthrough the power and the patience of intellectalone ; but from which he descried a scene moreglorious far than imagination could have formed,or than ever had been pictured and set forth,in the sublimest visions of poetry.6. It is thus that while the love of beauty,operating upon the susceptible imagination ofthe theorist, is one of those seducing influences,which lead men astray from the pursuit of experimentaltruth — he, in fact, who at the outset190 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEresists her fascinations, because of his supremerespect for the lessons of observation, is atlength repaid by the discoveries and sights ofa surpassing loveliness. The inductive philosophybegan its career, by a renunciation, painfulwe have no doubt at first to many of its disciples,of all the systems and harmonies of theschoolmen. But in the assiduous prosecution ofits labours it worked its way to a far noblerand more magnificent harmony at the last — tothe real system of the universe, more excellentthan all the schemes of human conception — notin the solidity of its evidence alone, but as anobject of tasteful contemplation. The self-denialwhich is laid upon us by Bacon's philosophy,like all other self-denial whether in the causeof truth or virtue, hath its reward. In givingourselves up to its guidance, Ave have often toquit the fascinations of beautiful theory ; butinexchange for these, are at length regaled bythe higher and substantial beauties of actualnature. There is a stubbornness in facts beforewhich the specious ingenuity is compelled togive way ; and perhaps the mind never suffersmore painful laceration, than when, after havingvainly attempted to force nature into a compliancewith her own splendid generalizations,she, on the appearance of some rebellious andimpracticable phenomenon, has to practise aforce upon herself, when she thus finds theINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 191goodly speculation superseded by the homelyand unwelcome experience. It seemed at theoutset a cruel sacrifice, when the world of speculation,with all its manageable and engagingsimplicities had to be abandoned ; and, on becomingthe pupils of observation, we, amid thevarieties of the actual world around us, felt as ifbewildered, if not lost, among the perplexitiesof a chaos. This was the period of greatest sufferance,but it has had a glorious termination.In return for the assiduity wherewith the studyof nature hath been prosecuted, she hath madea more abundant revelation of her charms.Order hath arisen out of confusion ; and, in theascertained structure of the universe, there arenow found to be a state and a sublimity, beyondall that was ever pictured by the mind, inthe days of her adventurous and unfetteredimagination. Even viewed in the light of anoble and engaging spectacle for the fancy todwell upon, who would ever think of comparingwith the system of Newton, either that celestialmachinery of Des Cartes which was impelledby whirlpools of ether, or that still more cumbrousmachinery of cycles and epicycles whichwas the progeny of a remoter age ! It is thusthat at the commencement of this observationalprocess, there is an abjuration of beauty.But it soon reappears in another form, andbrightens as we advance ; and there at length192 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEarises, on solid foundation, a fairer and goodliersystem, than ever floated in airy romance beforethe eye of genius.* Nor is it difficult to perceivethe reason of this. What we discover byobservation, is the product of the divine imagination— bodied forth by creative power, into astable and enduring universe. What we deviseby our own ingenuity is but the product ofhuman imagination. The one is the solid archetypeof those conceptions which are in the mindof God. The other is the shadowy representationof those conceptions which are in the mindof man. It is even as with the labourer, who, byexcavating the rubbish which hides and besetssome noble architecture, does more for the gratificationof our taste, than if, with his unpractisedhand, he should attempt to regale us by plansand sketches of his own. And so the drudgeryof experimental science, in exchange for thatIn the " Essays of John Sheppard," — a work very recentlypublished, and alike characterised by the depth of its christian intelligenceand feeling, and the beauty of its thoughts — there occursthe following passage, founded on the Manuscript Notes taken bythe author, of Mayfair's Lectures. ' It was impressively statedin a preliminary lecture by a late eminent Scottish Professor ofNatural Philosophy, that the actual physical wonders of creationfar transcend the boldest and most hyperbolical imaginings ofpoetic minds ;" " that the reason of Newton and Galileo took asublimer flight than the fancy of Milton and Ariosto." That thisis quite true I need only refer you to a few astronomical factsglanced at in subsequent pages of this volume in order to evince.'Sheppard 's Essays, p. 69.INTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 193beauty, whose fascinations it resisted at theoutset of its career, has evolved a surpassingbeauty from among the realities of truth andnature. The pain of the initial sacrifice isnobly compensated at the last. The views contemplatedthrough the medium of observation,are found, not only to have a justness in them,but to have a grace and a grandeur in them, farabove all the visions which are contemplatedthrough the medium of fancy, or which everregaled the fondest enthusiast in the enrapturedwalks of speculation and poetry But the toilsof investigation must be endured first, that thegrace and the grandeur might be enjoyed afterwards.The same is true of science in all itsdepartments, not of simple and sublime astronomyalone, but throughout of terrestrial physics ; andmost of all in chemistry, where the internalprocesses of actual and ascertained Nature arefound to possess a beauty, Which far surpassesthe crude though specious possibilitiesof other days. We perceive in this too, a fineadaptation of the external world to the facultiesof man ; a happy ordination of Nature by whichthe labour of the spirit is made to precede theluxury of the spirit, or every disciple of sciencemust strenuously labour in the investigation ofits truths, ere he can luxuriate in the contemplationof its beauties. It is by the patient seekingof truth first, that the pleasures of taste and194 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEimagination are superadded to him. For, inthese days of stern and philosophic hardihood,nothing but evidence, strict and scrutinized andthoroughly sifted evidence, will secure acceptancefor any opinion. Whatever its authority,whatever its engaging likelihood may be, it mustfirst be made to undergo the freest treatmentfrom human eyes and human hands. It is atonetime stretched on the rack of an experiment.At another it has to pass through fiery trial inthe bottom of a crucible. At another, it has toundergo a long questionary process, among thefumes, and the filtration, and the intense heat ofa laboratory; and, not till it has been subjectedto all this inquisitorial torture and survived it, isit preferred to a place in the temple of truth, oradmitted among the laws and the lessons of asound philosophy.7. But, beside those rewards and excitementsto science which lie in science itself, as thecuriosity which impels to the prosecution of it,and the delights of prosperous study, and thepleasures that immediately spring from the contemplationof its objects— besides these, there isa remoter but not less powerful influence, andto which indeed we owe greatly more than halfthe philosophy of our world. We mean therespect in which high intellectual endowmentsare held by general society. We are not surebut that the love of fame has been of moreINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 195powerful operation, in speeding onward themarch of discovery, than the love of philosophyfor the sake of its own inherent charms ; andthere are thousands of our most distinguishedintellectual labourers, who, but for an expectedharvest of renown, would never have enteredon the secret and solitary prosecution of theirarduous walk. We are abundantly sensible,that this appetency for fame may have helpedto vulgarize both the literature and scienceof the country ; that men, capable of themost attic refinement in the one, may, for thesake of a wider popularity, have descendedto verbiage and the false splendour of a meretriciouseloquence ; and that men, capable ofthe deepest research and purest demonstrationin the other, may, by the same unworthy compliancewith the flippancy of the public taste,have exchanged the profound argument forthe showy and superficial illustration — preferringto the homage of the exalted few,the attendance and plaudits of the multitude.It is thus, that, when access to the easier andlighter parts of knowledge has been suddenlyenlarged, the heights of philosophy may beabandoned for a season — the men who wont tooccupy there, being tempted to come down fromtheir elevation, and hold converse with thatincreasing host, who have entered within theprecincts, and now throng the outer courts of196 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEthe temple. It is thus, that at certain transitionperiods, in the intellectual history of the species,philosophy may sustain a temporary depressionfrom which when she recovers, we shall combine,with the inestimable benefit of a moreenlightened commonalty, both the glory and thesubstantial benefit of as cultured a literature andas lofty and elaborate a philosophy as before.And we greatly mistake, if we think, that inthose minds of nobler and purer ambition, thelove of fame is extinguished, because they arewilling to forego the bustling attendance andthe clamorous applause of a crowd. They tooare intensely set on praise, but it must be suchpraise as that of Attics, ' the incense of which,though not copious, is exquisite — that preciousaroma, which fills not the general atmosphere,but by which the few and the finer spirits of ourrace are satisfied. Theirs is not the broad daylightof popularity. It is a fame of a higherorder, upheld by the testimony of the amateursor the elite in science, and grounded on thoserare achievements which the public at largecan neither comprehend nor sympathize with.They sit on a hill apart," and there breathe ofan ethereal element, in the calm brightness ofan upper region, rather than in that glare andgorgeousness by which the eye of the multitudeis dazzled. It is not the eclat of a bonfire forthe regaling of a mob, but the enduring thoughINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 197quiet lustre of a star. The place which theyoccupy is aloft in the galaxy of a nation's literature,where the eyes of the more finely intellectualgaze upon them with delight, and thehearts only of such are lighted up in reverenceand con more towards them. Theirs is a highthough hidden praise, flowing in secret coursethrough the swans of a community, and felt byevery true academic to be his most appropriatereward'*8. The emotions of which we have yet spokenstand connected, either in the way of cause orof consequence, with the higher efforts of theintellect — as the curiosity which prompts tothese efforts, and the delights attendant on theinvestigation and discovery of truths whichreward them ; beside the grateful incense ofthose praises, whether general or select, thatare awarded to mental superiority, and formperhaps the most powerful incitement to thearduous and sustained prosecution of mentallabour. But there is a connection of anothersort, between the emotions and the intellect, ofstill higher importance — because of the alliancewhich it establishes between the intellectual andthe moral departments of our nature. We oftenspeak of the pleasure that we receive from oneUse and Abuse of Literary and Ecclesiastical Endowments,p. 165—166.C. II. P198 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEclass of the emotions, as those of taste — of thedanger or disagreeableness of another, as angeror fear, or envy — of the obligation that lies uponus to cherish and retain certain other emotions,insomuch that the designation of virtuous isgenerally given to them, as gratitude, and compassion,and the special love of relatives orcountry, and in one word, all the benevolentaffections of our nature. Now, however obviouswhen stated, it is not sufficiently adverted to,even when studying the philosophy of the subject,and still less in the practical governmentand regulation of the heart — that, for the verybeing of each of these specific emotions in theheart, there must a certain appropriate andcounterpart object, whether through the channelof sense or of the memory, be present to thethoughts. We can only feel the emotion ofbeauty, in the act of beholding or conceiving abeautiful object ; an emotion of terror, in theview of some danger which menaces us ; anemotion of gratitude, in the recollection of a pastkindness, or of the benefactor who conferred it.Such then is the necessary dependence betweenperception and feeling, that, without the one,the other cannot possibly be awakened. Presentan object to the view of the mind, and theemotion suited to that object, whether it be loveor resentment, or terror, or disgust, must consequentlyarise ; and with as great sureness, as, onINTELLECT AND THE Emotions Representingvisible things of different colour tothe eye, the green and red and yellow and blueimpress their different and peculiar sensationson the retina. It is very obvious, that the sensationsowe their being to the external objects,without the presence and the perception ofwhich they could not possibly have arisen. Andit should be alike obvious, that the emotions owetheir being to a mental perception, whether bysense or by memory, of the objects which arefitted to awaken them. Let an object be introducedto the notice of the mind, and its correlativeemotion instantly arises in the heart ; letthe object be forgotten or disappear from themental view, and the emotion disappears alongwith it.9. We deem it no exception to the invariablenessof that relation, which subsists between anobject and its counterpart emotion, that, in manyinstances, a certain given object may be presentand in full view of the observer, without awakeningthat sensibility which is proper to it. Aspectacle of pain does generally, but not always,awaken compassion. It would always, we think,if a creature in agony were the single object ofthe mind's contemplation. But the person, nowin suffering, may be undergoing the chastisementof some grievous provocation ; and theemotion is different, because the object is reallydifferent — an offender who has excited the anger200 ' CONNECTION BETWEEN THEof our bosom, and, in the view of whose inflictedsufferings, this indignant feeling receivesits gratification. Or the pain may be inflictedby our own hand on an unoffending animal inthe prosecution of some cruel experiment. Ifcompassion be wholly unfelt, it is not becausein this instance the law has been repealed whichconnects this emotion with the view of pain ; butit is because the attention of the mind to thisobject is displaced by another object; even thediscovery of truth ^ — and so what but for thismight have been an intense compassion, is overborneby an intense curiosity. And so with allthe other emotions. Were danger singly theobject of the mind's contemplation, fear, wethink, would be the universal feeling ; but it maybedanger connected with the sight or themenaces of an insulting enemy who awakensburning resentment in the heart, and whenanger rises fear is gone ; or it may be dangershared with fellow-combatants, whose presenceand observation kindle in the bosom the love ofglory and impel to deeds of heroism — not becauseany law which connects, and connects invariably,certain emotions with certain objects, is in anyinstance reversed or suspended ; but because, inthis conflict and composition of moral forces, oneemotion displaced another from the feelings, only,however, because one object displaced anotherfrom the thoughts. Still, in every instance, theINTELLECT AND THE Emotions. 201object is the stepping-stone to the emotion — insomuch,that if we want to recal a certain emotion,we must recal to the mind that certain objectwhich awakens it ; if we want to cease from theemotion, we must cease from thinking of itsobject, we must transfer the mind to otherobjects, or occupy it with other thoughts.10. This connection between the percipientfaculties of the mind and its feelings, reveals tousa connection between the intellectual and themoral departments of our nature. How the oneis brought instrumentally to bear upon the other,will be afterwards explained. But meanwhile itis abundantly obvious, that the presence or theabsence of certain feelings stands connected withthe presence or the absence of certain thoughts.We can no more break up the connection betweenthe thought of any object that is viewedmentally, and the feeling which it impresses onthe heart, than we can break up the connectionbetween the sight of any object that is viewedmaterially, and the sensation which it impressesupon the retina . If we look singly and steadfastlyto an object of a particular colour, as red, thereis an organic necessity for the peculiar sensationof redness, from which we cannot escape, butby shutting our eyes, or turning them away toobjects that are differently coloured. If wethink singly and steadfastly on an object ofa particular character, as an injury, there seems202 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEan organic necessity also for the peculiar emotionof resentment, from which there appears tobe no other way of escaping, than by stifling thethought, or turning the mind away to otherobjects of contemplation. Now we hear both ofvirtuous emotions and of vicious emotions ; andit is of capital importance to know how to retainthe one and to exclude the other — which is bydwelling in thought on the objects that awakenthe former, and discharging from thought theobjects that awaken the latter. And so it is bythinking in a certain way that wrong sensibilitiesare avoided, and right sensibilities are up-holden.It is by keeping up a remembrance ofthe kindness, that we keep up the emotion ofgratitude. It is by forgetting the provocation,that we cease from the emotion of anger. It isby reflecting on the misery of a fellow creaturein its vivid and affecting details, that pity iscalled forth. It is by meditating on the perfectionsof the Godhead, that we cherish and keepalive our reverence for the highest virtue andour love for the highest goodness. In one word,thought is at once the harbinger and the sustainerof feeling : and this, of itself, forms an importantlink of communication between the intellectualand the moral departments of our nature.11. We shall not be able to complete ourviews, either on the moral character of the emotions,or their dependence on the percipient facul-INTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 203ties of the mind, until we have established acertain ulterior principle which comes after artsinto notice. Neither do we now expatiate ontheir uses, of which we have already given sufficientspecimens, in our treatment of the specialaffections. We would only remark at present,on their vast importance to human happiness —seeing that a state of mental happiness cannoteven be so much as imagined without a state ofemotion. They are the emotions, in fact, andthe external affections together, which sharebetween them the whole interest, whether pleasurableor painful, of human existence. Andwhat a vivid and varied interest that is, may berendered evident, by a mere repetition of thosewords which compose the nomenclature of ourfeelings — as hope, and fear, and grief, and joy,and love diversified into so many separate affectionstowards wealth, fame, power, knowledge,and all the other objects of human desire, besidesthe tasteful and benevolent emotions — which altogetherkeep their unremitting play in the heart,and sustain or fill up the continuity of oursensible being. It says enough for the adaptationof external nature to a mental constitutionso complexly and variously endowed, that numerousas these susceptibilities are, the world iscrowded with objects, that keep them in full andbusy occupation. The details of this contemplationare inexhaustible ; and we are not sure204 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEbut that the general lesson of the Divine careor Divine benevolence, which may be foundedupon these, could be more effectually learnedby a close attention of the mind upon onespecific instance, than by a complete enumerationof all the instances, with at the sametime only a briefer and slighter notice of each ofthem.12. And it would make the lesson all themore impressive, if, instead of selecting as ourexample, an emotion of very exalted character,and of which the influence on human enjoymentstood forth in bright daylight to the observationof all, such as the sensibility of a heart thatwas feelingly alive to the calls of benevolence,or feelingly alive to the beauties of nature — weshould take for our case some other kind ofemotion, so common perhaps as to be ignoblyfamiliar, and on which one would scarcely thinkof constructing aught so dignified or so seriousas a theological argument. Yet we cannot helpthinking, that it most emphatically tells us of theteeming, the profuse benevolence of the Deity —when we reflect on those homelier and thoseevery-day sources, out of which, the whole ofhuman life, through the successive hours of it,is seasoned with enjoyment ; and a most agreeablezest is imparted from them, to the ordinaryoccasions of converse and companionship amongmen. When the love of novelty finds in theINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 205walks of science the gratification that is suitedto it, we can reason gravely on the final causeof the emotion, and speak of the purpose ofNature, or rather of the Author of Nature, inhaving instituted such a reward for intellectuallabour. But Me lose sight of all the wisdom andall the goodness that are connected with thismental ordination — when the very same principle,which, in the lofty and liberal savant,we call the love of novelty, becomes, in theplain and ordinary citizen, the love of news.Yet in this humbler and commonplace form,it is needless to say, how prolific it is of enjoyment— giving an edge as it were to the wholeof one's conscious existence, and its principalcharm to the innocent and enlivening gossipof every social party. Perhaps a still moreeffective exemplification may be had in anotheremotion of this class, that which arises from oursense of the ludicrous — which so often ministersto the gaiety of man's heart, even when alone ;and which, when he congregates with his fellows,is ever and anon breaking forth into some humorousconception, that infects alike the fanciesof all, and finds vent in one common shout ofec Stacy. Like every other emotion, it standsallied with a perception as its antecedent, theobject of the perception in this instance beingthe conjunction of things that are incongruouswith each other-on the first discovery or CONNECTION BETWEEN THEcaption of which, the mirth begins to tumultuaryin the heart of some one ; and on the firstutterance of which, it passes with irrepressiblesympathy into the hearts of all who are aroundhim — whence it obtains the same ready dischargeas before, in a loud and general effervescence.To perceive how inexhaustible thesource of this enjoyment is, we have only tothink of it in connection with its cause ; andthen try to compute, if we can, all the possibilitiesof wayward deviation, from the soberliberalities of truth and nature, whether in theshape of new imaginations by the mind of manorof new combinations and events in actualhistory. It is thus that the pleasure connectedwith our sense of the ludicrous, forms one ofthe most current gratifications of human life ;nor is it essential that there should be any rarepeculiarity of mental conformation, in orderto realize it. We find it the perennial sourceof a sort of gentle and quiet delectation, evento men of the most sober temperament, andwhose habit is as remote as possible from thatof fantastic levity, or wild and airy extravagance.When acquaintances meet together inthe street, and hold colloquy for a few minutes,they may look grave enough, if business orpolitics or some matter of serious intelligencebe the theme — yet how seldom do they partbefore some coruscation of playfulness has beenINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 207Struck out between them ; and the interview,though begun perhaps in sober earnest, butseldom passes off, without some pleasantry orother to enliven it. We should not dwell so londonthis part of the human constitution, were therenot so much of happiness and so much of benevolenceallied with it — as is obvious indeed fromthe very synonymes, to which the languageemployed for the expression of its various phenomenaand feeling has given rise. To whatelse but to the pleasure we have in the ludicrousis it owing, that a ludicrous observation has beentermed a pleasantry ; or how but to the affinitybetween happiness and mirth can weascribe it, that the two terms are often employedas equivalent to each other ; and whence butfrom the strong connection which subsists betweenbenevolence and humour can it be explained,that a man is said to be in good humour,when in a state of placidness and cordialitywith all who are around him? We are awarethat there is not a single disposition where withNature hath endowed us which may not beperverted to evil ; but when we see so muchboth of human kindness and of human enjoymentassociated with that exhilaration of heartto which this emotion is so constantly givingrise — ministering with such copiousness, bothto the smiles of the domestic hearth, and thegaieties of festive companionship — we cannot208 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEbut regard it as the provision of an indulgentFather, who hath ordained it as a sweeteneror an emollient amid the annoyances and theills which flesh is heir to.13. It were difficult to compute the whole effectof this ingredient, in alleviating the vexationsof life ; but certain it is that the ludicrous isoften blended with the annoyances which befalus ; and that its operation, in lightening thepressure of what might have otherwise beenviewed as somewhat in the light of a calamity,is far from inconsiderable. This balancing ofopposite emotions, suggested by different partsof the same complex event or object, and theeffect of the one if a pleasant emotion, inassuaging the painfulness of the other, is notan uncommon phenomenon in the exhibitionsof human feeling. A very obvious specimenof this is afforded by an acquaintance in theact of falling. There is no doubt an incongruitybetween the moment of his walking uprightly,and with the full anticipation of getting forwardin that attitude to the object whither he is bending— and the next moment of his flounderingin the mud, and hastening with all his mightto gather himself up again. They who philosophizeupon the laws of succession in the eventsof Nature, have a great demand for such successionsas are immediate. They go busily in questof the contiguous links, and properly conceiveINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 209that if any one hidden step be yet interposed,between the two which they regularly observeto follow each other, they have not completedthe investigation, till that step also have beenascertained. It is therefore so far an advantagein regard to the above phenomenon, that theredoes not appear to be time even for the mostrapid and fugitive intervention — for only let itoccur in the presence of lookers on, and, withthe speed of lightning, will it be followed uj) bythe instant and obstreperous glee of a wholehost of dictatorship.14. But this very exhibition may give riseto a wholly different emotion. The provocativeto laughter lies in the awkwardness of the fall.Let the awkwardness be conceived to abide asit was, and this other ingredient to be added,the severity of the fall — that a limb is fractured,or that a swoon, a convulsion, or a stream ofblood is the immediate consequence. In proportionto the hurt that was sustained, wouldbe the sympathy of far the greater numberof the by-sanders ; and this might be soheightened by the palpable sufferings of himto whom the accident has befallen, that thesense of the ludicrous might be entirely overborne.15. The two provocative are the awkwardnessof the fall and its severity. The twoemotions are the mirth and the compassion. The210 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEone of these may so predominate over the otheras to leave the mind under its entire and singleascendency. A mathematician would requirethe point, at which, by a gradual increaseor diminution upon either of the two elements,they were mutually neutralized — or the transitionwas made from the one to the other ofthem. In this we may not be able to satisfyhim. But all may have been sensible of anoccasion, when the two were so delicately poised,that the mind positively vibrated — so as tomake a sort of tremulous and intermediate play,between these distinct and nearly oppositeemotions. This is one of those nicer exhibitionsof our nature that one feels an interest in remarking; and many perhaps may recollectthe instances, when even some valued friendhath smarted pretty seriously, under some oddor ludicrous mishap in which he hath beeninvolved, and when they have felt themselvesin a state of most curious ambiguity, betweenthe pity which they ought to feel, and the levitywhich they were not able to repress. The peculiaritiesof this midway condition are greatlyaggravated, if there be so many acquaintanceswho share it among them, and more especially,if they meet together and talk over the subjectof it — in which case, it will be no singulardisplay of our mysterious nature, although thevisitations of a common sympathy should befound to alternate with the high-sounding pealsIINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 2Uof a most rapturous and uncontrollable merriment.16. We cannot fail to perceive, in this instancetoo, how inseparable the alliance is between perceptionand feeling. According as the mindlooks, so is the heart affected. When we look tothe awkwardness of the mischance, whatever itmay be, we become gay. When we look to itsseverity, we become sad. It is instructive toobserve, with what fidelity the heart followsthe mind in this process, and how whichever theobject is that for the time is regarded by theone, it is sure to be responded to by an appropriateemotion from the other.17. We should not have ventured on these illustrations,but for the lesson which they serve toestablish. They prove the extent to which asense of the ludicrous might lighten and divertthe painfulness of those serious feelings to whichhumanity is exposed. It is true that much evilmay be done, when it puts to flight, as it oftendoes, seriousness of principle ; but, on the otherhand, there is unquestionable good done by it,when it puts to flight, either the seriousness ofresentment — or the seriousness of suffering. Andwhen we think of its frequent and powerful effect,both in softening the malignant asperities ofdebate, and in reconciling us to those misadventuresand pettier miseries of life, which, if notso alleviated, would keep us in a state of continualfestering — we cannot but regard even212 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEthis humbler part of the constitution of man, asapalpable testimony both to the wisdom andgoodness of Him who framed us.*18. Before quitting this department of the subject,we may advert, not to an individual peculiarity,but to the respective characters by whichtwo classes of intellect are distinguished, and tothe effect of their mutual action and reaction onthe progress of opinion in the world.19. The first of these intellectual tendenciesmay be seen in those who are distinguished bytheir fond and tenacious adherence to the existingphilosophy, and by their indisposition to anychanges of it. They feel it painful to relinquishtheir wonted and established habits of thought —as if the mind were to suffer violence, by havingto quit its ancient courses, and to unlearn the" The advantages which we derive from our susceptibility of thisspecies of emotion, are, in their immediate influence on the cheerfulness,and therefore on the general happiness of society, sufficientlyobvious. How many hours would pass wearily along, butfor those pleasantries of wit, or of easier and less pretending gaietywhich enliven what would have been dull, and throw many brightcolours on what would have been gloomy. We are not to estimatethese accessions of pleasure lightly, because they relate to objectsthat may seem trifling, when considered together with those moreserious concerns, by which our ambition is occupied, and in relationto which, in the success or failure of our various projects, welook back on the past months or years of our life as fortunate orunfortunate. If these serious concerns alone were to be regarded,we might often have been very fortunate and very unhappy, as inother circumstances we might often have had much happiness inINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 213opinions of other days. We have no doubt thatthe love of repose, the aversion to that mentallabour which is requisite even for the understandingof a new system, or at least for the full comprehensionand estimate of its proofs — enterslargely into this dislike for all novelties of speculation,into this determined preference for thedoctrines in which they have been educated —although the associations too of taste and reverenceshare largely in the result. It is thus thatthe old are more disinclined to changes ; and thereis a peculiar reason why schools and corporationsof learning should make the sturdiest resistanceto them. It is a formidable thing to make headagainst that majority within the walls of everyvenerable institute, which each new opinion hasto encounter at the outset ; and more especially,the hours and days of years, which terminated at last in the disappointmentof some favourite scheme. It is good to travel with pureand balmy airs and cheerful sunshine, though we should not find,at the end of our journey, the friend whom we wished to see; andthe gaieties of social converse, though they are not, in our journeyof life, what we travel to obtain, are during' the continuance of ourjourney at once a freshness which we breathe, and a light thatgives every object to sparkle to our eye with a radiance that is notits own." Brown's Lectures — Lecture 59. But this emotion isallied with benevolence as well as with enjoyment. There is perhapsnot a more welcome topic at the tables of the great, than thecharacteristic peculiarities or oddities of humble life — and we haveno doubt that along with the amusement which is felt in the cottageanecdotes of a domain, there is often awakened by them, a benevolentinterest in the well-being of the occupiers.C. II. Q214 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEif it tend to derange the methods of a university,or unsettle the long established practice of itsmasters. This will explain that inveteracy oflong possession, which, operating both in manyindividual minds and in the bosom of colleges,gives formation and strength to what may betermed the conservative party in science or inthe literary commonwealth — that party whichmaintains the largest and most resolute contestwith all new opinions, and will not give way, tilloverpowered by the weight of demonstration,and energy of the public voice in their favour.20. Opposed to this array of strength on theside of existing principles, we have the incessantoperations of w hat may be termed the movementparty in science or in the literary commonwealthsome of whom are urged onward by the merelove of novelty and change ; others by the loveof truth ; and very many by a sort of ardent andindefinite imagination of yet reached heightsin philosophy, and of the new triumphs whichawait the human mind in its interminable progressfrom one brilliant or commanding discoveryto another. We have often thought that a resultingoptimism is the actual effect of the playor collision that is constantly kept up betweenthese two rival parties in the world of letters.On the one hand it is well, that philosophyshould not be a fixture, but should at length giveway to the accumulating force of evidence. ButINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 215on the other hand it is well, that it should requirea certain, and that a very considerableforce of evidence, ere it shall quit its presentholds, or resign the position which it now occupies.We had rather that it looked with anair of forbidding authority on the mere likelihoodsof speculation than that, lightly set agog byevery specious plausibility, it should open itsschools to a restless and rapid succession of yetundigested theories. It is possible to hold outtoo obstinately and too long ; but yet it is well,that a certain balance should obtain betweenthe adhesive and the aggressive forces in the^^'orld of speculation ; and that the general mindof society should have at least enough of thesedative in its composition, to protect it fromaught like violent disturbance, or the incursionof any rash adventurer in the field of originality.And for this purpose it is well, that each novelty,kept at bay for a time, and made to undergoa sufficient probation, should be compelled,thoroughly to substantiate its claims — ere it beadmitted to take a place beside the philosophy,which is recognized by all the authorities, andreceived into all the institutes of the land.21. And they are the very same principles,which, when rightly blended, operate so beneficially,not in philosophy alone, but in politics.There is no spirit which requires more to bekept in check, than that of the mere wantonness216 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEof legislation ; and so far from being annoyedby that indisposition to change, which is ratherthe characteristic of all established authorities,we should regard it in the light of a wholesomecounteractive, by which to stay the excesses ofwild and wayward innovators. There is a greatpurpose served in society by that law of nature,in virtue of which it is that great bodies moveslowly. It would not answer, if a governmentwere to veer and to vacillate with every breathof speculation — if easily liable to be divertedfrom the steadfastness of their course, by everylure or by every likelihood which sanguine adventurersheld out to them. It is well, that inthe ruling corporation, there should be a certainstrength of resistance, against which all splendidimaginations and all unsound and hollow possibilities,might spend their force and be dissipated; and, so far from complaining of it asan impracticable engine which is so hard anddifficult of impulse, we should look upon its veryunwieldiness in the light of a safeguard, withoutwhich we should be driven to and fro by everywind of doctrine on a troubled sea that neverrests. On these accounts we feel inclined, that,in the vessel of the body politic, there should beapreponderance of ballast over sail ; and that itreally is so, we might put to the account of thatoptimism, which, with certain reservations, obtainsto a very great degree, in the frame-workINTELLECT AND THE EMOTIONS. 217and throughout the whole mechanism of humansociety.22. But this property in the machine of agovernment to which we now advert, does notpreclude that steady and sober-minded improvementwhich is all that is desirable. It onlyrestrains the advocates of improvement fromdriving too rapidly. It does not stop, it onlyretards their course, by a certain number of defeatsand disappointments, which, if their coursebe indeed a good one, are but the stepping-stonesto their ultimate triumph. Ere that the victoryis gotten, they must run the gauntlet of manyreverses and many mortifications ; and they arenot to expect by one, but by several and successiveblows of the catapulta, that inveterateabuses and long established practices can possiblybe overthrown. It is thus, in fact, thatevery weak cause is thrown back into the nonentitywhence it sprung, and that everj^ cause ofinherent goodness or worth is ultimately carriedrejected, like the former, at its first and earliestovertures ; but, unlike the former, comingback every time with a fresh weight of publicfeeling and public demonstration in its favour,till, like the abolition of the slave trade or thatof commercial restrictions, causes which had thearduous struggle of many long years to undergo,it at length obtains the conclusive seal upon it ofthe highest authority in the land, and a seal by218 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEwhich the merits of the cause are far betterauthenticated, than if the legislature were apt tofluctuate at the sound of every new and seemlyproposal. We have therefore no quarrel with acertain vis inertia in a legislature. Only let itnot be an absolute fixture ; and there is the hope,with perseverance, of all that is really importantor desirable in reformation. The sluggishnessthat has been ascribed to great corporations is,in the present instance, a good and desirableproperty — as being the means of separating thechaff" from the wheat of all those overtures,that pour in upon representatives from everyquarter of the land ; and, so far from any feelingof annoyance at the retardation to which thebest of them is subjected, it should be mostpatiently and cheerfully acquiesced in, as beingin fact the process, by which it brightens intoprosperity, and at length its worth and its excellenceare fully manifested.23. It is not the necessary effect of this peculiarmechanism, it is but the grievous perversion ofit, when the corrupt inveteracy has withstoodimprovement so long, that ere it could be carried,the assailing force had to gather into themomentum of an energy that might afterwardsprove mischievous, when the obstacle which provokedit into action had at length been clearedaway. It is then that the vessel of the statewhich might have been borne safely and pros-intellectAND THE EMOTIONS. 219seriously onward in the course of ages, by asteady breeze and with a sufficiency of ballast,as if slipped from her moorings is drifted uncontrollablyalong, and precipitated from change tochange with the violence of a hurricane.Chapter III.On the Connection between the Intellect andthe Will.1. There is distinction made between a mentalsusceptibility and a mental power. Shouldwe attempt to define it, we might say of thepower, that it implies a reference to somethingconsequent, and of the susceptibility that itimplies a reference to something antecedent. Itis thus that a volition is conceived to indicatethe former, and an emotion to indicate the latter.Anger would be spoken of rather as a susceptibilityof the mind than as a power; and willrather as a power than as a susceptibility. Weview anger in connection with the provocativewhich went before it ; and so regarding it as aneffect, we conceive of the mind in which thiseffect has been wrought, as being at the time inastate of subject passiveness. We view the willin connection with the deeds which follow on220 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEits determinations; and so regarding it as acause, we conceive of the mind when it wills asbeing in a state of active efficiency. And yeta determination of the will may be viewed notmerely as the prior term to the act which flowsfrom it, but also as the posterior term to the influencewhich gave it birth — or in other words,either as the foregoing of a power or as theresult of a susceptibility. It is thus that desire,which on looking backward to the cause from,whence it sprung, we should call a susceptibilityon looking forward to the effect which itprompts for the attainment of its object, weshould call an impellent ; and thus depth offeeling is identical, or at least, in immediatecontact with decision and intensity of purpose.2. But in our intent prosecution of this analysis,and use of those appropriate terms which areemployed for expressing the results of it, wehave often to desert the common language, andare apt to lose sight of certain great and palpabletruths, of which that language is the ordinaryvehicle. When tracing the intermediate steps,between the first exposure of the mind to aseducing influence, and the deed or perpetrationof enormity into which it is hurried, we areengaged in what may properly be termed aphysical enquiry — as much so as, when passingfrom cause to consequent, we are attending toany succession or train of phenomena in theINTELLECT AND THE WILL. 221material world. But it is when thus employedthat we are so apt to lose sight of the moralcharacter of that which we are contemplating ;and to forget w hen or at what point of the seriesit is that the designation w whether of virtuous orvicious, the charge whether of merit or demerit,comes to be applicable.* It is well that, amidall the difficulties attendant on the physiologicalinquiry, there should be such a degree of clearnessand uniformity in the moral judgments ofmen — insomuch that the peasant can, with a justand prompt discernment equal to that of thephilosopher, seize on the real moral characteristicsof any action submitted to his notice, andpronounce on the merit or demerit of him whohas performed it. It is in attending to theseDr. Brown has well distinguished between the two inquiriesin the following' sentences. " In one very important respect, however,the inquiries, relating to the physiology of mind, differ fromthose which relate to the physiology of our animal frame. If wecould render ourselves acquainted with the intimate structure ofour bodily organs, and all the changes which take place, in theexercise of their various functions, our labour, with respect tothem, might be said to terminate. But though our intellectualanalysis were perfect, so that we could distinguish, in our mostcomplex thought or emotion, its constituent elements, and tracewith exactness the series of simpler thoughts which have progressivelygiven rise to them, other inquiries, equally or still moreimportant, would remain. We do not know all which is to beknown of the mind when we know all its phenomena, as we knowall which can be known of matter, when we know the appearanceswhich it presents, in every situation in which it is possibleto place it, and the manner in which it then acts or is acted upon222 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEpopular or rather universal decisions, that welearn those phenomena which are of main importanceto our argument — now that, after havingbestowed a separate attention on the moral andintellectual constitutions of human nature, weareinvestigating the connection which is betweenthem.3. The first of those popular or rather universaldecisions, which we shall at present notice,is, that nothing is moral or immoral which is notvoluntary. A murderer may be conceived, insteadof striking with the dagger in his ownhand, to force it, by an act of refined cruelty,into the hand of him, who is the dearest relativeor friend of his devoted victim ; and, by hisby other bodies. When we know that man has certain affectionsand passions, there still remains the great inquiry, as to the proprietyor impropriety of these passions, and of the conduct towhich they lead. We have to consider, not only how he is capableof acting, but also, whether, acting in the manner supposed, hewould be fulfilling a duty or perpetrating a crime. Every enjoymentwhich man can confer on man, and every evil which he canreciprocally inflict or suffer, thus become objects of two sciences —first of that intellectual analysis which traces the happiness andmisery, in their various forms and sequences, as mere phenomenaor states of the substance mind ; — and secondly, of that ethicaljudgment, which measures our approbation and disapprobation,estimating, with more than judicial scrutiny, not merely what isdone, but what is scarcely thought in secrecy and silence, anddiscriminating some element of moral good or evil, in all thephysical good and evil, which it is in our feeble power to execute,or in our still frailer heart to conceive and desire." BrownsLectures, Lecture I.INTELLECT AND THE WILL. 223superior strength, to compel the struggling andthe reluctant instrument to its grasp. He maythus confine it to the hand, and give impulse tothe arm of one, who recoils in utmost horror fromthat perpetration, of which he has been madeas it were the material engine ; and could mattersbe so contrived, as that the real murderershould be invisible, while the arm and the handthat inclosed the weapon, and the movements ofthe ostensible one, should alone be patent to theeye of the senses — then he and not the otherwould be held by the by-stander as chargeablewith the guilt. But so soon as the real natureof the transaction came to be understood, thisimputation Avould be wholly and instantly transferred.The distinction would at once be recognizedbetween the willing agent in this deed ofhorror, and the unwilling instrument. Therewould no more of moral blame be attached tothe latter, than to the weapon which inflictedthe mortal blow ; and on the former exclusively,the whole burden of the crime and its condemnationwould be laid. And the simple differencewhich gives rise to the whole of this moral distinctionin the estimate between them, is, thatwith the one the act was with the will ; with theother it was against it.4. The will may be spoken of either as afaculty of the mind, or it may denote one separateand individual act of willing. He willed224 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEto take a walk with me. It was his will so todo.But there is another term which is moreproperly expressive of the act, and is not at allexpressive of the faculty. Those terms whichdiscriminate, and which restrict language to aspecial meaning, are very convenient both inscience and in common life. The will thenmay express both the faculty and the act ofwilling. But the act of willing has been furtherexpressed by a term appropriated wholly toitself — and that is, volition. Mr. Locke definesvolition to be " an act of the mind, knowinglyexerting that dominion it takes itself to haveover any part of the man, by employing it in,or withholding it from any particular action."And Dr. Reid more briefly, but to the sameeffect, says that it is — " the determination of themind to do or not to do something which weconceive to be in our power." He very properlyremarks, however, that, after all, determinationis only another word for volition ; and heexcuses himself, at the same time, from givingany other more logical definition — on the plea,that simple acts of the mind do not admit of one.5. There is certainly a ground, in the natureand actual workings of the mental constitution,for the distinction, which has been questionedof late, between will and desire. Desire hasbeen thus defined by Locke — " It is the uneasinessman finds in himself, upon the absenceINTELLECT AND THE AVILL. 225of any thing, whose present enjoyment carriesthe idea of delight with it " — an uneasinesswhich many may remember to have felt intheir younger days, at the sight of an appleof tempting physiognomy, that they would fainhave laid hold of, but were restrained fromtouching by other considerations. The desireis just the liking that one has for the apple ;and by its effectual solicitations, it may gainover the will to its side — in which case, throughthe medium of a volition, the apple is laid holdof, and turned to its natural application. Butthe will may, and often does, refuse its consent ;and we then better perceive the distinctionbetween the desire and the will, when we thussee them in a state of opposition — or when theurgency of the desire is met by other urgencies,which restrain the indulgence of it. One mightbe conceived, as having the greatest appetencyfor the fruit, and yet knowing it to be injurious tohis health — ^^so that, however strong his desires, hiswill keeps its ground against their solicitations.Or he may wish to reserve it for one of hisinfant children ; and so his will sides with thesecond desire against the first, and carries thislatter one into execution. Or he may reflect, afterall, that the apple is not his own property, or thatperhaps he could not pull it from among the goldencrowds and clusters around it, without injuryto the tree upon which it is hanging ; and so he226 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEis led by the sense of justice to keep both theone and the other desire at abeyance — and theobject of temptation remains untouched, justbecause the will combats the desire instead ofcomplying with it, and refuses to issue thatmandate, or in other words, to put forth thatvolition, which would instantly be followed upby an act and an accomplishment. And thus,however good the tree is for food, and howeverpleasant to the eyes, and however much to bedesired, so as to make one taste and be satisfied—yet, if strong enough in all these determinationsof prudence or principle, he may lookon the fruit thereof and not eat.6. Dr. Brown and others would say, thatthere is nothing in this process, but the contestof opposite desires and the prevalence of thestrongest one — and so identify will and desirewith each other.* But though a volition shouldbe the sure result of a desire, that is no moreEdwards, at the outset of his treatise on the Will, controvertsLocke ; but in such a way as reduces the difference between themvery much to a question of nomenclature. On the one hand, thedifference between a volition and a desire does not affect the maindoctrine of Jonathan Edwards ; for, though volitions be distinctfrom desires, they may nevertheless be the strict and unvaryingresults of them. Even Edwards himself seems to admit, that themind has a different object in willing from what it has in desiringan act of our own being the object of the one ; the thing desiredbeing the object of the other. It serves to mark more strikinglythe distinction between willing and desiring, when even an act ofour own is the proper object of each of them. There may beINTELLECT AND THE WILL. 227reason why they should be identified, than whythe prior term of any series in nature should beidentified or confounded, with any of its posteriorterms, whether more or less remote. Inthe process that we have been describing, therewere different desires in play, but there were notdifferent volitions in play. There was one volitionappended to the strongest desire : but theother desires though felt by the mind, and thereforein actual being, had no volitions appendedto them — proving that a desire may exist separatelyfrom the volition that is proper to it, andthat therefore the two are separate and distinctfrom each other. The truth is, using Dr. Brown'sown language, the mind is in a different statedien framing a volition, from what it is whenfeeling a desire. Alien feeling a desire, themind has respect to the object desired — whichobject, then in view of the mind, is acting withits own peculiar influence on a mental suscepti-a great desire to inflict a blow on an offender ; but this desire,restrained by considerations of prudence or principle, may not passinto a volition. Edwards would say that even here the volitiondoes not run counter to the desire, but only marks the prevalenceof the stronger desire over the weaker one. Now this is true ; butwithout at all obliterating the distinction for which we contend.The volition does run counter to the weaker desire, though underthe impulse of the stronger, and there are three distinct mentalphenomena in this instance, the stronger desire, the weaker desireand the volition, which ought no more to be confounded, than anymovement with the motive forces that gave rise to it, or than theposterior with the prior term of any sequence.228 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEability. When framing a volition the mind hasrespect, not properly to the object, but to theact by which it shall attain the object — and soissaid to be putting forth a mental power.*But whether this distinction be accurately expressedor not, certain it is, the mind is differentlyconditioned, when in but a state of simpledesire — from what it is when in the act of conceivinga volition. It is engaged with differentthings, and looking different ways — in the onecase to the antecedent object which has excitedthe desire, in the other case to the posterioract on which the will has determined for theattainment of the object. The palsied man whocannot stretch forth his hand to the apple that isplaced in the distance before him, may, nevertheless,long after it ; and in him we perceivedesire singly — for he is restrained by very helplessnessfrom putting forth a volition, the properobject of which is some action of our own, andthat we know to be in our own power. Weaccept with great pleasure of that simplificationby Dr. Brown, in virtue of which we regard themind not as a congeries of different faculties, butas, itself one and indivisible, having the capacityof passing into different states ; and without conceivingany distinction of faculties, we onlyaffirm that it is in a different state when it wills,from that in which it is when it simply desires.See Art. 1 . of this Chapter.INTELLECT AND THE WILL. 229Notwithstanding the high authority both of Dr.Brown and Mr. Mill, we think that in confoundingthese two, they have fallen into an erroneoussimplification ; and we abide by the distinctionof Dugald Stewart and the older writers uponthis subject.*7. But the point of deepest interest is that stepof the process, at which the character of rightor wrong comes to be applicable. It is not at thatpoint, when the appetites or affections of ournature solicit from the will a particular move-humesays even' well of desire, that — " it arises from good consideredsimply and aversion from evil. The will again exerts itself,when either the presence of the good or absence of the evil may beattained by any action of the mind or body." This is the definitionof Hume, and it is a very good one. And it tallies with the sensibleremark of Dr. Reid, that the object of every volition is someaction of our own. And upon this he founds some very clear illustrationsof the difference that there is between a desire and avolition. " A man desires that his children may be happy, andthat they may behave well. Their being happy is no action at all ;and their behaving well is not his action but theirs." " A manathirst has a strong desire to drink ; but for some particular reasonhe determines not to gratify his desire," Here the man has thedesire but not the will. In other cases he may have the will butnot the desire. "A man for health may take a nauseous drug,for which he has no desire, but a great aversion." Desire, therefore,is not will ; but only one of the incitements that often leadsto it — though it may at all times be, and actually sometimes iswithstood. It is, however, because desire is so often accompaniedby will, that we are apt to overlook the distinction betweenthem.I may here observe that to frame a volition is sometimes expressedmore shortly by the phrase, to will. I will put forth myC. II. R230 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEment; neither is it at that point, when either arational self love or a sense of duty remonstratesagainst it. It is not at that point when the consentof the will is pleaded for, on the one side orother — but all-important to be borne in mind, itis at that point when the consent is given. Whenwe characterize a court at law for some one ofits deeds — it is not upon the urgency of the argumenton one side of the question, or of the replyupon the other, that we found our estimate ; butwholly upon the decision of the bench, whichdecision is carried into effect by a certain ordergiven out to the officers who execute it. Andso, in characterising an individual for some oneof his doings, we found our estimate, not uponhand, is different from, I desire to put it forth. There may bereasons why I should restrain the desire — so that though I desireit, I may not will it. For this application of the verb to will, wehave the authority of the best English writers. " Whoever," saysDr. South, " wills the doing of a thing, if the doing of it be in hispower, he will certainly do it ; and whoever does not do the thingwhich he has in his power to do, does not properly will it." AndLocke says, " the man that sits still is said to be at liberty, becausehe can walk if he wills it." Dr. South makes a happy discrimination,which serves to throw light upon the precise nature of a volitionas opposed to other things that may or may not lead to a volition —when he says, " that there is as much difference between theapprobation of the judgment and the actual volitions of the will,as between a man's viewing a desirable thing, and reaching afterit with his hand." He further says of a wish, which is noughtbut a longing desire, that — " a wish is properly the desire of a manwho is sitting or lying still ; but an act of the will is a man ofbusiness vigorously going about his work."INTELLECT AND THE WILL. 231the desires of appetite that may have instigatedhim on the one hand, or upon the dictates ofconscience that may have withstood these uponthe other — not upon the elements that conflictedin the struggle, but on the determination thatput an end to it — even that determination ofthe wall, which is carried into effect by thosevolitions, on the issuing of which, the hands,and the feet, and the other instruments of actionare put into instant subserviency.8. To prove how essentially linked together,the morality of any act is with its wilfulness, itis of no consequence, whether the volition thatgave rise to the act, be the one which precededit immediately as its proximate cause, or be aremote and anterior volition — in which lattercase, it is termed a purpose, conceived at someperiod which may have long gone by, but whichwas kept unalterable till the opportunity for itsexecution came round.* There may be an intervalof time, between that resolution of the willwhich is effective, and that performance bywhich it is carried into effect. One may resolveIt is true that if the desire were to cease for the object to beattained by the proposed act, the purpose would cease along withit, but it were confounding the things which in reality are distinctfrom each other, to represent on this account the desire and thepurpose as synonymous. The one respects the object that is wishedfor; the other respects the action, by which the object is to beattained.232 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEto-day, with full consent and purpose of the will,on some criminal enterprise for tomorrow. It isto-day that he has become the criminal, and hasincurred a guilt to which even the performanceof the morrow may bring no addition and noenhancement. The performance of tomorrowdoes not constitute the guilt, but only indicatesit. It may strove what before the execution ofthe will was still an uncertainty. It may provethe strength of that determination which hasbeen already taken — how it can stand its groundthrough all the hours which intervene betweenthe desire and its fulfilment; how meanwhilethe visitations of reflection and remorse havebeen kept at a distance, or all been disregarded; how with relentless depravity, thepurpose has been adhered to, and the remonstrancesof conscience or perhaps the entreatiesof virtuous friendship have all been set at nought ;how, with a hardihood that could brave alikethe disgrace and the condemnation which attachto moral worthlessness, he could proceed withunfaltering step from the reprobate design to itsfull and final accomplishment — nor suffer all thesuggestions of his leisure and solitude, howeveraffecting the thought of that innocence which heis now on the eve of forfeiting, or a tendernessfor those relatives who are to be deeply woundedby the tidings of his fall, or the authority of aINTELLECT AND THE Mill. 233father's parting advice, or the remembrance of amother's prayers, to stay his hand.9. That an action then be the rightful object,either of moral censure, or approval, it must havehad the consent of the will to go along with it.It must be the fruit of a volition — else it is utterlybeyond the scope, either of praise for its virtuousnessor of blame for its criminality. If anaction be involuntary, it is as unfit a subject forany moral reckoning, as are the pulsations ofthe wrist. Something ludicrous might occur,which all of a sudden sets one irresistibly on theaction of laughing ; or a tale of distress mightbe told, which whether he wills or not, forcesfrom him the tears of sympathy, and sets him asirresistibly on the action of weeping ; or, on theappearance of a ferocious animal, he mightstruggle with all his power for a serene andmanly firmness, yet struggle in vain against theaction of trembling; or if instead of a formidablea loathsome animal was presented to his notice,he might no more help the action of a violentrecoil perhaps antipathy against it, than he canhelp any of the organic necessities of that constitutionwhich has been given to him ; or evenupon the observation of what is disgusting in thehabit or countenance of a fellow man, he maybeoverpowered into a sudden and sensitive aversion; and lastly, should some gross and grievoustransgression against the decencies of civil234 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEiced life be practised before him, he might nomore be able to stop that rush of blood to thecomplexion which marks the inward workings ofan outraged and offended delicacy, than he isable to alter or suspend the law of its circulate.In each of these cases the action is involuntary; and precisely because it is so, theepithet neither of morally good nor of morallyevil can be applied to it. And so of every actionthat comes thus to speak of its own accord ; andnot at the will or bidding of the agent. It maybepainful to himself. It may also be painfulto others. But if it have not had the consent ofhis will, even that consent without which noaction that is done can be called voluntary, it ishis misfortune and not his choice; and thoughnot indifferent in regard to its consequences onthe happiness of man, yet, merely because disjoinedfrom the will, it in point of moral estimationis an act of the purest indifference.10. How then, it may be asked, can anymoral character be affixed to an emotion, whichseems to be an organic or pathological phenomenon,wherewith the will may have little, perhapsnothing to do. Nothing we have affirmedis either virtuous or vicious, unless the voluntaryin some way intermingles with it ; and how thenshall we vindicate the moral rank which is commonlyassigned to the mere susceptibilities ofour nature? We regard compassion as a vir-intellectAND THE WILL. 235tous sensibility ; and we regard malignity, orlicentiousness, or envy, as so many depravedaffections ; and yet, on our principle, they arevirtuous or vicious, only in so far as they arewilful. It is clearly at the bidding of his will,that a man acts with his hand, and therefore weareat no loss to hold him responsible for hisdoings ; but we must learn how it is at the biddingof his will that he feels with his heart, erewe can hold him responsible for his desires. Ifapart from the will, there be neither moral worthnor moral worthlessness — if it be implied in thevery notion of desert that the will has had someconcern in that which we thus characterize — ifneither actions nor affections are, without volitions,susceptible of any moral reckoning — itmay require some consideration to perceive, howfar the element of moral worth is at all implicatedin an emotion. If the emotions of sympathybe as much the result of an organic frameworkas the emotions of taste, and if this betrue of all the emotions — it remains to be seen,why either praise or censure should be awardedto any of them. Whether an emotion of tastearises within me at the sight of beauty, or anemotion of pity at the sight of distress — themind may have been as passive, or there mayhave been as much of the strictly pathological inthe one emotion as in the other.11. Now it may be very true, that the will236 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEhas as little to do with that pathological law, bywhich the sight of distress awakens in my bosoman emotion of pity, as with that other pathologicallaw by which the sight of a red objectimpresses on my retina the sensation peculiar tothat colour. Yet the will, though not the proximate,may have been the remote and so thereal cause, both of the emotion and sensationnotwithstanding. It may have been at the biddingof my will, that, instead of hiding myself,from my own flesh, I visited a scene of wretchedness,and entered within the confines as it wereof that pathological influence, in virtue of which,after that the spectacle of suffering w as seen thecompassion was unavoidable. And it is also atthe bidding of my will, that I place myselfwithin view of an object of sense ; that I directmy eye towards it, and keep it open to thatsensation, which, after the circumstances that Ihave voluntarily realized, is equally unavoidable.I might have escaped from the emotion, had Iso willed, by keeping aloof from the spectaclewhich awakened it. And I might escape fromthe sensation, if I so will, by shutting my eyes,or turning them away from the object which isits cause ; or, in other \^ words, by the commandwhich I have over the looking faculty thatbelongs to me. And perhaps the mind has alooking faculty as well as the body, in virtue ofwhich, as by the one objects are either removedIINTELLECT AND THE WILL. 237from, or made present to the sight, so by theother, objects may be either removed from, ormade present to the thoughts. Could we ascertainthe existence and operations of such afaculty, this would explain how it is, that theemotions are subordinated not immediately butmediately to the will — that the mind by thedirection of its looking faculty towards thecounterpart objects, could, on the one hand, willthese emotions into being ; or by the directionof it away from these objects, could, on the otherhand, will them again into extinction. Such wehold to be the faculty of attention. It forms thegreat link between the intellectual and moraldepartments of our nature ; or between the percipientand what has already been named thepathetic departments. It is the control whichthe will has over this faculty that makes manresponsible for the objects which he chooses toentertain, and so responsible for the emotionswhich pathologically result from them.12. If it be by a voluntary act that he comesto see certain objects, then, whatever the emotionsare which are awakened by these objects, hemay be said to have willed them into being. —In like manner, if it be by a voluntary act thathe comes to think of certain objects, then, mayit also be said, that he wills all the emotionswhich follow in their train. It is admitted onall hands, that, by the power which the will has238 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEover the muscles of the human frame, it caneither summon into presence or bid away certainobjects of sight. And, notwithstanding theeffect which the expositions of certain metaphysicalreasoners have had, in obscuring the process,it is also admitted, almost universally, that,by the power which the will has over the thinkingprocesses, it can either summon into presenceor bid away certain objects of thought.The faculty of attention we regard as the greatinstrument for the achievement of this — theligament which binds the one department ofour constitution to the other — the messenger,to whose wakefulness and activity we owe allthose influences, which pass and repass in constantsuccession between our moral and intellectualnature.13. Dr. Reid, in his book on the active powers,has a most important chapter on those operationsof the mind that are called voluntary. Amongthese, he gives a foremost place to attention —where, instead however of any profound orcareful analysis, he presents us with a numberof very sensible remarks ; and from the undoubtedpart which the will has in the guidanceand exercise of this faculty, he comes to thesound conclusion, that a great part of wisdomand virtue consists in giving the proper directionto it.14. Dugald Stewart ranks attention amongINTELLECT AND THE WILL. 239the intellectual faculties ; — and seems to regardit as an original power, which had very muchescaped the notice of former observers. ButDr. Brown we hold to have been far the mostsuccessful in his expositions of this faculty ; andby which he makes it evident, that it is notmore distinct from the mental perception of anyobject of thought, than the faculty of looking toany object of sight, is distinct from the facultyof seeing it.15. In his chapter on the external affectionscombined with desire, he institutes a beautifulanalysis ; in the conduct of which, he has thrownthe magic tints of poetry over a process of veryabstract but conclusive reasoning. We fear,that, in this age of superficial readers, thepublic are far from being adequately aware ofthat M wondrous combination of talent, which thissingularly gifted individual realized in his ownperson ; and with w hat facility, yet elegance, hecould intersperse the graces of fancy, among thedemonstrations of a most profound and originalmetaphysics. The passage to which we nowrefer, is perhaps the finest exemplification ofthis in all his volumes ; and though we canhardly hope, that the majority, even of the welleducated, will ever be tempted to embark on hisadventurous speculations — yet many, we doubtnot, have been led by the fascination of hisminor accomplishments, to brave the depths and240 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEthe difficulties of that masterly course which hehas given to the world. For among the steepsand the arduous elevations of that high walkwhich he has taken, he kindly provides thereader with many a resting place — some enchantedspot, over which the hand of taste haththrown her choicest decorations ; or where, afterthe fatigues and the triumphs of successful intellect,the traveller may from the eminence thathe has won, look abroad on some sweet or nobleperspective, which the great master whose footstepshe follows hath thrown open to his gaze.It is thus that there is a constant relief andrefreshment afforded along that ascending way,which but for this would be most severely intellectual; and if never was philosophy moreabstruse, yet never was it seasoned so exquisitely,or spread over a page so rich in all thoseattic delicacies of the imagination and the stylewhich could make the study of it attractive.16. There is a philosophy not more solid ormore sublime of achievement than his, but ofsterner frame — that would spurn " the fairydreams of sacred fountains and Elysian grovesand vales of bliss." For these he ever had mostbenignant toleration, and himself sported amongthe creations of poetic genius. We are aware ofnought more fascinating, than the kindness andcomplacency, wherewith philosophy, in some ofthe finer spirits of our race, can make herINTELLECT AND THE WILL. 241graceful descent into a humbler but loveliersession than her own — Ashen " the intellectualpower bends from his awful throne a willingear and smiles'17. " If," says Dr. Brown, "Nature has given usthe power of seeing many objects at once, she hasgiven us also the faculty of looking but to one —that is to say of directing our eyes on one onlyof the multitude ;'' and again, " there are someobjects M-hich are more striking than others,and w which of themselves almost call us to lookat them. They are the predominant objects,around which others seem to arrange themselves."18. The difference between seeing a thingand looking at it, is tantamount to the differencewhich there is, between the mere presence of athought in one's mind and the mind's attentionto that which is the object of thought. Nowthe look, according to Dr. Brown's analysis, ismade up of the simple external affection of sight,and a desire to know more about some one ofthe things which we do see. We think it thenatural consequence of the error into which hehas fallen, of confounding the desire with thewill, that he has failed in giving a completeor continuous enough description of the processof attention — for, without any violence to theorder of his own very peculiar contemplations,he might have gone on to say, as the effect of242 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEthis mixed perception and desire on the partof the observer, that he willed to look to theobject in question ; and he might have spokenof the volition which fastened his eye and hisattention upon it. Both he and Mr. Mill seemaverse to the intervention of the will in thisexercise at all — the one finding room only fordesire ; and the other for his processes of association,ascribing attention to the mere occurrenceof interesting sensations or ideas in thetrain. Now if this question is to be decided byobservation at all, or by consciousness which isthe faculty of internal observation, the mentalstates of desiring and willing seem just as distinguishableas any other mental states whatever.At the time when the mind desires, itbears a respect towards the desirable object ; atthe time when it wills, it bears a respecttowards something different from this, to thatact of its own which is put forth for the purposeof attaining the object. The desire that is felttowards the object is specifically a distinct thing,from the volition which prompts or precedes theaction. The desire may have caused the volition; but this is no reason why it should beconfounded with the volition. And in likemanner, a feeling of interest in an idea, orrather in the object of an idea, is quite distinguishablefrom that volition which respects asomething different from this object — whichINTELLECT AND THE WILL. 243respects an act or exercise of the mind, even theattention that we shall give to it. The interestthat is felt in any object of thought may havebeen the cause, and the sole cause of the attentionwhich we give to it. But the necessaryconnection w which obtains between the parts of aprocess, is no reason why we should overlookany part, or confound the different parts witheach other. In this instance, Mr. Hume seemsto have observed more accurately than either ofthe philosophers whom we have now named,w hen he discriminates between the will and thedesire, and tells us of the former, that it exertsitself when the thing desired is to be attainedby any action of the mind or body. A volitionis as distinctly felt in the mental as in thebodily process — although it be in the latter only,that the will first acts on some one of themuscles as its instrument, and issues in a visiblemovement as its required service. The powerof the will over an intellectual process is markedby the difference, the palpable differencewhich there is, between a regulated train ofthought and a passive reverie. And there isnothing in the intervention of the will to contravene,or even to modify the general laws ofassociation. Neither does the wish to recovera particular idea, involve in it the incongruityof that idea being both present with and absentfrom the mind at the same time. We may not244 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEhave an idea that is absent, and yet have theknowledge of its being related to some otheridea that is present ; and we therefore attend tothis latter idea and dwell upon it, for the purpose,as is well expressed by Mr. Mill, of —giving it the opportunity of exciting all theideas with which it is associated ; for by notattending to it, we deprive it more or less of thatopportunity." It is therefore, as he elsewhereexpresses it, that we detain certain ideas andsuffer others to pass. But there is nothinginconsistent with the laws or phenomena ofassociation, in our saying of this act of detentionthat it is a voluntary act — that we detaincertain ideas, because we will to detain them.*19. It is this which virtue's emotion, eventhough there be nothing virtuous which is notvoluntary. It is true that once the idea of anobject is in the mind, its counterpart emotionmay, by an organic or pathological law, havecome unbidden into the heart. The emotionmay have come unbidden ; but the idea maynot have come unbidden. By an act of thewill, it may, in the way now explained, havebeen summoned at the first into the mind'spresence ; and at all events it is by a continuousact of the will that it is detained and dweltSee the Chapter on the Will in Mill's analysis of thehuman mind.Intellect AM) THE WILL. '24-5upon. The will is not in contact with theemotion, but it is in contact with the idea ofthat object which awakens the emotion — andtherefore, although not in contact with theemotion, it may be vested with an effectualcontrol over it. It cannot bid compassion intothe bosom, apart from the object which awakensit ; but it can bid a personal entry into thehouse of mourning;, and then the compassionwill flow apace ; or it can bid a mental conceptionof the bereaved and afflicted family there,and then the sensibility will equally arise,whether a suffering be seen or a suffering bethoughtof. In like manner, it cannot bid intothe breast the naked and unaccompanied feelingof gratitude ; but it can call to recollection, andkeep in recollection the kindness which promptsit — and the emotion follows in faithful attendanceon its counterpart object. It is thus thatwe can will the right emotions into being, notimmediately but mediately — as the love of God,by thinking on God — ^a sentiment of friendship,by dwelling in contemplation on the congenialqualities of our friend — the admiration of moralexcellence, by means of a serious and steadfastattention to it. It is thus too that we bid awaythe wrong emotions, not separately and in disjunctionfrom their objects, for the pathologicallaw which unites objects with emotions wecannot break asunder. But we rid our heartC. II. s246 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEof the emotions, b)^ ridding our mind of theirexciting and originating thoughts ; of anger,for example, by forgetting the injury ; or ofa licentious instigation, by dismissing from ourfancy the licentious image, or turning our sightand our eyes from viewing vanity. It is thiscommand of the will over the attention, which,transmuting the intellectual into the-moral,makes duties of heedfulness and considerationand duties too of prime importance, becauseof the place which attention occupies in themental system, as the great ligament betweenthe percipient and the pathetic parts of ournature. It is by its means that the will is madeto touch at least the springs of emotion — if it donot touch the emotions themselves. The willtells on the sensibilities, through an intermediatemachinery which has been placed at its disposal ;and thus it is, that the culture or regulation ofthe heart is mainly dependent on the regulationof the thoughts.20. We may thus be enabled to explain, andperhaps more clearly than before, the forceand inveteracy of habit ; and that, not by thepower of emotions to suggest emotions, butpurely by the power of thoughts to suggestthoughts. In this process, the motions will ofcourse intermingle with their own counterpartthoughts ; and both ideas and feelings will succeedeach other in their customary trains allINTELLECT AND THE WILL. 247the more surely, the oftener it has been sufferedto pass unbroken by any intervention of thewill, any remonstrance from the voice of conscience.It is in this way that the wretchedvoluptuary, becomes every year the more helplessvictim of his own depraved inclinations —because more and more lorded over by those foulimaginations, w which are lighted up to him, fromalmost every object he sees or thinks of; andwhich now he scarcely has the power, becausehe never had the honest or sustained will tobid away. That may truly be called a moralchastisement under which he suffers. The morehe has sinned, the more helpless is the necessityunder which he lies of sinning — a bondagestrengthened by every act of indulgence, till hemay become the irrecoverable slave of thosepassions which war against the principles ofa better and higher nature. And he is domineeredover by passions, because domineeredover by thoughts ; and it is only by the forceor mastery of counteracting thoughts, that thespell is broken — or, in other words, it is throughan intellectual medium, that the moral distemperis cleared away. If he be rescued from hisdelusions to sobriety and virtue, ideas will be thestepping-stones of his returning path — the sirensthat will recall him to himself, by chasing awaythe fascinations wherewith he is encompassed.Could the percipient part of his nature be set248 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEright, the pathological part of it would becomewhole. He would yet behave himself aright,did he only bethink himself aright; and noblerecoveries have been effected, even from mostdeep and hopeless infatuation, simply by thepower of thoughts — when made to dwell on thedistress of friends, the poverty and despair ofchildren, the ruin of health as well as fortune,the displeasure of an angry God, the horrorsof an unprovided death-bed or an undone eternity.*21. Actions are voluntary in themselves, in thatthe mind can will them directly into being. Emotions,though not voluntary in themselves, are sofarvoluntary in their proximate or immediatecauses — in that the mind, to a certain extent,and by the control which it has over the facultyof attention, can will those ideas into its presenceby which the emotions are awakened. It is wellA strict confinement to our assigned object has hithertoprevented any allusion to Christianity, from which indeed wepurposely abstain, till we approach more nearly towards the conclusionof this essay. Still we may here remark how strikinglyaccordant the philosophy of our nature is with the lessons of theGospel in regard to the reciprocal acting of its moral and intellectualparts on each other — and that not merely in Avhat Scriptureenjoins on the management of temptations ; but in its frequentaffirmation, as a general and reigning principle, of the powerwhich its objective doctrines have in transforming the subjectivemind which receives them — exemplified in such phrases, as " beingsanctified by the truth," and "keeping our hearts in the love ofGod. by building ourselves up on our most holy faith."INTELLECT AND THE WILL. 249that man is thus vested, not only with a controlover his actions ; but also in a great degree witha control over his emotions, these powerful intellectsto action — and it required an exquisitefitting of the intellectual to the moral in man'smental system, ere such a mechanism couldbe framed. But we not only behold in the relationbetween the will and the emotions, a skilfuladaptation in the parts of the human constitutionto each other ; we also behold a general andmanifold adaptation to this peculiarity, in thevarious objects of external nature. Man can, bymeans of these objects, either kindle the rightemotions in his bosom, or make his escape fromthose emotions that trouble and annoy him. Byan entry into an abode of destitution, he caneffectually soften his heart ; by an entry into anabode of still deeper suffering, where are to befound the dead or the dying, he can effectuallysolemnize it. But a still more palpable use ofthat indefinite number of objects wherewith theworld is so filled and variegated, is, that bycreating an incessant diversion of the thoughtsfrom such objects as are of malignant influence,it may rid the inner man of the grief, or theanger, or the wayward licentiousness of feeling,which might otherwise have lorded over him ;and to the urgent calls of business or duty oramusement, do we owe such lengthened periodsof exemption both from the emotions that pain.250 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEand from the emotions that would vitiate anddeprave us.22. But there is another application, of atleast as high importance, to which this peculiarityof our mental structure is subservient.By the command which the will has over theattention, we become responsible, not only forour states of emotion, but also in a great degreefor our intellectual states. The imagination thatthere is neither moral worth nor moral delinquencyin the state of a man's belief, proceedson the voluntary having had no share in the processwhich leads to it. Now through the inter-mediumof the very same faculty, the faculty ofattention, the will stands related to the ultimateconvictions of the understanding, precisely as itstands related to the ultimate emotions of theheart. It is true that as the object in view ofthe mind is, so the emotion is. — And it is as truethat as the evidence in view of the mind is, sothe belief is. In neither case has the will to dowith the concluding sequence ; but in both casesit has equally to do with the sequences that wentbefore it. There may be a pathological necessitybeyond our control, in that final step of thesuccession, which connects the object that is perceivedwith its counterpart emotion, or the evidencethat is perceived with its counterpart belief.But in like manner as it is by the attention,which MO might or niighl not have exercised,INTELLECT AND THE WILL. 251that the object is perceived by us, so is it by theattention, which we might or might not have exercised,that the evidence is perceived by us.It is thus that on innumerable questions, andthese of vital importance, both to the presentwell-being and the future prospects of humanity,the moral may have had causal antecedentover the intellectual ; and the state of a man'screed may depend on the prior state of his character.We have already seen how a presentcompassion may have been the result of a previouschoice ; and so may a present convictionbe the result of a previous choice — being inproportion not to the evidence possessed by thesubject, but to the evidence attended to, andperceived in consequence of that attention. Thedesignations of virtuous and vicious are only applicableto that which is voluntary ; and it isprecisely because, through the faculty of attention,the voluntary has had so much to do, if notimmediately with the belief, at least with theinvestigations which lead to it — that man maybereckoned with for the judgments of his understanding,as well as for the emotions of his heartor the actions of his history.23. That man is not rightfully the subject ofany moral reckoning for his belief, would appearthen, to be as monstrous a heresy in scienceas it is in theology, as philosophically unsoundas it is religiously unsound ; and deriving all its252 Connection BETWEEN THEplausibility from the imagination, that the beliefis in no way dependent upon the will. It is notmorally incumbent upon man to see an object,which is placed beyond the sphere of his vision—nor can either a rightful condemnation or arightful vengeance be laid upon him, because hehas not perceived it. It must lie within thatsphere, else he is no more responsible for nothaving reached it with his eye, than for nothaving stretched forth his hand to any of the distantbodies in the firmament. It must be withinrange of his seeing ; and then the only questionwhich needs to be resolved is, what the will hasto do with the seeing of it. Now to see is notproperly an act of the will, but to look is altogetherso ; and it is the dependence of his lookingfaculty on the will, which makes man responsiblefor what he sees or what he does not see, inreference to all those objects of sight, that areplaced within the territory of sensible vision.And if there be but a looking faculty in the mind,man may be alike responsible for what he believesor what he does not believe, in reference,not to sensible objects alone, but to those truthswhich are placed within the territory of his intellectualor mental vision. Now attention is evensuch a faculty. Man can turn and transfer it atpleasure from one to another topic of contemplation.He can take cognizance of anv visiblething, in virtue of the power which he has overINTELLECT AND THE WILL. '163the eye of his body — a power not to alter thelaws of vision, but to bring the organ of visionwithin the operation of these laws. And he cantake cognizance of any announced truth, in virtueof the power he has over his attention whichis his mental eye — a power, not to alter the lawsof evidence, but to bring the organ of the intellectwithin their operation. attention is thelooking organ of the mind — the link of communicationbetween man's moral and mans intellectualnature — the messenger, as it were, by whichthe interchange between these two departmentsis carried on — a messenger too at the bidding ofthe will, which saith to it at one time go and itgoeth, at another cone and it cometh, and at athird do this and it doeth it. It is thus that manbecomes directly responsible for the conclusionsof his understanding — for these conclusionsdepend altogether not on the evidence whichexists, but on that portion of the evidence whichis attended to. He is not to be reckoned with,either for the lack or the sufficiency of the existentevidence ; but he might most justly bereckoned with, for the lack or the sufficiency ofhis attention. It is not for him to create thelight of day ; but it is for him both to open andto present his eye to all its manifestations. Neitheris it for him to fetch down to earth the lightof the upper sanctuary. But if it be indeed truethat that light hath come into the world, then it254 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEis for him to guide the eye of his understandingtowards it. There is a voluntary part for him toperform ; and thenceforward the question is involvedwith most obvious moralities. The thingis now submitted to his choice. He may havethe light, if he only love the light ; and if he donot, then are his love of darkness and the evil ofhis doings, the unquestionable grounds of hismost clear and emphatic condemnation. /24. And this principle is of force, throughoutall the stages in the process of the enquiry — fromthe very first glance of that which is the subjectof it, to the full and finished conviction in whichthe enquiry terminates. At the commencementof the process, we may see nothing but the likelihoodsof a subject — not the conclusive proofs, butonly as yet the dim and dawning probabilities ofthe question — nothing which is imperative uponour belief, and yet every thing which is imperativeupon our attention. There may be as greata moral perversity in resisting that call, whichthe mere semblance of truth makes upon ourfurther attention — as in resisting that call, whichthe broad and perfect manifestation of it makesupon our conviction. In the practice of Scottishlaw, there is a distinction made between the precognitionand the proof — carried into effect inEngland by the respective functions of the grandand petty jury ; it being the office of the formerto find a true bill, or to decide whether the mat-intellectAND THE AVILL. 255ter in question should be brought to a furthertrial ; and it being the office of the latter to makethat trial, and to pronounce the final verdictthereupon. Now what we affirm is, that theremight be to the full as grievous a delinquencyin the former act of judgment as in the latter; inthe denial of a further hearing to the cause afterthe strong probabilities which have transpiredat the one stage, as in the denial of a fair verdictafter the strong and satisfactory proofs whichhave transpired at the other. All the equities ofrectitude may be as much traversed or violated,at the initial or progressive steps of such anenquiry, as by the ultimate judgment whichforms the termination of it. To resist a goodand valid precognition, and so to refuse the trial,is a moral unfairness of the very same kind,with that resistance of a good and valid proofwhich leads to the utterance of a false verdict.He were an iniquitous judge, who should internallystifle the impression of those verities, whichnow brightened forth upon him, at the close ofhis investigation. But he also were an iniquitousjudge, who should stifle the impression of thoseverisimilitude, that even but obscurely and languidlybeamed upon him at the outset.25. Now, in all the processes of the humanintellect, there is a similar gradation silentlyyet substantially carried forward. There isfirst an aspect of probability, which constitutes256 CONNECTION BETWEEN THEno claim upon our immediate belief, but whichat least constitutes a most rightful claim uponour attention, a faculty, as we before said, at thebidding; of our will, and for the exercise of whichwe are therefore responsible — seeing that wheneverthere is a rightful claim upon our attention,and the attention is not given, it is wrongfullywithheld. But we know that the effect of thisfaculty, is to brighten every object of contemplationto which it is directed, gradually toevolve into greater clearness all its lineaments,and lastly to impress the right conviction uponthe understanding. In other words, the man,on such an occasion as this, is intellectuallyright, but just because he is morally right. Hebecomes sound in faith ; but only in virtue ofhaving become sound in principle. The truebelief in which he ultimately lands, is not all atonce forced upon him, by the credentials wherewithit was associated ; but he had the patienceand the candour to wait the unrolling of these credentials; or rather he helped to enrol them withhis own hand. He fastened his regards uponsome proposition which involved in it the interestsor the obligations of humanity ; becausethere sat upon it, even at the first, a certaincreditable aspect, which had he had the hardihoodto withstand or to turn from, it wouldhave made him chargeable, not with a mentalalone, but with a moral perversity — not withINTELLECT AND THE WILL. 2o7the error that sprigs from a mistaken judgment,but with the guilt that springs from theviolation of an incumbent duty. Many arethe truths which do not carry an instant andoverpowering evidence along with them ; andwhich therefore, at their first announcement,are not entitled to demand admittance for themselvesas the articles of a creed. Neverthelessthey may be entitled to a hearing ; and, by therefusal of that hearing, man incurs, not themisfortune of an involuntary blunder, but theturpitude of a voluntary crime.Chapter IV.On the Defects and the Uses of Natural Theology.1. We behold in the influence which the willhas over the intellectual states, the same adaptationsWhich we did in the influence of the willover the emotions. In the first place, it is wellthat the will should have a certain over-rulingpower over the conclusions of the understandingseeing that if emotions supply the great impellentforces ; doctrines, or the truths which arebelieved, supply the great principles of action.And secondly there is a striking adaptation,in this part of our constitution, to the things258 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESand the objects which be around us. For althoughthere be much of truth, having that sort ofimmediate and resistless evidence, which forcesitself upon our convictions whether we will ornot — there is also much, and that too practicallythe most momentous, of which we can onlyattain the conviction and the knowledge, bya lengthened often a laborious process of enquiry.In like manner as of material objects,they may be seen but imperfectly at the first;and we become fully and minutely acquaintedwith their visible properties, only by a prolongedlook, which is a sustained and voluntaryact — so, many are the objects of thought, boththe reality and the nature of which, are butdimly apprehended on the first suggestion ofthem ; and of which, we can only be madefirmly to believe and thoroughly to know, bymeans of a prolonged attention, which is asustained and voluntary act also. It is thus thatthe moral state determines the intellectual — forit is by the exercise of a strong and continuouswill, upholding or perpetuating the attention,that what at the outset were the probabilities ofa subject are at length brightened into its proofs,and the verisimilitude of our regardful noticebecome the verities of our confirmed faith.2. Of all the subjects to which the attentionof the human mind can be directed, this principleadmits of pre-eminent application to theOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 259subject of theology — as involving in it, both thepresent duties and the final destinies of ourrace. In no other track of inquiry, are themoral and the intellectual more thoroughlyblended, — as might be evinced by tracing thewhole progress, from the first or incipient dispositionof mind towards the theme, to thedevotedness of its confirmed assurance.3. Going back then to the very earliest K)f ourmental conceptions on this subject, we advertfirst to the distinction in point of real andlogical import, between unbelief and disbelief.The former we apprehend, to be the furthestamount of the atheistical verdict on the questionof a God. The atheist does not labourto demonstrate that there is no God. But helabours to demonstrate that there is no adequateproof of there being one. He does not positivelyaffirm the position, that God is not ; but heaffirms the lack of evidence for the position,that God is. His verdict on the doctrine of aGod is only that it is not proven. It is not thatit is disprove. He is but an Atheist. He is notan Antithesis.4. Now there is one consideration, whichaffords the enquirer a singularly clear andcommanding position, at the outset of this greatquestion. It is this. We cannot, without aglaring contravention to all the principles of theexperimental philosophy, recede to a further*200 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESdistance from the doctrine of a God, than tothe position of simple atheism . We do not needto take our departure from any point furtherback than this, in the region of antitheism ;for that region cannot possibly be entered by usbut by an act of tremendous presumption, whichit were premature to denounce as impious, butwhich we have the authority of all modernscience for denouncing as unphilosophical. Tomake this palpable, we have only to contrastthe two intellectual states, not of theism andatheism, but of theism and antitheism — alongwith the two processes, by which alone, we canbe logically and legitimately led to them.5. To be able to say then that there is a God,we may have only to look abroad on some definiteterritory, and point to the vestiges that aregiven of His power and His presence somewhere.To be able to say that there is no God, we mustwalk the whole expanse of infinity, and ascertainby observation, that such vestiges are to befound nowhere. Grant that no trace of Him canbe discerned in that quarter of contemplation,which our puny optics have explored — does itfollow, that, throughout all immensity, a Beingwith the essence and sovereignty of a God isnowhere to be found? Because through ourloopholes of communication with that smallportion of external nature which is before us,we have not seen or ascertained a God — must weOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 261therefore conclude of every unknown and untroddenvastness in this illimitable universe,that no diversity is there. Or because, throughthe brief successions of our little day, theseheavens have not once broken silence, is ittherefore for us to speak to all the periods ofthat eternity which is behind us ; and to say,that never hath a God come forth with theunequivocal tokens of His existence? Ere wecan say that there is a God — we must have seen,on that portion of Nature to which we haveaccess, the print of His footsteps, or have haddirect intimation from Himself; or been satisfiedby the authentic memorials of His converse withour species in other days. But ere we can saythat there is no God — we must have roamedover all nature, and seen that no mark of a Divinefootstep was there ; and we must have gottenintimacy with every existent spirit in the universe,and learned from each, that never dida revelation of the Deity visit him ; and wemust have searched, not into the records of onesolitary planet, but into the archives of allworlds, and thence gathered, that, throughoutthe wide realms of immensity, not one exhibitionof a reigning and living God ever has beenmade. Atheism might plead a lack of evidencewithin its own field of observation. But antitheismpronounces both upon the things whichare, and the things which are not within thatC. II. T262 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESfield. It breaks forth and beyond all thoseUnits, that have been prescribed to man'sexcursive spirit, by the sound philosophy ofexperience ; and by a presumption the mosttremendous, even the usurpation of all spaceand of all time, it affirms that there is no God.To make this out, we should need to travelabroad over the surrounding universe till we hadexhausted it, and to search backward throughall the hidden recesses of eternity ; to traversein every direction the plains of infinitude, andsweep the outskirts of that space which isitself interminable ; and then bring back to thislittle world of ours, the report of a universalblank, wherein we had not met with one manifestationor one movement of a presiding God.For man not to know of a God, he has only tosink beneath the level of our common nature.But to deny him, he must be a God himself.He must arrogate the ubiquity and omniscienceof the Godhead.*This idea has been powerfully rendered by Foster in the followingpassage extracted from one of his essays. —The wonder turns on the great process, by which a man couldgrow to the immense intelligence that can know there is no God.What ages and what lights are requisite for this attainment ? Thisintelligence involves the very attributes of Divinity, while a God isdenied. For unless this man is omnipresent, unless he is at thismoment in every place in the Universe, he cannot know but theremay be in some place manifestations of a Deity by which even hewould be overpowered. If he does not absolutely know everyOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 2G:>6. It affords a finis outset to this investigation,that we cannot recede a greater way from thedoctrine to be investigated, than to the simplepoint of ignorance or unbelief. We cannot,without making inroad on the soundest principlesof evidence, move one step back from this,to the region of disbelief. We can figure aninquirer taking up his position in midway atheism.But he cannot, without defiance to thewhole principle and philosophy of evidence,make aggression thence on the side of antitheism.There is a clear intellectual principle,which forbids his proceeding in that direction ;and there is another principle equally clear,though not an intellectual but a moral one,which urges him, if not to move, at least tolook in the opposite direction. We are notasking him, situated where he is, to believe inGod. For the time being, we as little expecta friendly as we desire a hostile decision uponagent in the Universe, the one that he does not know may be God.If he is not himself the chief agent in the Universe, and does notknow what is so, that which is so may be God. If he is notin absolute possession of all the propositions that constituteuniversal truth, the one which he wants may be that there is aGod. If he cannot with certainty assign the cause of all that heperceives to exist, that cause may be a God. If he does not knowevery thing that has been done in the immeasurable ages that arepast, some things may have been done by a God. Thus unless heknows all things, that is, precludes another Deity by being onehimself, he cannot know that the Being whose existence herejects, does not exist.264 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESthe question. Our only demand for the presentis, that he shall entertain the question. And toenforce the demand, we think that an effectiveappeal might be made to his own moral nature.We suppose him still to be an atheist, but nomore than an atheist — for, in all right Baroniaelogic, the very farthest remove from theism,at which he or any man can be placed by thelack of evidence for a God, is at the point ofsimple neutrality. We might well assume thispoint, as the utmost possible extreme of alienationfrom the doctrine of a Creator, to which themind of a creature can in any circumstancesbe legitimately carried. We cannot move fromit, in the direction towards antitheism, withoutviolence to all that is just in philosophy ; andwe might therefore commence with enquiring,whether, in this lowest state of information andproof upon the question, there can be any thingassigned, which should lead us to move, or atleast to look in the opposite direction.7. In the utter destitution, for the present, ofany argument, or even semblance of argument,that a God is — there is, perhaps, a certain duteousmovement which the mind ought to take, on thebare suggestion that a God may be. The certaintyof an actual God binds over to certaindistinct and most undoubted proprieties. Butso also may the imagination of a possible God —in which case, the very idea of a God, even inOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 265its most hypothetical form, might lay a responsibility,even upon atheists.8. To make this palpable, we might imaginea family suffering under extreme destitution,and translated all at once into sufficiency oraffluence by an anonymous donation. Had thebenefactor been known, the gratitude that weredue to him becomes abundantly obvious ; andin the estimation of every conscience, nothingcould exceed the turpitude of him, Who shouldregale himself on the bounties wherewith he hadbeen enriched, and yet pass unfeelingly by thegiver of them all. Yet does not a proportion ofthis very guilt rest upon him, who knows notthe hand that relieved him, yet cares not toenquire? It does not exonerate him from theburden of all obligation that he knows not thehand which sustains him. He incurs a guilt, ifhe do not want to know. It is enough to convicthim of a great moral delinquency, if he havegladly seized upon the liberalities which werebrought in secret to his door, yet seeks not afterthe quarter whence they have come — willingthat the hand of the dispenser should remain foreverunknown, and not wanting any such disclosuresas would lay a distinct claim or obligationupon himself. He altogether lives bythe bounty of another ; yet would rather continueto live without the burden of those servicesor acknowledgments that are due to him. His266 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESignorance of the benefactor might alleviate thecharge of ingratitude ; but it plainly awakensthe charge again, if he choose to remain inignorance, and would shun the information thatmight dispel it. In reference then to this stillundiscovered patron of his family, it is possiblefor him to evince ingratitude ; to make fullexhibition of a nature that is unmoved by kindnessand withholds the moral responses whichare due to it, that can riot with utmost selfishnessand satisfaction upon the gifts while intotal indifference about the giver — an indifferencewhich might be quite as clearly and characteristicallyshown, by the man who seeks not afterhis unknown friend, as by the man who slightshim after that he has found him.9. It may thus be made to appear, that thereis an ethics connected with theology, which maycome into play, anterior to the clear view of anyof its objects. More especially, we do not needto be sure of God, ere we ought to have certainfeelings, or at least certain aspirations towardshim. For this purpose we do not need, fullyand absolutely to believe that God is. It isenough that our minds cannot fully and absolutelyacquiesce in the position that God is not.To be fit subjects for our present argument, wedo not need to have explored that territory ofnature which is within our reach ; and thencegathered, in the traces of a designer's hand theOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 267positive conclusion that there is a God. It isenough if we have not traversed, throughout allits directions and in all its extent, the sphere ofimmensity ; and if we have not scaled the mysteriousaltitudes of the eternity that is past ; nor,after having there searched for a divinity invain, have come at length to the positive and theperemptory conclusion, that there is not a God.In a word, it is quite enough, that man is barelya finite creature, who has not yet put forth hisfaculties on the question whether God is ; neitherhas yet so ranged over all space and all time, asdefinitely to have ascertained that God is not —but with whom though in ignorance of all proofs,it still remains a possibility that God may be.10. Now to this condition, there attaches amost clear and incumbent morality. It is to goin quest of that unseen benefactor, who foraught I know, has ushered me into existence,and spread so glorious a panorama around me.It is to probe the secret of my being and mybirth ; and, if possible, to make discoverywhether it was indeed the hand of a benefactor,that brought me forth from the chambers of nonentity,and gave me place and entertainmentin that glowing territory, which is lighted upwith the hopes and the happiness of livingmen. It is thus that the very conception of aGod throws a responsibility after it ; and thatduty, solemn and imperative duty, stands asso-268 ON THE DEFECTS AND USEScited with the thought of a possible deity, aswell as with the sight of a present deity, standingin full manifestation before us. Even anteriorto all knowledge of God, or when thatknowledge is in embryo, there is both a pathof irreligion and a path of piety ; and that lawwhich denounces the one and gives to the otheran approving testimony, may find in him who isstill in utter darkness about his origin and hisend, a fit subject for the retribution which shedeals in. He cannot be said to have borne disregardto the will of that God, whom he has found.But his is the guilt of impiety, in that he hasborne disregard to the knowledge of that God,whom he was bound by every tie of gratitude toseek after — a duty not founded on the proofsthat may be exhibited for the being of a God,but a duty to which even the most slight andslender of presumptions should give rise. Andwho can deny that, antecedent to all close andcareful examination of the proofs, there are atleast many presumptions in behalf of a God, tomeet the eye of every observer ? Is there any sohardy as to deny, that the curious workmanshipof his frame may have had a designer and anarchitect, that the ten thousand independent circumstanceswhich must be united ere he canhave a moment's ease, and the failure of any oneof which would be agony, may not have met atrandom, but that there may be a skilful andOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 269unseen hand to have put them together into onewondrous concurrence, and that never ceases touphold it ; that there may be a real and livingartist, whose fingers did frame the economy ofactual things, and who hath so marvellouslysuited all that is around us to our senses and ourpowers of gratification ? Without affirming aughtwhich is positive, surely the air that we breathe,and the beautiful light in which we expatiate,these elements of sight and sound so exquisitelyfitted to the organs of the human frame-work,may have been provided by one who did benevolentlyconsult in them our special accommodation.The graces innumerable that lie widelyspread over the face of our world, the gloriousconcave of heaven that is placed over us, thegrateful variety of seasons that like Nature'sshifting panorama ever brings new entertainmentand delight to the eye of spectators — these may,for aught we know, be the emanations of a creativemind, that originated our family and devisedsuch a universe for their habitation. Regardingthese, not as proofs, but in the humble light ofpresumptions for a God, they are truly enoughto convict us of foulest ingratitude — if we gonot forth in quest of a yet unknown, but at leastpossible or likely benefactor. They may not resolvethe question of a God. But they bring theheaviest reproach on our listlessness to the question; and show that, anterior to our assured270 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESbelief in his existence, there lies upon us a mostimperious obligation to ' stir ourselves up thatwe may lay hold of Him.'11. Such presumptions as these, if not somany demands on the belief of man, are atleast so many demands upon his attention ; andthen, for aught he knows, the presumptions onwhich he ought to enquire may be more andmore enhanced, till they brighten into proofswhich ought to convince him. The prima-facieevidence for a God may not be enough to decidethe question ; but it should at least decide manto entertain the question. To think upon howslight a variation either in man or in externalnature, the whole difference between physicalenjoyment and the most acute and most appallingof physical agony may turn ; to think howdelicate the balance is, and yet how surely andsteadfastly it is maintained, so as that the vastmajority of creatures are not only upheld incomfort, but often may be seen disporting themselvesin the redundance of gaiety ; to think ofthe pleasurable sensations wherewith every hourisenlivened, and how much the most frequentand familiar occasions of life are mixed up withhappiness ; to think of the food, and the recreation,and the study, and the society, and thebusiness, each having an appropriate relish ofits own, so as in fact to season with enjoymentthe great bulk of our existence in the world ; toOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 271think that, instead of living in the midst ofgrievous and incessant annoyance to all ourfaculties, we should have awoke upon a worldthat so harmonized with the various senses ofman, and both gave forth such music to his earand to his eye such manifold loveliness ; tothink of all these palpable and most preciousadaptations — and yet to care not, whether in thiswide universe there exists a being who has hadany hand in them — to riot and regale oneself tothe uttermost in the midst of all this profusion —and yet to send not one wishful inquiry afterthat Benevolence which for aught we know mayhave laid it at our feet — this, however shadedfrom our view the object of the question may be,is, from its very commencement, a clear outrageagainst its ethical proprieties. If that veil ofdim transparency, which hides the Deity fromour immediate perceptions, were lifted up ; andwe should then spurn from us the manifestedGod — this were direct and glaring impiety. Butanterior to the lifting of that veil, there may beimpiety. It is impiety to be so immersed as weare,in the busy objects and gratifications oflife ; and yet to care not whether there be agreat and a good spirit by whose kindness it isthat life is upholden. It needs not that this spiritshould reveal himself in characters that forceour attention to him, ere the guilt of our impietyhas begun. But ours is the guilt of impiety, in272 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESnot lifting our attention towards God, in notseeking after Him if haply we may find Him. fi12. Man is not to blame, if an atheist, becauseof the want of proof. But he is to blame, if anatheist, because he has shut his eyes. He isnot to blame, that the evidence for a God has notbeen seen by him, if no such evidence therewere within the field of his observation. Buthe is to blame, if the evidence have not beenseen, because he turned away his attention fromit. That the question of a God may lie unresolvedin his mind, all he has to do, is to refusea hearing to the question. He may abide withoutthe conviction of a God, if he so choose.But this his choice is matter of condemnation.To resist God after that He is known, is criminalitytowards Him ; but to be satisfied that Heshould remain unknown, is like criminalitytowards Him. There is a moral perversity ofspirit with him who is willing, in the midst ofmany objects of gratification, that there shouldnot be one object of gratitude. It is thus that,even in the ignorance of God, there may be aresponsibility towards God. The Discerner ofthe heart sees, whether, for the blessings innumerablewherewith He has strewed the path ofevery man, He be treated, like the unknownbenefactor who was diligently sought, or likethe unknown benefactor who was never caredfor. In respect, at least of desire after God, theOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 273same distinction of character may be observedbetween one man and another — whether God bewrapt in mystery, or stand forth in full developmentto our world. Even though a mantle ofdeepest obscurity lay over the question of Hisexistence ; this would not efface the distinction,between the piety on the one hand whichlaboured and aspired after Him ; and theimpiety upon the other which never missedthe evidence that it did not care for, and sogrovelled in the midst of its own sensuality andselfishness. The eye of a heavenly witness isupon all these varieties ; and thus, whether itbe darkness or whether it be dislike which hathcaused a people to be ignorant of God, thereis with Him a clear principle of judgment, thatHe can extend even to the out fields of atheism.13. It would appear then, that, even in theinitial state of the human mind on the questionof a God, there is an impellent force upon theconscience, which man ought to obey, and whichhe incurs guilt by resisting. We do not speakof that light which irradiates the termination ofthe inquirer's path, but of that embryo or rudimentallight which glimmers over the outset ofit; which serves at least to indicate the commencementof his way ; and which, for aught heknows, may brighten, as he advances onwards, tothe blaze of a full and finished revelation. At nopoint of this progress, does ' the trumpet give an274 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESuncertain sound,' extending, if not to those whostand on the ground of Antithesis, (which wehave already pronounced upon and we trustproved to be madly irrational) — at least to thosewho stand on the ground of Atheism, who,though strangers to the conviction, are certainlynot strangers to the conception of a Deity. Itis of the utmost practical importance, that eventhese are not beyond the jurisdiction of anobvious principle ; and that a right obligatorycall can be addressed to men so far back on thedomain of irreligion and ignorance. It is deeplyinteresting to know, by what sort of moral force,even an atheist ought to be evoked from the fastnesswhich he occupies — what are the notices,by responding to which, he should come forthwithopen eyes and a willing mind to this highinvestigation ; and by resisting which, he willincur a demerit, whereof a clear moral cognizancemight be taken, and whereon a righteous moralcondemnation might be passed. The "fishersof men" should know the uttermost reach oftheir argument ; and it is well to understand ofreligion, that, if she have truth and authority atall, there is a voice proceeding from her whichmight be universally heard — so that even theremotest families of earth, if not reclaimed byher, are laid by her under sentence of righteousreprobation .14. On this doctrine of the moral dynamics,OF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 275which operate and are in force, even in our stateof profoundest ignorance respecting God, theremay be grounded three important applications.15. The first is that all men, under all thepossible varieties of illumination, may neverthelessbe the fit subjects for a judicial cognizance.Their theology, seen through the hazy mediumof a dull and imperfect evidence, may havearisen no higher than to the passing suggestionof a God — a mere surmise or rumination aboutan unseen spirit, who, tending all their footsteps,was their guardian and their guide throughthe dangers of the pathless wilderness. Now inthis thought, fugitive though it be, in theseuncertain glimpses whether of a truth or of apossibility, there is that, to which the elementsof their moral nature might respond — so that tothem, there is not the same exemption from allresponsibility, which will be granted to the manwho is sunk in hopeless idiotism, or to the infantof a day old. Even with the scanty materialsof a heathen creed, a pure or a perverse moralitymight be grounded thereupon — whether, in thoselongings of a vague and undefined earnestnessthat arise from him who feels in his bosom anaffinity for God and godliness ; or, in the heedlessnessof him, who, careless of an unknownbenefactor, would have been alike careless,although he had stood revealed to his gaze, withas much light and evidence as is to be had in276 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESChristendom. These differences attest whatman is, under the dark economy of Paganism ;and so give token to what he would be, underthe bright economy of a full and finishedrevelation. It is thus that the Searcher of theheart will find out data for a reckoning, evenamong the rudest of nature's children, oramong those whose spiritual light glimmers mostfeebly. Even the simple theology of the desertcan supply the materials of a coming judgmentso that the Discerner of the inner man will beatno loss for a principle, on which He mightclearly and righteously try all the men of allthe generations that be upon the face of theearth.16. The second important bearing of this principleis on the subject of religious education.For what is true of a savage is true of a child.Its moral may outrun its argumentative light.Long anterior to the possibility of any soundconviction as to the character or existence of aGod, it may respond with sound and correctfeeling to the mere conception of Him. Wehold, that, on this principle, the practice of early,nay even of infantine religious education, may,in opposition to the invectives of Rousseau andothers, be fully and philosophically vindicated.For the effect of this anticipative process is, that,though it do not at once enlighten the mind onthe question of a God, it at least awakens to theOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. '277question. It does not consummate the process ;but, in as far as the moral precedes the intellectual,it makes good the preliminary steps of theprocess — insomuch that, in every Christian land,the youth and the manhood are accountable fortheir belief, because accountable for their use ortheir neglect of that enquiry, by which the beliefought to have been determined. They have allfrom their infancy heard of God. Many havebeen trained to think of Him, amidst a thousandassociations of reverence. Some, winder a roofof piety, have often lisped the prayers of earlychildhood to this unseen Being ; and, in theoften repeated sound of morning and eveningorisons, they have become familiar to His name.Even they who have grown up at random throughthe years of a neglected boyhood, are greatlywithin the limits of that responsibility for whichwe plead. They are fully possessed, if not withthe certainty, at least with the idea, of a greateternal Sovereign. The very imprecations ofprofaneness may have taught it to them. Thevery Sabbath they spend in riot and blasphemyat least remind them of a God. The worship-bellof the church they never enter, conveys tothem, if not the truth, at least an imagination ofthe truth, which, if it do not arrest them by asense of obligation, will leave guilt upon theirsouls — though it be guilt against a God who isunknown.c. II. u278 ON THE Defects AND USES17. But lastly, we may now perceive whatthat is, on which a teacher of religion finds anintroduction for his topic, even into the minds ofpeople in the lowest state both of moral and intellectualdebasement. They may have not thatin them, at the outset of his ministrations, whichcan enable them to decide the question of a God ;but they have at least that in them, which shouldsummon all their faculties to the respectful entertainmentof it. They have at least such asense of the divinity, as their own conscienceswill tell, should put them on the regards and theenquiries of moral earnestness. This is a clearprinciple which operates at the very commencementof a religious course ; and causes the firsttransition, from the darkness and insensibility ofalienated nature, to the feelings and attentions ofseriousness. The truth is, that there is a certainrudimental theology every where, on which thelessons of a higher theology may be grafted — asmuch as to condemn, if not to awaken theapathy of nature. What we have already saidof the relation in which the father of a starvinghousehold stands to the giver of an anonymousdonation, holds true of the relation in which allmen stand to the unseen or anonymous God.Though in a state of absolute darkness, andwithout one token or clue to a discovery, thereis room for the exhibition of moral differencesamong men — for even then, all the elements ofOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. '279morality might be at work, and all the tests ofmoral propriety might be abundantly verified ;and still more, after that certain likelihoods hadarisen, or some hopeful opening had occurred forinvestigating the secret of a God. There is theutmost moral difference that can be imaginedbetween the man who would gaze with intensescrutiny upon these likelihoods, and the man whoeither in heedlessness or aversion would turn hiseyes from them ; between the man who wouldseize upon such an opening and prosecute such aninvestigation to the uttermost, and the man whoeither retires or shrinks from the opportunity ofa disclosure that might burden him both withthe sense and with the services of some mightyobligation.18. And the same moral force which beginsthis enquiry, also continues and sustains it. Ifthere be power in the very conception of a Godto create and constitute the duty of seeking afterHim, this power grows and gathers with everyfootstep of advancement in the high investigation.If the thought of a merely possible deityhave rightfully awakened a sense of obligationwithin us to entertain the question ; the view ofa probable deity must enhance this feeling, andmake the claim upon our attention still moreurgent and imperative than at the first. Everynew likelihood makes the call louder, and thechallenge more incumbent binding than before.280 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESIn proportion to the light we had attained, wouldbe the criminality of resisting any further noticesor manifestations of that mighty Being withwhom we had so nearly and so emphatically todo.Under the impulse of a right principle, weshould follow on to know God — till, after havingdone full justice both to our opportunities andour powers, we had made the most of all theavailable evidence that was within our reach,and possessed ourselves of all the knowledgethat was accessible.19. We can conceive, how, under the influenceof these considerations, one should begin andprosecute the study of Natural Theology, till hehad exhausted it. But an interesting inquiryremains. We have already endeavoured to estimatewhat the proper leadings of the mind are,at the commencement and along the progressof the study. The remaining question is, whatwere the proper leadings of the mind at thetermination of it.20. And first it will be seen, on the principleswhich we have already endeavoured to establish,that no alleged defect of evidence in NaturalTheology can extinguish the use of it — a usewhich might still remain, under every conceivabledegree, whether of dimness or of distinctnessin its views. Even the faint anddistant probabilities of the subject, may stilllay upon us, the duty of careful and strenuousOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 281inquisition ; and that, long anterior to our fullacquaintance with the certainties of the subject.The verisimilitude of the question are the signalposts, by following the intimations of which, weareat length conducted to the verities of thequestion. Although Natural Theology thereforeshould fail to illuminate, yet, by a moral forceupon the attention, it may fully retain the powerto impel. Even if it should have but someevidence, however slender, this should put us atthe very least into the attitude of enquirers ; andthe larger the evidence, the more earnest andvigilant ought the enquiry to be. Thus a greatobject is practically fulfilled by Natural Theology.It gives us to conceive, or to conjecture, or toknow so much of God, that, if there be a profestmessage with the likely signatures upon it ofhaving proceeded from Him — though not ourduty all at once to surrender, it is at least ourbounden duty to investigate. It may not yet beentitled to a place in our creed ; but it is at leastentitled to a place in the threshold of the understanding— where it may wait the full and fairexamination of its credentials. It may not beeasy to measure the intensity of Nature's light ;but enough if it be a light, that, had we obeyedits intimations, would have guided us onwards tolarger manifestations of the Deity. If NaturalTheology but serve thus to fix and direct ourinquiries, it may fulfil a most important part as282 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESthe precursor of revelation. It may not be itselfthe temple ; but it does much by leading theway to it. Even at the outset period of ourthickest ignorance, there is a voice which callsupon us to go forth in quest of God. And inproportion as we advance, does the voice becomemore urgent and audible, in calling us onwardto further manifestations. It says much forNatural Theology, that it begins at the commencement,and carries us forward a part of thisway ; and it has indeed discharged a most importantfunction, if, at the point where its guessesor its discoveries terminate, it leaves us with asmuch light, as should make us all awake to thefurther notices of a God, or as shall leave ourheedlessness wholly inexcusable.21. There is a confused imagination withmany, that every new accession, whether ofevidence or of doctrine, made to the Natural,tends in so far, to reduce the claims or to depreciatethe importance of the Christian Theology.The apprehension is, that, as the latter wasdesigned to supplement the insufficiency of theformer, — then, the more that the arguments ofNatural Theology are strengthened, or its truthsare multiplied ; the more are the lessons of theChristian Theology unneeded and uncalled for.It is thus that the discoveries of reason are heldas superseding, or as casting a shade of insignificance,and even of discredit over the discoveriesOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 283of revelation. There is a certain dread or jealousy,with some humble Christians, of all thatincense which is offered at the shrine of thedivinity by human science — whose daring incursionon the field of theology, it is thought,will, in very proportion to the brilliancy of itssuccess, administer both to the proud independenceof the infidel, and to the pious alarm ofthe believer.2*2. But to mitigate this disquietude, it shouldbe recollected, in the first place, that, if Christianityhave real and independent evidence ofbeing a message from God, it will be all themore humbly and respectfully deferred to, shoulda previous natural theology have assured us ofHis existence, and thrown the radiance of aclear and satisfying demonstration over the perfectionsof His character. However plausibleits credentials may be, we should feel no greatinterest in its statements or its overtures, if wedoubted the reality of that Being from whom itprofesses to have come ; and it is precisely in asfar as we are preoccupied with the conviction of athrone in heaven, and of a God sitting upon thatthrone, that we should receive what bore thesignatures of an embassy from Him with awfulreverence.23. But there is another consideration stillmore decisive of the place and importance ofChristianity, notwithstanding every possible284 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESachievement by the light of nature. There aremany discoveries which, so far from alleviating,serve but to enhance the difficulties of the question.For example, though science has madeknown to us the magnitude of the universe, ithas not thereby advanced one footstep towardsthe secret of God's moral administration ; buthas, in fact, receded to a greater distance, fromthis now more hopeless, because now more complexand unmanageable problem than before.To multiply the data of a question, is not alwaysthe way to facilitate its solution ; but often theway, rather, to make it more inextricable. Andthis is precisely the effect of all the discoveriesthat can be made by natural theology, on thatproblem which it is the special office of Christianityto resolve. With every new argumentby which philosophy enhances the goodness andgreatness of the Supreme Being, does it deepenstill more the guilt and ingratitude of those whohave revolted against Him. The more emphaticallyit can demonstrate the care and benevolenceof God — the more emphatically, alongwith this, does it demonstrate the worthlessnessof man. The same light which irradiates theperfections of the divine nature, irradiates, withmore fearful manifestation than ever, the moraldisease and depravation into which humanityhas fallen. Had natural theology been altogetherextinct, and there had been no sense of aOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 285law or law-giver among men, we should havebeen unconscious of any difficulty to be redressed,of any dilemma from which we neededextrication. But the theology of nature and consciencetells us of a law ; and in proportion as itmultiplies the claims of the Law-giver in heaven,does it aggravate the criminality of its subjectsupon earth. With the rebellious phenomenonof a depraved species before our eyes, everynew discovery of God, but deepens the enigmaof man's condition in time, and of his prospectsin eternity ; and so makes the louder call forthat remedial system, which it is the very purposeof Christianity to introduce into the world.24. We hold that the theology of nature shedspowerful light on the being of a God ; and that,even from its unaided demonstrations, we canreach a considerable degree of probability, bothfor His moral and natural attributes. But whenit undertakes the question between God andman, this is That it finds to be impracticable.It is here where the main helplessness of naturelies. It is baffled in all its attempts to decipherthe state and the prospects of man, viewed in therelation of an offending subject to an offendedsovereign. In a word, its chief obscurity, andwhich it is wholly unable to disperse, is thatwhich rests on the hopes and the destiny of ourspecies. There is in it enough of manifestationto awaken the fears of guilt, but not enough286 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESagain to appease them. It emits, and audiblyemits, a note of terror ; but in vain do we listenfor one authentic word of comfort from any ofits oracles. It is able to see the danger, but notthe deliverance. It can excite the forebodingsof the human spirit, but cannot quell them —knowing just enough to stir the perplexity, butnot enough to set the perplexity at rest. It canstate the difficulty, but cannot unriddle the difficulty— having just as much knowledge as toenunciate the problem, but not so much as mightlead to the solution of the problem. There mustbe a measure of light, we do allow ; but, like thelurid gleam of a volcano, it is not a light whichguides, but which bewilders and terrifies. Itprompts the question, but cannot frame or furnishthe reply. Natural theology may see asmuch as shall draw forth the anxious interrogation,"What shall I do to be saved?" Theanswer to this comes from a higher theology.25. These are the grounds on which we wouldaffirm the insufficiency of that academic theism,which is sometimes set forth in such an aspectof completeness and certainty, as might seem toleave a revelation or a gospel wholly uncalledfor. Many there are who would gloss over thedifficulties of the question ; and who, in themidst of all that undoubted outrage which hasbeen inflicted by sinful creatures on the truthand the holiness and the justice of God, would,OF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 287by merging all the attributes of the Divinityinto a placid and undistinguishing tenderness,still keep their resolute hold of heaven, as atleast the splendid imagination, by which to irradiatethe destinies of our species. It is thus thatan airy unsupported romance has been heldforth as the vehicle, on which to embark all thehopes and the hazards of eternity. We wouldnot disguise the meagreness of such a system.We would not deliver the lessons of naturaltheology, without telling at the same time of itslimits. We abjure the cruelty of that sentimentalism,which, to hush the alarms of guiltyman, would rob the Deity of his perfections,and stamp a degrading mockery upon his law.When expounding the arguments of naturaltheology, along with the doctrines which itdimly shadows forth, we must speak of thedifficulties which itself suggests but which itcannot dispose of; we must make mention ofthe obscurities into which it aims, but which it isunable to dissipate — of its unresolved doubts — ofthe mysteries through which it vainly tries togrope its uncertain way — of its weary and fruitlessefforts — of its unutterable longings. Andshould, on the one hand, the speculations ofhuman ingenuity, and, on the other, the certaintiesof a well accredited revelation, comeforth to illuminate this scene of darkness — wemust not so idolize the light or the sufficiency of288 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESnature, as to turn from the firmament's meridianblaze, that we might witness and admire thetiny lustre of a glow-worm.26. The two positions are perfectly reconcilable— first of the insufficiency of naturalreligion ; and secondly, the great actual importanceof it. It is the wise and profound sayingof D'Alembert, that, ' man has too littlesagacity to resolve an infinity of questions,which he has yet sagacity enough to make.'Now this marks the degree, in which naturaltheology is sagacious— being able, from its ownresources, to construct a number of cases, whichat the same time it is not able to reduce. Thesemust be handed up for solution to a higher calculus; and thus it is, that the theology of natureand of the schools, the theology of the ethicalclass — though most unsatisfactory, when treatedas a terminating science — is most important,and the germ of developments at once preciousand delightful, when treated as a rudimentalone. It is a science, not so much of dicta asof desiderata ; and, from the way in which theseare met by the counterpart doctrines of thegospel, the light of a powerful and most pleasingevidence is struck out by the comparison betweenthem. It is that species of evidencewhich arises from the adaptation of a mouldto its counterpart form ; for there is preciselythis sort of fitting, in the adjustment whichOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 289obtains, between the questions of the naturaland the responses of the supernatural theology.For the problem which natural theology cannotresolve, the precise difficulty which it is whollyunable to meet or to overcome, is the restorationof sinners to acceptance and favour with a Godof justice. All the resources and expedients ofnatural theology are incompetent for this solution— it being, in fact, the great desideratumwhich it cannot satisfy. Still it performs animportant part in making us sensible of thedesideratum. It makes known to us our sin ;but it cannot make known to us salvation. Letus not overlook the importance of that which itdoes, in its utter helplessness as to that which itdoes not. It puts the question, though it cannotanswer the question ; and nowhere so much as atthis turning-point, are both the uses and the defectsof natural theology so conspicuously blended.27. Natural theology then, however little tobe trusted as an informer, yet as an enquirer,or rather as a prompter to enquiry, is of inestimableservice. It is a high function that shedischarges, for though not able to satisfy thesearch, she impels to the search. We are apt toundervalue, if not to set her aside altogether,when we compare her obscure and imperfectnotices with the lustre and the fulness of revelation.But this is because we overlook thevirtue that lies in the probabilities of a subject290 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESa virtue, either, on the one hand, to fasten theattention ; or, on the other hand, to condemn thewant of it. This we hold to be the precise officeof natural theology — and an office too, whichshe performs, not merely as the theology ofscience among those who listen to her demonstrationsin the academic hall ; but which shealso performs with powerful and practical effect,as the theology of conscience, throughout allthe classes of our general population. It is thisinitial work which makes her so useful, weshould say so indispensable, as a preliminaryto the gospel. Natural theology is quite overratedby those who would represent it as thefoundation of the edifice. It is not that, butrather the taper by which we must gropeour way to the edifice. The stability of afabric is not greater than the stability of thatupon which it rests ; and it were ascribing ageneral infirmity to revelation, to set it forth,as leaning upon natural theism, in the way that amathematical doctrine leans upon the axiomsor first principles of the science. Christianityrests on its own proper evidence ; and if, insteadof this, she be made to rest on an antecedentnatural religion, she becomes weak throughout,because weak radically. It is true that in theology,the natural goes before the revealed, evenas the cry of weakness or distress goes beforethe relief to which it aspires, and which it isprompted to seek after. It goes before, notOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 291synthetically in the order of demonstration, buthistorically in the mind of the enquirer. It isnot that natural religion is the premises, andChristianity the conclusion ; but it is thatnatural religion creates an appetite which itcannot quell ; and he who is urged thereby,seeks for a rest and a satisfaction which hecan only obtain in the fulness of the gospel.Natural theology has been called the basis ofChristianity. It would accord better with ourown views of the place which it occupies, and ofthe high purpose which it undoubtedly servesif it were called the basis of Christianization.28. The most important exemplification of theway in which natural religion bears upon Christianity,is furnished by the question of a sinner'sacceptance with God. Natural religion cansuggest to man the apprehension of his guilt ;for however dim her objective view of the Deity,there is no such dimness in her ethical notion ofwhat is due even to an uncertain God. Withouthaving seriously resolved the question, we maystand convicted to our own minds of a hardenedand habitual carelessness of the question. Ifour whole lives long have been spent in themidst of created things, without any serious orsustained effort of our spirits in quest of a Creator— if, as our consciences can tell, the wholedrift and practical earnestness of our thoughtsare towards the gifts, with but a rare and occasionalanxiety towards the Giver — if the sense of292 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESHim touch but lightly on our spirits, and we, byour perpetual lapses from the sacred to the secular,prove that our gravitation is to earth, andthat in truth our best-loved element is atheism —if the notices of a God, however indistinct wherewithwe are surrounded, instead of fastening ourregards on this high contemplation, do but disturbwithout at all influencing the general tenorof our engagements — these are things of whichthe light of Nature can take cognizance ; andthese are things because of which, and of their feltunworthiness, nature is visited by the misgivingsboth of remorse and of terror. She has dataenough on which to found the demonstrationand the sense of her own unworthiness ; andhence a general feeling of insecurity among allspirits, a secret but strong apprehension that allisnot right between them and God.29. This is not a matter of mere sensitive andpopular impression ; but in strict accordancewith the views of a calm and intelligent jurisprudence.It enters into the very essence of ourconception of a moral government, that it musthave sanctions — which could not have place,were there either to be no dispensation of rewardsand punishments ; or were the penalties,though denounced with all the parade and proclamationof law, to be never executed. It isnot the lesson of conscience, that God would,under the mere impulse of a parental fondnessOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. ±93for the creatures whom He had made, let downthe high state and sovereignty which belong toHim ; or that He would forbear the infliction ofthe penalty, because of any soft or timid shrinkingfrom the pain it would give to the objects ofHis displeasure. There is nothing either inhistory or nature, which countenances such animagination of the Deity, as that, in the re-letting of mere tenderness. He would stoop toany weak or unworthy compromise with guilt.The actual sufferings of life speak loudly andexperimentally against the supposition ; andwhen one looks to the disease and the agonyof spirit, and above all the hideous and unsparingdeath, with its painful struggles andgloomy forebodings, which are spread universallyover the face of the earth — we cannotbut imagine of the God who presides over suchan economy, that He is not a being who willfalter from the imposition of any severity, whichmight serve the objects of a high administration.Else all steadfastness of purpose, and steadfastnessof principle were fallen from. God wouldstand forth to the eye of His own creatures, aspectacle of outraged dignity. And He of w homwe image that He dwells in an inviolable sanctuary,the august monarch of heaven and earthwith a law by subjects dishonoured, by thesovereign unavenged — would possess but thesemblance and the mockery of a throne.C. II. X294 ON THE DEFECTS AND USES30. Such a conception is not only a violenceto the apprehensions of nature, but is evenacknowledged at times by our academic theists,as a violence to the sound philosophy of thesubject. The most striking testimony to thiseffect is that given by Dr. Adam Smith, on thefirst appearance of his " Theory of Moral Sentiments;" nor does it detract from its interest orits value, that he afterwards suppressed it, inthe subsequent editions of his work. — " All ournatural sentiments," he says, " prompt us tobelieve, that as perfect virtue is supposed necessarilyto appear to the Deity as it does to us, asfor its own sake and without any farther view,the natural and proper object of love andreward, so must vice of hatred and punishment.That the gods neither resent nor hurt was thegeneral maxim of all the different sects of theancient philosophy ; and if by resenting, beunderstood that violent and disorderly perturbationwhich often distracts and confounds thehuman heart ; or if by hurting, be understoodthe doing of mischief wantonly, and withoutregard to propriety or justice, such weaknessis undoubtedly unworthy of the divine perfection.But if it be meant that vice does notappear to the Deity to be for its own sake theobject of abhorrence and aversion, and what forits own sake, it is fit and reasonable shoukl bepunished, the truth of this maxim can by noOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 295means be so easily admitted. If we consult ournatural sentiments we are apt to fear lest beforethe holiness of God, vice should appear to bemore worthy of punishment, than the weaknessand imperfection of human virtue can ever seemto be of reward. Man when about to appearbefore a Being of infinite perfection, can feelbut little confidence in his own merit, or in theimperfect propriety of his own conduct. In thepresence of his fellow creatures he may oftenjustly elevate himself, and may often have reasonto think highly of his own character and conduct,compared to the still greater imperfectionof theirs. But the case is quite different, whenabout to appear before his infinite Creator. Tosuch a Being, he can scarcely imagine, that hislittleness and weakness should ever appear to betheproper objects either of esteem or of reward.But he can easily conceive how the numberlessviolations of duty, of which he has been guiltyshould render him the proper object of aversionand punishment ; neither can he see any reasonwhy the divine indignation should not be letloose, without any restraint, upon so vile aninsect as he is sensible that he himself mustappear to be. If he should still hope for happiness,he is conscious that he cannot demand itfrom the justice ; but he must entreat it fromthe mercy of God. Repentance, sorrow, humiliation,contrition at the thought of his past ON THE DEFECTS AND USESconduct, are upon this account the sentimentswhich become him, and seem to be the onlymeans which he has left, for appeasing that wrathwhich he knows he has justly provoked. Heeven distrusts the efficacy of all these, andnaturally fears lest the wisdom of God shouldnot, like the weakness of man, be prevailed uponto spare the crime by the most importunatelamentations of the criminal. Some other intercession,some other sacrifice, some other atonement,he imagines must be made for him, beyondwhat he himself is capable of making, before thepurity of the divine justice can be reconciled tohis manifold offences. The doctrines of revelationcoincide in every respect with these originalanticipations of nature ; and as they teach ushow little we can depend upon the imperfectionof our own virtue, so they show us at the sametime that the most powerful intercession hasbeen made, and that the most dreadful atonementhas been paid, for our manifold transgressionsand iniquities.".31. This interesting passage seems to havebeen written by its author, inter a true apprehensionof that dilemma, in which the world isinvolved. He admits a moral government onthe part of God. He admits a universal delinquencyon the part of man. And his feeling is,that the government would be nullified by amere act of indemnity, which rendered noOF NATURAL Theology. 297acknowledgment to the justice which had beenviolated, or to the authority of that law whichhad been trampled on. In these circumstances,he casts about as it were for an adjustment ; andputs forth a conjectural speculation ; and guesseswhat the provision should be, which, under anew economy, might be adopted for repairing adefect, that is evidently beyond all the resourcesof natural theism ; and proposes the very expedientof our profest revelation, for the resolvingof a difficulty which had been else impracticable.We deem it a melancholy fact, that thisnoble testimony to the need of a gospel, shouldhave disappeared in the posterior editions of hiswork — revised and corrected as they were byhis own hand. It is not for men to sit in thechair of judgment ; and never should they feela greater awe or tenderness upon their spirits,than when called to witness or to pronounceupon the aberrations of departed genius. Yetwhen one compares the passage he could at onetime have written, with the memoir that, afteran interval of many years, he gave to the worldof David Hume, that ablest champion of theinfidel cause — one fears lest, under the contagionof a near and withering intimacy with him, hisspirit may have imbibed of the kindred poison ;and he at length have become ashamed, of thehomage that he once had rendered to the worthand importance of Christianity.29H ON THE DEFECTS AND USES32. This notwithstanding remains one of thefinest examples of the way, in which the Naturalbears upon the Christian theology ; and of theoutgoings, by which, the one conducts to a in the other. We hold that there aremany such outgoings ; that at the uttermostmargin of the former there is a felt want, andthat in accurate counterpart to this, the latterhas something to offer in precise and perfectadaptation thereto. Now the great error of ouracademic theism, as commonly treated, is thatit expresses no want ; that it reposes in its ownfancied sufficiency ; and all its landing-placesare within itself, and along the uttermost limitsof its own territory. It is no reproach againstour philosophical moralists, that they have notstepped beyond the threshold of that j^eculium,which is strictly and appropriately theirs ; or notmade incursion into another department thantheir own. The legitimate complaint is, that, ontaking leave of their disciples, they warn themnot, of their being only yet at the outset or inthe prosecution of a journey, instead of havingreached the termination of it. They in fact takeleave of them, in the middle of an unprotectedhighway — when they should have reared afinger-post of direction to the places which liebeyond. The paragraph which we have nowextracted, was just such a finger-post — thoughtaken down, we deeply regret to say, by the veryOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 299hand that had erected it. Our veneration forhis name must not restrain the observation, that,by this, he undid the best service which a professorof moral science can render to humanity.Along the confines of its domain, there shouldbe raised, in every quarter, the floating signalsof distress, that its scholars, instead of beinghilled into the imagination that now they mayrepose as in so many secure and splendid dwellingplaces, should be taught to regard themonly as towers of observation— whence they haveto look for their ulterior guidance and their ulteriorsupplies, to the region of a conterminoustheology.33. There is a difficulty here in the theismof nature, within the whole compass of which, nosolution for it can be found. It will at leastafford a specimen of the way in which the onebears upon the other, if we state the method ofescape from this difficulty that has been providedin the theism of Christianity. The greatmoral problem which under the former waits tobe resolved, is to find acceptance in the mercyof God, for those who have braved His justice,and done despite to the authority of His law ;and that, without any compromise of truth ordignity. By the offered solution of the NewTestament, a channel has been opened up, througha high mediatorship between God and man,for the descent of a grace and a mercy the most.'JOO ON THE DEFECTS AND USESexuberant on a guilty world ; and through it, theovertures of reconciliation are extended untoall ; and a sceptre of forgiveness, but of forgivenessconsecrated by the blood of a great atonement,has been stretched forth, even to the mostpolluted and worthless outcasts of the humanfamily ; and thus the goodness of the divinityobtained its fullest vindication, yet not a goodnessat the expense of justice — for the affrontdone to an outraged law, has been amply repairedby the homage to its authority of an illustrioussufferer, who took upon himself the burdenof all those penalties which we should haveborne ; and, in the spectacle of whose deep andmysterious sacrifice, God's hatred of moral evilstands forth in most impressive demonstration.So that, instead of a conflict or a concussionbetween these two essential attributes of Hisnature, a way has been found, by which each isenhanced to the uttermost, and a flood of mostcopious and convincing illustration has beenpoured upon them both.34. This specimen will best illustrate of moralphilosophy, even in its most finished state, that itis not w hat may be called a terminating science.It is at best but a science in transitu ; and itslessons are those of a preparatory school. Itcontains but the rudiments of a nobler acquirement; and he discharges best the functions of ateacher, not who satiates but who excites the aj)-OF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 301petite, and then leaves it wholly luiappeased.This arises from the real state and bearing of thescience, as being a science, not so much of doctrinesas of desiderata. At most it leaves itsscholars in a sort of twilight obscurity. And, ifa just account is rendered of the subject, therewill unavoidably be the feeling, that, instead ofhaving reached a secure landing-place, we havebroken off, as in the middle of an unfinisheddemonstration.35. That indeed is a most interesting adjustmentbetween Moral Philosophy and the ChristianTheology, which is represented to us by theunresolved difficulties of the one science, and thereduction which is made of these difficulties inthe other. We have far the most importantexample of this, in the doctrine of the atonementthat sublime mystery, by which the attributesof the divinity have all been harmonized ; andthe most liberal outlet has been provided formercy to the offender, while still the truth andjustice of the Lawgiver have been vindicated, andall the securities of His moral government areupholden. By the disloyalty of our race, theprinciples of Heaven's jurisprudence are broughtto a test of utmost delicacy ; for there seems tobe no other alternative, than that man shouldperish in overwhelming vengeance, or that Godshould become a degraded sovereign. It nullifiesthe moral government of the world, if all forceC. II. Y302 ON THE DEFECTS AND USESand authority be taken from its sanctions ; andit is a problem Avhicli even ' angels desired tolook into,' how the breach could be healed,which had been made by this world's rebellion,and yet the honour of heaven's high Sovereignbe untarnished by the compromise. The onescience lands us in the difficulty ; and by theother alone it is, that we are extricated. Theone presents us with the case ; but, for thesolution of it, we must recur to a higher calculus,to an instrument of more powerful discovery andof fuller revelation. The one starts a questionwhich itself cannot untie; and the other furnishesthe satisfactory response to it. The desideratumof the former meets with the doctrine of thelatter ; and it is this frequent adjustment, as ofa mould to its counterpart die ; it is this closeand manifold adaptation between the wants ofnature and the overtures of a profest revelation ;it is this fitting of the supernal application tothe terrestrial subject upon which it is laid; itis the way, more especially, in which the disruptionbetween heaven and earth has beenrestored, and the frightful chasm that sin hadmade on the condition and prospects of ourspecies is wholly repaired to all who will throughthe completeness of an offered Saviour ; it is thismingled harmony of the greater and lesser lights,which gives evidence that both have been kindledby the same hand, and that it is He who put theOF NATURAL THEOLOGY. 303candle which glimmers so feebly into my heart,it is He also who poured the noonday effulgenceof Christianity around me.36. It were foreign to our prescribed subjectto attempt an exposition, in however brief andrapid a sketch, of the credentials of Christianity.We only remark, that, amid the lustre andvariety of its proofs, there is one strikingly analogous,and indeed identical in principle, withour own peculiar argument. If in the system ofexternal nature, we can recognize the evidenceof God being its author, in the adaptationswherewith it teems to the Moral and IntellectualConstitution of Man — there is room and opportunityfor this very evidence in the book of anexternal revelation. What appears in the constructionof a world might be made to appear asmanifestly in the constriction of a volume, whoseobjective truths may present as obvious andskilful an accommodation to our mental economy,as do the objective things of a created universe.And it is not the less favourable, for an indicationof its divine original, that whereas Nature, asbeing the original system, abounds with thosewitnesses which harmonize with the mental constitutionin a state of health — Christianity, asbeing a restorative system, abounds in witnessesto the same constitution in a state of disease.We are not sure but that in the latter, from itsvery design, we shall meet with still more delicate304 ON NATURAL THEOLOGY.and decisive tests of a designer, than have yetbeen noticed in the former ; and certain it is,that the wisdom and goodness and even power ofa moral architect, may be as strikingly evincedin the reparation, as in the primary establishmentof a Moral Nature.FINIS.J. WHITIISOHAM, IIJOKS CJDIRT, Chancery Une.