THE BRIDGEWATER TREATISESON THE POWER WISDOM AND GOODNESS OF GODAS MANIFESTED IN THE CREATIONTREATISE ION THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THE MORALAND INTELLECTUAL CONSTITUTION OF MANBY THE REV. T. CHALMERS Did.IN TWO VOLUMESON THE POWER WISDOM AND GOODNESS OF GODAS MANIFESTED IN THE ADAPTATIONOF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THE MORAL ANDINTELLECTUAL CONSTITUTION OF MANBY THEREV. THOMAS CHALMERS D. D.PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY IN THE UNIVERSITYOF EDINBURGHVOL IAliLONDONWILLIAM PICKERING(o2>0ZLIBRARYScraps INSTITUTIONOF OCEANOGRAPHYUNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIALA Jolly. CA£i1C. Nottingham, Took COURT, CHANCERY LANE.RIGHT HONOURABLE AND RIGHT REVERENDCHARLES JAMES,LORD BISHOP OF LONDON.MY LORD,Your Lordship's personal kindness to myselfwould alone have inclined me to solicitfor this work the honour of your patronageand name.But I must further confess the peculiarsatisfaction which I feel, in offering it as atribute and a public acknowledgment ofmy admiration for an order of men, who,more than all others, have enriched by theirlabours the moral and theological literatureof England.VI DEDICATION.In the prosecution of that arduous andhitherto almost unattempted theme whichthe late President of the Royal Societyhas, by your Lordship's recommendation,assigned to me, I have derived greater aidfrom the views and reasonings of BishopButler, than I have been able to findbesides, in the whole range of our existentauthorship.With his powerful aid I commenced thehigh investigation to which your Lordshiphas called me. To imagine that I havecompleted it, would be to forget at oncethe fulness of the Creation, and the finitudeof the Creature. Whatever the departmentof Nature may be which we explore, inquestof evidence for the perfections of itsAuthor, there is no inquirer, though even ofthe most transcendent powers, who shallever attain the satisfaction of having traversedthe whole length and breadth ofthe land. He will have but entered andproceeded a certain way, within the marginDEDICATION. VIIof a territory, whose riches are inexhaustible.That your Lordship may long continue,by your zeal, and talents, and lofty erudition,to sustain the honours, and to promotethe vital good of our Religious Establishmentsin this empire, is the ferventdesire and prayer ofMy Lord,Your Lordship's most obligedand obedient Servant,Thomas Chalmers.Eden. May 13, 1833.NOTICE.The series of Treatises, of which the present is one, ispublished under the following circumstances :The Right Honourable and Reverend FrancisHenry, Earl of Bridgewater, died in the month ofFebruary, 1829 ; and by his last Will and Testament, bearingdate the 25th of February, 1825, he directed certainTrustees therein named to invest in the public funds thesum of Eight thousand pounds sterling; this sum, withthe accruing dividends thereon, to be held at the disposalof the President, for the time being, of the Royal Societyof London, to be paid to the person or persons nominatedby him. The Testator further directed, that the person orpersons selected by the said President should be appointedto write, print, and publish one thousand copies of a workOn the Porter, Wisdom, and Goodness of God, as manifestedin the Creation ; illustrating such tvork hy all reasonablearguments, as for instance the variety and formation ofGod's creatures in the animal, vegetable, and mineral kingdoms; the effect of digestion, and thereby of conversion ;the construction of the hand of man, and an infinite varietyof other arguments ; as also by discoveries ancient andmodern, in arts, sciences, and the 7vhole extent of literature.He desired, moreover, that the profits arising from the saleof the works so published should be paid to the authors ofthe works.The late President of the Royal Society, Davies Gilbert,Esq. requested the assistance of his Grace the Archbishopof Canterbury and of the Bishop of London, in determiningupon the best mode of carrying into effect the intentions ofthe Testator. Acting with their advice, and with the concurrenceof a nobleman immediately connected with thedeceased, Mr. Davies Gilbert appointed the following eightgentlemen to write separate Treatises on the differentbranches of the subject as here stated :THE REV. THOMAS CHALMERS, Did.PROFESSOR OF DIVINITY IN THE UNIVERSITY OF EDINBURGH.ON THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THEMORAL AND INTELLECTUAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN.JOHN KIDD, M. D. Fer. S.REGIUS PROFESSOR OF MEDICINE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.ON THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TO THEPHYSICAL CONDITION OF MAN.THE REV. WILLIAM Wheel, Mea. F.R.S.FELLOW OF TRINITY COLLEGE, Cambridge.ON ASTRONOMY AND GENERAL PHYSICS.SIR CHARLES BELL, K. H. F.R.S.THE HAND: ITS MECHANISM AND VITAL ENDOWMENTSAS EVINCING DESIGN.PETER MARK ROGET, Med.FELLOW OF *ND SECRETARY TO THE ROYAL Soleil Y.ON ANIMAL AND Vegetable PHYSIOLOGYXITHE REV. WILLIAM Auckland, D. D. F. R. S.CANON OF CHRIST CHURCH, AND PROFESSOR OF GEOLOGY IN THEUNIVERSITY OF OXFORD.ON GEOLOGY AND MINERALOGY.THE REV. WILLIAM KIRBY, M. A. F. R. S.ON THE HISTORY, HABITS, AND INSTINCTS OF ANIMALS.WILLIAM PROUT, Med. Fer. S.ON CHEMISTRY, METEOROLOGY, AND THE FUNCTIONOF DIGESTION.His Royal Highness the Duke of Sussex, Presidentof the Royal Society, having desired that no unnecessarydelay should take place in the publication of theabove mentioned treatises, they will appear at short intervals,as they are ready for publication.CONTENTSTO THE FIRST VOLUME.INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER 7PART I.On the Adaptation of External Nature to theMoral Constitution of Man.Chap. I. On the Supremacy of Conscience 57II. Second General Argument.On the Inherent Pleasure of the Virtuous, andMisery of the Vicious Affections 98III. Third General Argument.The Power and Operation of Habit 133IV. On the General Adaptation of External Natureto the Moral Constitution of Man 158V. On the Special and Subordinate Adaptations ofExternal Nature to the Moral Constitution ofMan 187VI. On those Special Affections which conduce to theCivil and Political Well-being of Society . 2 1 8PREFACE.It is an incongruous thing, when there isany want of conformity between the subjectmatter of an essay, and its title. The objectof this explanatory preface is to shew that itis an incongruity into which we have notfallen.In the first place we were not in fair circumstancesfor expounding the adaptationof external nature to the mental constitutionof man, till we had made manifest in somedegree what that constitution is. There isno distinct labourer in that conjunct demonstrationof the divine attributes which is nowbeing offered to the world, to whom thisessentially preliminary topic had been assignedas the subject of a separate work.It was therefore unavoidable, that, to a certainextent we should undertake it ourselves,else, in proceeding to the construction of ourargument, we might have incurred the chargeC. B)i PREFACE.of attempting to rear a superstructure, withouta foundation to rest upon.But in the execution of this introductorypart of our subject, we could scarcely haverefrained from noticing the indications ofdivine wisdom and goodness in our mentalconstitution itself, even though our strictlyproper, because our assigned task, was topoint out these indications in the adaptationof this constitution to external nature. Wecould not forget that the general purpose ofthe work was to exhibit with all possiblefulness the aro-ment for the character of theDeity, as grounded on the laws and appearancesof nature. But we should have leftout a very rich and important track ofargument, had we forborne all observationon the evidence for the divine perfections, inthe structure and processes of the mind itself,and confined ourselves to the evidence affordedby the relations which the mind boreto the external world. In the adaptation ofexternal nature to man's physical constitution,there are many beautiful and decisiveindications of a God. But prior to these,there is a multitude of distinct indications,both in the human anatomy, and the humanPREFACE.physiology, viewed by themselves, and asseparate objects of contemplation. Andaccordingly, in this joint undertaking, therehave been specific labourers assigned to eachof these departments. But we have not hadthe advantage of any previous expounderfor the anatomy of the mind, or the physiologyof the mind ; and we felt that to haveleft unnoticed all the vivid and various inscriptionsof a Divinity, which might becollected there, would have been to withholdfrom view some of the best attestations inthe whole range and economy of nature, forthe wisdom and benevolence of its greatarchitect.But to construct a natural theology onany subject, it is not necessary to make ofthat subject a full scientific exposition. Theone is as distinct from the other, as the studyof final is from the study of efficient causes —the former often lying patent to observation,while the latter may be still involved indeepest obscurity. It were a manifest injuryto our cause, it were to bedim the nativelustre of its evidences — did we enter with itamong the recondite places of the mentalphilosophy, and there enwrap it in the PREFACE.dignity of questions yet unresolved, in themist of controversies yet unsettled. Often,though not always, the argument for a Godinsome phenomenon of nature depends uponits reality, and not upon its analysis, or thephysical mode of its origination — on the undoubtedtruth that so it is, and not on theundetermined, perhaps indeterminable questionof how it is. We should not haveshrunk from the obscurer investigation, hadit been at all necessary. But that is noreason why time must be consumed on matterswhich are at once obscure and irrelevant.It is all the more fortunate that we are nottoo long detained from an entry on ourproper task, among the depths or the difficultiesof any preliminary disquisition whichcomes before it — and that the main strengthof the argument which our mental constitution,taken by itself, furnishes to the causeof theism, lies not in those subtilties whichare apprehended only by few, but in certainbroad and palpable generalities which arerecognised by all men.But there is another explanation whichwe deem it necessary to make, in order fullyto reconcile the actual topics of our essay,PREFACE. Owith the designation which has been prefixedto it.If by external nature be meant all that isexternal to mind, then the proper subjectof our argument is the adaptation of thematerial to the mental world. But if byexternal nature be meant all that is externalto one individual mind, then would the subjectbe very greatly extended ; for besidethe reciprocal influence between that individualmind, and all sensible and materialthings, we should consider the reciprocalinfluence between it and all other minds.By this contraction of the idea from themental world to but one individual memberof it ; and this proportional extension in theidea of external nature from the materialcreation to the whole of that living, as wellas inanimate creation, by which any singleman is surrounded ; we are introduced notmerely to the action and reaction which obtainbetween mind and matter ; but, whichis far more prolific of evidence for a Deity,to the action and reaction which obtain betweenmind and mind. We thus find accessto a much larger territory, which shouldotherwise be left unexplored — and have the6 PREFACE.opportunity of tracing the marks of a divineintelligence in the mechanism of humansociety, and in the frame-work of the socialand economical systems to which men areconducted, when they adhere to that light,and follow the impulse of those affectionswhich God has bestowed on them.But in the progress of our argument, wecome at length to be engaged with the adaptationsof external nature, even in the moststrict and limited sense of the term. In theorigin and rights of property, as well as inthe various economic interests of society, webehold the purest exemplification of thatadjustment which obtains between the materialsystem of things and man's moralnature — and when we proceed to treat of hisintellectual constitution, it will be found thatthe harmonies between the material and themental worlds are still more numerous, andmore palpably indicative of that wisdomwhich originated both, and conformed themwith exquisite and profound skill to eachother.INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.GENERAL AND PRELIMINARY OBSERVATIONS.1. External nature, when spoken of In contradistinctionto mind, suggests chiefly, if not solely,the idea of the material universe. Even thoughrestricted to this limited and proper sense of theterm, we should still behold the proofs of beneficentdesign in the witnesses of the one to the other ;but far more abundantly and decisively, it mustbe confessed, in the adaptation of external natureto the physical, than in its adaptation to themoral and intellectual constitution of man. Forfully developing our peculiar argument, an enlargementof the meaning commonly affixed toexternal nature seems indispensable, — an enlargementthat we should not have ventured on, if inso doing we crossed the legitimate boundaries ofour assigned subject ; and that, for the merepurpose of multiplying our topics, or possessingourselves of a wider field of authorship. But thetruth is, that did we confine our notice to therelations which obtain between the world of mindand the world of matter, we should be doing8 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.injustice to our own theme, by spoiling it ofgreatly more than half its richness, — beside leavingunoccupied certain fertile tracts of evidence,which, if not entered upon in our division of thegeneral work, must, as is obvious from the natureof the respective tasks, be altogether omitted inthe conjunct demonstration that is now beingoffered to the public, of the Goodness and Wisdomof the Deity.2. It is true that, with even but one solitaryhuman mind in midst of the material creation,certain relations could be traced between themthat would indicate both skill and a benevolentpurpose on the part of Him who constructed theframework of nature, and placed this single occupierwithin its confines. And, notwithstandingthis limitation, there would still be preserved touscertain striking adaptations in the externalsystem of things to the intellectual, and some too,though fewer and less noticeable, to the moralconstitution of man. But, born as man obviouslyis for the companionship of his fellows, it mustbe evident that the main tendencies and aptitudesof his moral constitution should be looked for inconnection with his social relationships, with theaction and reaction which take place betweenman and the brethren of his species. We thereforeunderstand external nature to comprehend init, not merely all that is external to mind, but allthat is external to the individual possessor of aINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 9human mind, — who is surrounded not only by aneconomy of complex and extended materialism,but who is surrounded by other men and otherminds than his own. Without this generalizedview of external nature, we should be left in possessionof but scanty materials for evincing itsadaptation to the moral constitution of man,though an ample held of observation would stilllie open to us, in unfolding the aptitude of thehuman understanding, with its various instinctsand powers, for the business of physical investigation.For the purpose then of enhancing ourargument, or rather of doing but justice to it, wepropose to consider not merely those relationsbetween mind and matter, but those relationsbetween mind and mind, the establishment ofwhich attests a wise and beneficent contrivance.We shall thus be enabled to enter on a departmentof observation distinct from that of all theother labourers in this joint enterprize, and whiletheir provinces respectively are to trace the handof a great and good Designer in the mechanismof the heavens, or the mechanism of the terrestrialphysics, or the mechanism of various organicstructures in the animal and vegetable kingdoms ;it will be part of ours, more especially, to pointout the evidences of a forming and presiding, andwithal benevolent intelligence in the mechanismof human society. —3. ewe conceive of external nature then that it10 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.comprehends more than the mute and unconsciousmaterialism, and the objective truth — itcomprehends also the living society by whichthe possessor of a moral and intellectual constitutionis surrounded. Did we exclude the latterfrom our regards, we should be keeping out ofvicar a number of as wise, and certainly, in thedegree that mind is of higher consideration thanbody, of far more beneficial and important adaptationsthan any which are presented to ournotice in the mechanical, or chemical, or physiologicaldepartments of creation. Both in the reciprocitiesof domestic life, and in those widerrelations, which bind large assemblages of meninto political and economical systems, we shalldiscern the incontestable marks of a divine wisdomand care; principles or laws of human naturein virtue of which the social economy moves rightlyand prosperously onward, and apart from whichall would go into derangement ; affinities betweenman and his fellows, that harmonize the individualwith the general interests, and are obviouslydesigned as provisions for the well-beingboth of families and nations.4. It might help to guard us against a possiblemisconception, if now, at the outset of our argument,we shall distinguish between the moralconstitution of man, and that moral system ofdoctrine which embodies in it the outer truths orprinciples of ethical science. The two are asINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 11distinct from each other, as are the objective andsubjective in any quarter of contemplation whatever,and ought no more to be confounded than,in optics, the system of visible things with theanatomical structure of the eye. r The organwhich perceives or apprehends truth is separatein reality, and should be kept separate in thought,from the truth which is apprehended ; and thusit is that we should view the moral constitutionof man and the moral system of virtue as diverseand distinct from each other. \ The one belongsto the physiology of the mind, and is collected,like all other experimental truth, by a diligentobservation of facts and phenomena. The other,involving, as it does, those questions which relateto the nature of virtue, or to the origin and principlesof moral obligation, directs the attention ofthe mind to another quarter than to its own processes,and presents us with a wholly distinctmatter of contemplation. ' The acts of moraljudgment or feeling should not be confoundedwith the objects of moral judgment or feeling,any more, in fact, than the rules of logic shouldbe confounded w ili the laws which govern the procedureof the human understanding. > The question,"what is virtue?' or " what is that whichconstitutes virtue ?" is one thing. The question,what is the mental process by which mantakes cognizance of virtue?" is another. Theyare as distinct from each other as are the princeIntroductory Chapter.cipher of good reasoning from the processes of thereasoning faculty. It is thus that the mentalphilosophy, whose proper and legitimate provinceis the physics of the mind, should be keptdistinct from logic and ethics, and the philosophyof taste. The question, " what is beautiful inscenery?" or " what is right in character?" orwhat is just in argument?" is distinct from thequestion, " what is the actual and historical procedureof the mind in addressing itself to theserespective objects of contemplation?" as distinct,indeed, as the question of " Quid est"' is fromQuid oportet ;" or as the question of " M-^hat is"from " what ought to be"* A sound objectivesystem of ethics may be framed, irrespective ofany attention that we give to man's moral constitution.A sound system of logic may be framed,irrespective of any attention that we give to man'sintellectual constitution. And on the other hand,however obscure or unsettled these sciences maystill be ; and more especially, whatever controversiesmay yet obtain respecting the nature andthe elementary principles of virtue,— such not-seethe Introduction to Sir James Macintosh's EthicalDissertations*' The purpose of the physical sciences, throughoutall their provinces, is to answer the question, " What is?" Thepurpose of the moral sciences is to answer the question, " Whatought to be ?" — It should be well kept in view, that mentalphilosophy is one province of the physical sciences, and belongs tothe first of these two departments, being distinct from moralphilosophy, whi( h forms the second of them, v^INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 13withstanding, may be the palpable and ascertainedfacts in the nature and history of subjectiveman, that, both on his mental constitution,and on the adaptation thereto of external nature,there might remain a clear and unquestionableargument for the power, and wisdom, and goodnessof God.5. Having thus referred our argument, not tothe constitution of morality in the abstract, butto the constitution of man's moral nature — aconcrete and substantive reality, made up offacts that come within the domain of observation ;let us now consider how it is that natural theologyproceeds with her demonstrations, on other constitutionsand other mechanisms in creation, thatwe may learn from this in what manner weshould commence and prosecute our labours, onthat very peculiar, we had almost said, untriedfield of investigation which has been assignedto us. ." 'i '-''6. The chief then, or at least the usual subject-matterof the argument for the wisdom and goodnessof God, is the obvious adaptation wherewithcreation teems, throughout all its borders, ofmeans to a beneficial end. And it is manifestthat the argument grows in strength with thenumber and complexity of these means. Thegreater the number of independent circumstanceswhich must meet together for the production ofa useful result — then, in the actual fact of their14 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.concurrence, is there less of probability for itsbeing the effect of chance, and more of evidencefor its being the effect of design. A beneficentcombination of three independent elements is notso impressive or so strong an argument for adivinity, as a similar combination of six or tensuch elements. And every mathematician, conversantin the doctrine of probabilities, knowshow with every addition to the number of theseelements, the argument grows in force and intensity,with a rapid and multiple augmentationtill at length, in some of the more intricate andmanifold conjunctions, those more particularlyhaving an organic character and structure, couldwe but trace them to an historical commencement,we should find, on the principles of computationalone, that the argument against theirbeing fortuitous products, and for their being theproducts of a scheming and skilful artificer, wasaltogether overpowering.7. We might apply this consideration to variousdepartments in nature. In astronomy, the independentelements seem but few and simple,which must meet together for the composition ofa planetarium. One uniform law of gravitation,with a force of projection impressed by one impulseon each of the bodies, could suffice toaccount for the revolutions of the planets roundthe sun, and of the satellites around then-primaries,along with the diurnal revolution ofINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. loeach, and the varying inclinations of the axesto the pkmes of their respective orbits. Out ofsuch few contingencies, the actual orrery ofthe heavens has been framed. But in anatomy,to fetch the opposite illustration from anotherscience, what a complex and crowded combinationof individual elements must first be effected,ere we obtain the composition of an eye, — forthe completion of which mechanism, there mustnot only be a greater number of separate laws,as of refraction and muscular action and secretion; but a vastly greater number of separateand distinct parts, as the lenses, and the retina,and the optic nerve, and the eye-lid and eyelashes,and the various muscles wherewith thisdelicate organ is so curiously beset, and each ofwhich is indispensable to its perfection, or to theright performance of its functions. It is passingmarvellous that we should have more intenseevidence for a God in the construction of an eye,than in the construction of the mighty planetarium— or that, within less than the compass ofa handbreadth, we should find in this lowerworld a more pregnant and legible inscription ofthe Divinity, than can be gathered from a broadand magnificent survey of the skies, lighted upthough they be, with the glories and the wondersof astronomy.8. But while nothing can be more obvious thanthat the proof for design in any of the naturalIG INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.formations, is the stronger, in proportion to thenumber of separate and independent elementsM which have been brought together, and each ofwhich contributes essentially to its usefulness —we have long held it of prune importance to theatheistical argument, that clear exhibition shouldbe made of a distinction not generally advertedto, which obtains between one set of these elementsand another. We shall illustrate this bya material, ere we apply it to a mental workmanship.9. There is, then, a difference of great argumentativeimportance in this whole question,between the Laws of Matter and the Dispositionsof Matter. In astronomy, for example, whenattending to the mechanism of the planetarysystem, we should instance at most but twolaws — the law of gravitation ; and perhaps thelaw of perseverance, on the part of all bodies,whether in a state of rest or of motion, till interruptedby some external cause. But had we tostate the dispositions of matter in the planetarysystem, we should instance a greater number ofparticulars. We should describe the arrangementof its various parts, whether in respect tosituation, or magnitude, or figure — as the positionof a large and luminous mass in the centre, andof the vastly smaller but opaque masses whichcirculated around it, but at such distances as notto interfere with each other, and of the stillIntroductory CHAPTER. 17smaller secondary bodies which revolved aboutthe planets : And we should include in this descriptionthe impulses in one direction, and nearlyin one plane, given to the different moving bodies ;and so regulated, as to secure the movement ofeach, in an orbit of small eccentricity. The dispositionsof matter in the planetary system werefixed at the original setting up of the machine.The laws of matter were ordained for the workingof the machine. The former, that is the dispositions,make up the frame-work, or what maybetermed the apparatus of the system. Thelatter, that is the laws, uphold the performanceof it.10. Now the tendency of atheistical writers isto reason exclusively on the laws of matter, andto overlook its dispositions. Could all the beautiesand benefits of the astronomical system be referredto the single law of gravitation, it Avouldgreatly reduce the strength of the argument foradesigning cause. La Place, as if to fortifystill more the atheism of such a speculation, endeavouredto demonstrate of this law — that, inrespect of its being inversely proportional to thesquare of the distance from the centre, it is anessential property of matter. La Grange hadpreviously established — that but for such a proportion,or by the deviation of a thousandth partfrom it, the planetary system would go intoderangement — or, in other words, that the law,c. c6 e>o:^^18 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.such as it is, was essential to the stability of thepresent mundane constitution. La Place wouldhave accredited the law, the unconscious andunintelligent law, that thing according to him ofblind necessity, with the whole of this noble andbeautiful result — overlooking what La Grangeheld to be indispensable as concurring elementsin his demonstration of it — certain dispositionsalong with the law — such as the movement of allthe planets, first in one direction, second nearlyin one plane, and then in nearly circular orbits.We are aware that according to the discoveries,or rather perhaps to the guesses of some lateranalysts, the three last circumstances might bedispensed with ; and yet notwithstanding, theplanetary system, its errors still remaining periodical,would in virtue of the single law oscillatearound a mean state that should be indestructibleand everlasting. Should this come to be a conclusivelysettled doctrine in the science, it willextenuate, we admit, the argument for a designingcause in the formation of the planetarium.But it will not annihilate that argument — forthere do remain certain palpable utilities in thedispositions as well as laws of the planetarysystem, acknowledged by all the astronomers ;such as the vastly superior weight and quantityof matter accumulated in its centre, and thelocal establishment there of that great fountain oflight and heat from which the surrounding worldsINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 19receive throughout the whole of their course anequable dispensation. What a mal adjustmentwould it have been, had the luminous and theopaque matter changed places in the firmament ;or the planets, by the eccentricity of their orbits,been subject to such vicissitudes of temperature,as would certainly, in our own at least, haveentailed destruction both on the animal andvegetable kingdoms.11. But whatever defect or doubtfulness ofevidence there may be in the mechanism of theheavens — this is amply made up for in a moreaccessible mechanism, near at hand. If eitherthe dispositions of matter in the former mechanismbe so few, or the demonstrable results ofits single law be so independent of them, thatthe agency of design rather than of necessity orchance be less manifest than it otherwise wouldbe in the astronomical system ; nothing on theother hand can exceed the force and concentrationof that proof, which is crowded to so marvellousa degree of enhancement within the limitsof the anatomical system. It is this which enablesus to draw so much weightier an argumentfor a God, from the construction of an eye thanfrom the construction of a planetarium. Andhere it is quite palpable, that it is in the dispositionsof matter more than in the laws of matter,where the main strength of the argument lies,though we hear much more of the wisdom of20 Introductory ('nAPTKK.Nature's laws, than of the wisdom of her collocations.*Now it is true that the law of refractionis indispensable to the faculty of vision ; butthe laws indispensable to this result are greatlyoutnumbered by the dispositions which are indispensableto it — such as the rightly sized andshaped lenses of the eye ; and the rightly placedretina spread out behind them, and at the precisedistance where the indispensable picture of externalnature might be formed, and presented asit were for the information of the occupier within ;and then, the variety and proper situation of thenumerous muscles, each entrusted with an import-thisdistinction between the laws and collocations of matteris overlooked by atheistical writers, as in the following specimenfrom the " System de la Nature" of Mirabeau. " These prejudiceddreamers," speaking: of believers in a God, " are in anextacy at the sight of the periodical motion of the planets ; at theorder of the stars ; at the various productions of the earth ; at theastonishing harmony in the component parts of animals. In thatmoment however, they forgot the laws of motion ; the power ofgravitation ; the forces of attraction and repulsion ; they assignall these striking phenomena to unknown causes, of Which theyhave no one substantive idea."When Professor Rol)ison felt alarmed by the attempted demonstrationof La Place, that the law of gravitation was an essentialproperty of matter, lest the cause of natural theology should beendangered by it — he might have recollected that the main evidencefor a Divinity lies not in the laws of matter, but in their collocations— because of the utter inadequacy in the existing laws to haveoriginated the existing collocations of the material world. Sothat if ever a time was, when these collocations were not — thereis no virtue in the laws that can account for their commencement,or that supersedes the fiat of a God.INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. tilant function, and all of them contributing to thepower and perfection of this curious and mani-follycomplicated organ. It is not so much theendowment of matter with certain properties, asthe arrangement of it into certain parts, thatbespeaks here the hand of an artist ; and thiswill be found true of the anatomical structure inall its departments. It is not the mere chemicalproperty of the gastric juice that impresses thebelief of contrivance ; but the presence of thegastric juice, in the very situation whence itcomes forth to act w with advantage on the food,when received into the stomach, and there submittedto a digestive process for the nourishmentof the animal economy. It is well to distinguishthese two things. If we but say of matter thatit is furnished with such powers as make it subservientto many useful results, we keep backthe strongest and most unassailable part of theargument for a God. It is greatly more pertinentand convincing to say of matter, that it is distributedinto such parts as to ensure a rightdirection and a beneficial application for itspowers. It is not so much in the establishmentof certain laws for matter, that we discern theaims or the purposes of intelligence, as in certaindispositions of matter, that put it in the way ofbeing usefully operated upon by the laws. Insomuch,that though we conceded to the atheist,the eternity of matter, and the essentially inherent22 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.character of all its laws — we could still point outto him, in the manifold adjustments of matter,its adjustments of place, and figure, and magnitude,the most impressive signatures of a Deity.And what a countless variety of such adjustmentswithin the compass of an animal, or even a vegetableframe work. In particular, what an amountand condensation of evidence for a God in theworkmanship of the human body. What brightand convincing lessons of theology might man(Mould he but open his eyes) read on his ownperson — that microcosm of divine art, where asin the sentences of a perfect epitome, he mighttrace in every lineament or member the fingerand authorship of the Godhead.12. In the performances of human art, theargument for design that is grounded on theuseful dispositions of matter, stands completelydisentangled from the argument that is groundedon the useful laws of matter — for in every implementor piece of mechanism constructed bythe hands of man, it is in the latter apart fromthe former, that the indications of contrivancewholly and exclusively lie. We do not accreditman with the establishment of any laws formatter — yet he leaves enough by which to tracethe operations of his intelligence in the collocationsof matter. He does not give to matter anyof its properties ; but he arranges it into parts —and by such arrangement alone, does he impressINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 23upon his workmanship the incontestable marksof design ; not in that he has communicated anypowers to matter, but in that he has intelligentlyavailed himself of these powers, and directedthem to an obviously beneficial result. Thewatchmaker did not give its elasticity to themain-spring, nor its regularity to the balance-wheel,nor its transparency to the glass, nor themomentum of its varying forces to the levers ofhis mechanism, — yet is the whole replete withthe marks of intelligence notwithstanding, announcingthroughout the hand of a maker whohad an eye on all these properties, and assignedthe right place and adjustment to each of them,in fashioning and bringing together the parts ofan instrument for the measurement and the indicationof time. Now, the same distinction canbe observed in all the specimens of natural mechanism.It is true that we accredit the authorof these with the creation and laws of matter, aswell as its dispositions ; but this does not hinderits being in the latter and not in the former,where the manifestations of skill are most apparent,or where the chief argument for a divinitylies. The truth is, that mere laws, withoutcollocations, would have afforded no securityagainst a turbid and disorderly chaos. One canimagine of all the substantive things which enterinto the composition of a watch, that they mayhave been huddled together, without shape, and24 lNTKODU( Toby CHAPTER.without collocation, into a little chaos, or confusedmedley ; — where, in full possession of allthe properties which belong to the matter of theinstrument, but without its dispositions, everyevidence of skill would have been wholly obliterated.And it is even so with all the substantivethings which enter into the compositionof a world. Take but their forms and collocationsaway from them, and this goodly universewould instantly lapse into a heaving and disorderlychaos — yet without stripping matter ofany of its properties or powers. There mightstill, though operating with random and undirectedactivity, be the laws of impulse, andgravitation, and magnetism, and temperature, andlight, and the forces of chemistry, and even thosephysiological tendencies, which, however abortivein a state of primitive rudeness, or before the spiritof a God moved on the face of the waters, waitedbut a right distribution of the parts of matter, todeveloped into the full effect and establishmentof animal and vegetable kingdoms. The thingwanted for the evolution of this chaos into anorderly and beneficial system is not the endowingof matter with right properties ; but theforming of it into things of right shape and magnitude,and the marshalling of these into rightplaces. This last alone would suffice for bringingharmony out of confusion ; and, apart altogetherfrom the first, or, without involving our-introductoryCIIAPTEK. 2i)selves in the metaphysical obscurity of thosequestions which relate to the origination of matterand to the distinction between its arbitraryand essential properties, might we discern, in themere arrangements of matter, the most obviousand decisive signatures of the artist hand whichhas been employed on it.13. That is a fine generalization by the lateProfessor Robinson, of Edinburgh, which rangesall philosophy into two sciences — one the scienceof contemporaneous nature ; the other, the scienceof successive nature. When the material worldis vicAved according to this distinction, the wholescience of its contemporaneous phenomena iscomprehended by him under the general nameof Natural History, which takes cognizance ofall those characters in external nature thatexist together at the instant, and which may bedescribed without reference to time — as smell,and colour, and size, and weight, and form, andrelation of parts, whether of the simple inorganicor more complex organic structures. But whenthe elements of time and motion are introduced,we are then presented with the phenomena ofsuccessive nature ; and the science that embracesthese is, in contradistinction to the former, termedNatural Philosophy. This latter science may beseparated or subdivided further into naturalphilosophy, strictly and indeed usually so called,whose province it is to investigate those changes26 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.which take effect in bodies by motions that aresensible and measurable ; and chemistry, or thescience of those changes which take effect inbodies by motions which are not sensible or, atleast, not measurable, and which cannot thereforebe made the subjects of mathematical computationor reasoning. This last, again, is capableof being still further partitioned into the sciencewhich investigates the changes effected by meansof insensible motion in all inorganic matter, orchemistry strictly and usually so called ; and thescience of physiology, whose province it is toinvestigate the like changes that take place inorganicbodies, whether of the animal or vegetablekingdoms.14. Or, the distinction between these twosciences of contemporaneous and successive naturemay otherwise be stated thus. The one, ornatural history, is conversant with objects — theother, or natural philosophy in its most comprehensivemeaning, is conversant with events. Itis obvious that the dispositions of matter comewithin the province of the former science — whilethe laws of matter, or the various moving forcesby which it is actuated, fall more properly underthe enquiries of the latter science. Now, adoptingthis nomenclature, we hold it a most importantassertion for the cause of natural theology,that should all the present arrangements of ourexisting natural history be destroyed, there is noINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 27power in the laws of our existing natural philosophyto replace them. Or, in other words, ifever a time was, when the structure and dispositionsof matter, under the present economyof things were not — there is no force known innature, and no combination of forces that canaccount for their commencement. The laws ofnature may keep up the working of the machinerybut they did not and could not set up themachine. The human species, for example, maybeupholden, through an indefinite series of ages,by the established law of transmission — but werethe species destroyed, there are no observedpowers of nature by which it could again beoriginated. For the continuance of the systemand of all its operations, we might imagine asufficiency in the laws of nature ; but it is thefirst construction of the system which so palpablycalls for the intervention of an artificer, ordemonstrates so powerfully the fiat and finger ofa God.15. This distinction between nature's laws andnature's collocations is mainly lost sight of inthose speculations of geology, the object of whichis to explain the formation of new systems emergingfrom the wreck of old ones. They proceedon the sufficiency of nature's laws for buildingthe present economy of things out of the ruinsof a former economy, which the last great physicalcatastrophe on the face of our earth had iMuoDutTouy chapter.thrown. Now, in these ruins, viewed as materialsfor the architecture of a renovated world, theredid reside all those forces, by which the processesof the existing economy are upholden ;but the geologists assign to them a functionwholly distinct from this, when they labour todemonstrate that by laws, and laws alone, theframe-work of our existing economy was puttogether. It is thus that they would exclude theagency of a God from the transition between onesystem, or one formation, and another, althoughit be precisely at such transition when this agencyseems most palpably and peculiarly called for.We feel assured that the necessity for a divineintervention, and, of course, the evidence of itwould have been more manifest, had the distinctionbetween the laws of matter and its collocationsbeen more formally announced, or morefully proceeded on by the writers on naturaltheism. And yet it is a distinction that musthave been present to the mind of our greatNewton, who expressly affirms that a mechanismof wondered structure could not arise by themere laws of nature. In his third printed letterto Bentley, he says, that " the growth of newsystems out of old ones, without the mediation of adivine power, seems to me apparently absurd ;"and that " the system of nature was set in orderin the beginning, with respect to size, figure,proportions, and properties, by the counsels ofINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. '29God's own intelligence." In the last extracts,by his admission of the properties along with thedispositions of matter, he somewhat confounds ordisguises again the important distinction which,at times, he had clearly in his view.*16. But one precious fruit of the recent geologicaldiscoveries may be gathered from thetestimony which they afford to the destructionof so many terrestrial economies now gone by,and the substitution of the existing one in theirplace. If there be truth at all in the speculationsof this science, there is nothing whichappears to have been more conclusively establishedby them, than a definite origin orcommencement for the present animal and vegetableraces. Now we know what it is whichupholds the whole of the physiological systemthat is now before our eyes, — even the successivederivation of each individual member from a• Towards the end of the third book of Newton's Optics, wehave the following very distinct testimony upon this subject :For it became Him who created them to set them in order. Andif he did so, it is unphilosophical to seek for any other origin ofthe world, or to pretend that it might arise out of a chaos by themere laws of nature ; though being once formed, it may continueby those laws for many ages."This disposition to resolve the collocations into the laws ofnature proves, in the expressive language of Granville Penn,how strenuously, not " physical science, but only some of itsdisciples have laboured to exclude the Creator from the details ofhis own creation; straining every nerve of ingenuity to ascribethem all to secondary causes."30 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.parent of its own likeness ; but we see no force innature, and no complication of forces which cantell us what it was that originated the system.It is at this passage in the history of nature,where we meet with such pregnant evidence forthe interposition of a designing cause, — an evidence,it will be seen, of prodigious density andforce, when we compute the immense numberand variety of those aptitudes, whether of form ormagnitude or relative position, which enter intothe completion of an organic structure. It is inthe numerical superiority of the distinct collocationsto the distinct laws of matter, that thesuperior evidence of the former lies. We do notdeny that there is argument for a God in thenumber of beneficial, while, at the same time,distinct and independent laws wherewith matteris endowed. We only affirm a million-fold intensityof argument in the indefinitely greaternumber of beneficial, and at the same time distinctand independent number of collocationswhereinto matter has been arranged. In thisrespect the human body may be said to presenta more close and crowded and multifarious inscriptionof the divinity, than any single objectwithin the compass of visible nature. It is instinctthroughout with the evidence of a builder'shand ; and thus the appropriate men of sciencewho can expound those dispositions of matterwhich constitute the anatomy of its frame-work,INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 31and which embrace the physiology of its variousprocesses, are on secure and firm vantage groundfor an impressive demonstration.17. Now there are many respects in which theevidence for a God, given forth by the constitutionof the human body, differs from the evidencegiven forth by the constitution of the humanspirit. It is with the latter evidence that wehave more peculiarly to deal ; but at present weshall only advert to a few of its distinct andspecial characteristics. The subject will at lengthopen into greater detail, and development beforeus, — yet a brief preliminary exposition may beuseful at the outset, should it only convey somenotion of the difficulties and particularities of thetask which has been put into our hands. ^18. A leading distinction between the materialand the mental fabrications is, the far greatercomplexity of the former, at least greater to allhuman observation. Into that system of meanswhich has been formed for the object of seeing,there enter at least twenty separate contingencies,the absence of any one of which would either derangethe proper function of the eye, or altogetherdestroy it. We have no access to aught likethe observation of a mental structure, and all ofwhich our consciousness informs us is a successionof mental phenomena. Now in these we aresensible of nothing but a very simple antecedentfollowed up, and that generally on the instant,S2 Introductory CHAPTER.by a like simple consequent. We have the feelingand still more the purpose of benevolence,followed up by complacency. We have the feelingor purpose, and still more the execution ofmalignity, or rather the recollection of that execution,followed up by remorse. However manifoldthe apparatus may be which enables us tosee an external object, — when the sight itself,instead of the consequent in a material succession,becomes the antecedent in a mental one ; orinother words, when it passes from a materialto a purely mental process ; then, as soon, doesit pass from the complex into the simple ; and,accordingly, the sight of distress is followed up,without the intervention of any curiously elaboratedmechanism that we are at all conscious of,by an immediate feeling of compassion. Theseexamples will, at least, suffice to mark a strongdistinction between the two enquiries, and to showthat the several arguments draw n from each mustat least be formed of very different materials.19. There are two distinct ways in Which themind can be viewed, and which constitute differentmodes of conception, rather than diversitiesof substantial and scientific doctrine. The mindmay either be regarded as a congeries of differentfaculties ; or as a simple and indivisible substance,with the susceptibility of passing intodifferent states. By the former mode of viewingit, the memory, and the judgment, and the con-introductoryCHAPTER. 33science, and the will, are conceived of as so manydistinct bnt co-existent parts of mind, which istins represented to us somewhat in the light ofan organic structure, having separate members,each for the discharge of its own appropriatemental function or exercise. By the latter, whichwe deem also the more felicitous mode of viewingit, these distinct mental acts, instead of beingreferred to distinct parts of the mind, are conceivedof as distinct acts of the whole mind, —insomuch that the w hole mind remembers, or thewhole mind judges, or the whole mind wills, orinshort, the whole mind passes into various intellectualstates or states of emotion, according tothe circumstances by which at the time it isbeset, or to the present nature of its employment.We might thus either regard the study of mindas a study in contemporaneous nature ; and weshould then, in the delineation of its variousparts, be assigning to it a natural history, — or wemight regard the study of mind as a study insuccessive nature ; and we should then, in thedescription of its various states, be assigning toita natural philosophy. When such a phrase asthe anatomy of the human mind is employed byphilosophers, we may safely guess that the formeris the conception which they are inclined to formof it.* When such a phrase again as^the physis under this conception too that writers propose to laydown a map of the human faculties.C. D34 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.biology of the human mind is made use of, thelatter is the conception by which, in all probability,it has been suggested. It is thus thatDr. Thomas Brown designates the science ofmind as mental physiology. AVith him, in fact,it is altogether a science of sequences, his veryanal) sis being the analysis of results, and not ofcompounds.20. Now, in either view of our mental constitutionthere is the same strength of evidencefor a God. It matters not for this, whether themind be regarded as consisting of so many usefulparts, or as endowed with as many usefulproperties. It is the number, whether the oneor other, of these — out of which the product isformed of evidence for a designing cause. Theonly reason why the useful dispositions of matterare so greatly more prolific of this evidence thanthe useful laws of matter, is, that the former sogreatly outnumber the latter. Of the twentyindependent circumstances which enter into beneficialconcurrence in the formation of an eye, thateach of them should be found in a situation ofoptimism, and none of them occupying either anindifferent or a hurtful position —it is this whichspeaks so emphatically against the hypothesis ofa random distribution, and for the hypothesis ofan intelligent order. Vet this is but one out ofthe many like specimens, wherewith the animaleconomy thickens and teems in such marvellousINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 35profusion. By the doctrine of probabilities, themathematical evidence, in this question betweenthe two suppositions of intelligence or chance,will be found, even on many a single organ ofthe human frame work, to preponderate vastlymore than a million-fold on the side of the former.We do not affirm of the human mind that it isso destitute of all complication and variety, as tobe deficient altogether in this sort of evidence.Let there be but six laws or ultimate facts in themental constitution, with the circumstance ofeach of them being beneficial ; and this of itselfwould yield no inconsiderable amount of preciseand calculable proof, for our mental economybeing a formation of contrivance, rather than onethat is fortuitous or of blind necessity. It willat once be seen, however, why mind, just fromits greater simplicity than matter, should contributeso much less to the support of naturaltheism, of that definite and mathematical evidencewhich is founded on combination.2 1 . But, although in the mental department ofcreation, the argument for a God that is gatheredout of such materials, is not so strong as in theother great department — yet it does furnish apeculiar argument of its own, which, though notgrounded on mathematical data, and not derivedfrom a lengthened and logical process of reasoning,is of a highly effective and practical characternotwithstanding. It has not less in it of the36 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.substance, though it may have greatly less in itof the semblance of demonstration, that it consistsof but one step between the premises andthe conclusion. It is briefly, but cannot be moreclearly and emphatically expressed than in thefollowing sentence. — " He that formed the eye,shall he not see ? He that planted the ear, shallhe not hear ? He that teacheth man knowledge,shall he not know ?" That the parent cause ofintelligent beings shall be itself intelligent is anaphorism, which, if not demonstrable in the formsof logic, carries in the very announcement of itachallenging power over the acquiescence ofalmost all spirits. It is a thing of instant conviction,as if seen in the light of its own evidence,more than a thing of lengthened and laboriousproof. It may be stigmatized as a mere impression— nevertheless the most of intellects goasreadily along with it, as they would from onecontiguous step to another of many a statelyargumentation. If it cannot be exhibited as theconclusion of a syllogism, it is because of its owninherent right to be admitted there as the majorproposition. To proscribe every such truth, orto disown it from being truth, merely becauseincapable of deduction, Avould be to cast awaythe first principles of all reasoning. It wouldbanish the authority of intuition, and so reduceall philosophy and knowledge to a state of universalscepticism — for m hat is the first departureIN TKUDl'C Toke CHAPTER. 37of every argument but an intuition, and what butaseries of intuitions are its successive steppingstones? We should soon involve ourselves inhelpless perplexity and darkness, did we insiston every thing being proved and on nothing beingassumed — for valid assumptions are the materialsof truth, and the only office of argument is toweave them together into so many pieces ofinstruction for the bettering or enlightening ofthe species. f^22. That blind and unconscious matter cannot,by any of her combinations, evolve the phenomenaof mind, is a proposition seen in its ownimmediate light, and felt to be true with all thespeed and certainty of an axiom. It is to suchtruth, as being of instant and almost universalconsent, that, more than to any other, we owe theexistence of a natural theology among men : yet,because of the occult mysticism wherewith it ischarged, it is well that ours is a cause of suchrich and various argument ; that in her servicewe can build up syllogisms, and expatiate overwide fields of induction, and amass stores of evidence,and, on the useful dispositions of matteralone, can ground such large computations ofprobability in favor of an intelligent cause ormaker for all things, as might silence and satisfythe reasoners.23. But we forget that the object of the jointcompositions which enter into this work, is not38 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.properly to demonstrate the being but the attributesof God, and more especially His power,and wisdom, and goodness. We start from thatpoint at which the intuitions and proofs of thequestion have performed their end of convincingman that God is ; and from this point, we setforth on an enquiry into the character whichbelongs to him. Now this is an enquiry whichthe constitution of the mind, and the adaptationof that constitution to the external world, arepre-eminently fitted to illustrate. We hold thatthe material universe affords decisive attestationto the natural perfections of the Godhead, butthat it leaves the question of his moral perfectionsinvolved in profoundest mystery. Themachinery of a serpent's tooth, for the obviousinfliction of pain and death upon its victims,may speak as distinctly for the power and intelligenceof its Maker as the machinery of thoseteeth which, formed and inserted for simplemastication, subserve the purposes of a blandand beneficent economy. An apparatus of sufferingand torture might furnish as clear an indicationof design, though a design of cruelty, asdoes an apparatus for the ministration of enjoymentfurnish the indication also of design, but adesign of benevolence. Did we confine ourstudy to the material constitution of things, weshould meet with the enigma of many perplexingand contradictory appearances. We hopeINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 39to make it manifest, that in the study of themental constitution, this enigma is greatly alleviated,if not wholly done away ; and, at allevents, that within our peculiar province therelie the most full and unambiguous demonstrations,which nature hath any where given to us,both of the benevolence and the righteousnessof God.24. If, in some respects, the phenomena ofmind tell us less decisively than the phenomenaof matter, of the existence of God, they tell us farmore distinctly and decisively of His attributes.We have already said that, from the simplicityof the mental system, we met with less there ofthat evidence for design which is founded oncombination, or on that right adjustment andadaptation of the numerous particulars, whichenter into a complex assemblage of things, andwhich are essential to some desirable fulfilment.It is not, therefore, through the medium of thisparticular evidence — the evidence which lies incombination ; that the phenomena and processesof mind are the best for telling us of the Divineexistence. But if otherwise, or previously toldof this, we hold them to be the best throughoutall nature for telling us of the Divine character.For if once convinced, on distinct grounds, thatGod is, it matters not how simple the antecedentsor the consequents of any particular successionmay be. It is enough that we know>^Y40 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.what the terms of the succession are, or what theeffect is wherewith God m ills any given thing tobe followed up. The character of the ordination,and so the character of the ordainer, dependson the terms of the succession ; and noton the nature of that intervention or agency,whether more or less complex, by which it isbrought about. And should either term of thesuccession, either the antecedent or consequent,be some moral feeling, or characteristic of themind, then the inference comes to be a verydistinct and decisive one. That the sight ofdistress, for example, should be followed up bycompassion, is an obvious provision of benevolence,and not of cruelty, on the part of Himwho ordained our mental constitution. Again,that a feeling of kindness in the heart should befollow ed up by a feeling of complacency in theheart, that in every virtuous affection of thesoul there should be so much to gladden andharmonize it, that there should always be peacewithin when there is conscious purity or rectitudewithin ; and, on the other hand, that malignityand licentiousness, and the sense of anymoral transgression whatever, should alwayshave the effect of discomforting, and sometimeseven of agonizing the spirit of man — that swf hshould be the actual workmanship and workingof our nature, speaks most distinctly, we apprehend,for the general righteousness of him whoINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 41constructed its machinery and established itslaws. An omnipotent patron of vice would havegiven another make, and a moral system withother and opposite tendencies to the creatureswhom he had formed. He would have establisheddifferent sequences ; and, instead of thatoil of gladness which now distils, as if from asecret spring of satisfaction, upon the upright ;and, instead of that bitterness and disquietudewhich are now the obvious attendants on everyspecies of delinquency, we should have had thereverse phenomena of a reversely constitutedspecies, whose minds were in their state ofwildest disorder when kindling with the resolvesof highest excellence ; or were in their best andhappiest, and most harmonious mood, whenbrooding over the purposes of dishonesty, orfrenzied with the passions of hatred and revenge. / J -25. In this special track of observation, wehave at least the means or data for constructinga far more satisfactory demonstration of thedivine attributes, than can possibly be gathered,we think, from the ambiguous phenomena of theexternal world. In other words, it will be foundthat the mental phenomena speak more distinctlyand decisively for the character of Godthan do the material phenomena of creation.And it should not be forgotten that whateverserves to indicate the character, serves also toconfirm the existence of the Divine Being. For42 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.this character, whose signatures are impressedon Nature, is not an abstraction, bit must haveresidence on a concrete and substantive Being,who hath communicated a transcript of Himselfto the workmanship of His own hands. It isthus, that, although in our assigned departmentthere is greater poverty of evidence for a God, inas far as that evidence is grounded on a skilfuldisposition of parts, — yet, in respect of anotherkind of evidence, there is no such poverty ; for,greatly more replete as we hold our special departmentto be with the unequivocal tokens of amoral character, we, by that simple but strongligament of proof which connects a character withan existence, can, in the study of mind alone,find a firm stepping-stone to the existence of aGod. Our universe is sometimes termed themirror of Him who made it. But the optical reflection,whatever it may be, must be held asindicating the reality which gave it birth ; and,whether we discern there the expression of areigning benevolence, or a reigning justice, thesemust not be dealt with as the aerial or the fancifulpersonifications of qualities alone, but as thesubstantial evidences of a just and benevolent,and, withal, a living God.26. But, in the prosecution of our assignedtask, we shall, after all, meet m ili much of thatevidence, which lies in the manifold, and, withal,happy conjunction of many individual things,INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 43by the meeting together of which, some distinctlybeneficial end is accomplished, broughtabout in that one way and in no other. For itought further to be recollected, that, simple asthe constitution of the human mind is, and proportionallyunfruitful, therefore, as it may be ofthat argument for a God, which is founded onthe right assortment and disposition of manyparts, or even of many principles ; yet, on studyingthe precise terms of the commission whichhas been put into our hands, it will be found thatthe materials even of this peculiar argannent lieabundantly within our province. For it is notstrictly the mental constitution of man whichforms the subject of our prescribed essay, butthe adaptation to that constitution of externalnature. We have to demonstrate, not so muchthat the mind is rightly constituted in itself, asthat the mind is rightly placed in a befittingtheatre for the exercise of its powers. It is todemonstrate that the world and its various objectsare suited to the various capacities of this inhabitant— this moral and intelligent creature, ofwhom Me have to prove that the things whichare around him bear a fit relation to the lawsor the properties which are within him. Thereis ample room here for the evidence of collocation.Yet there remains this distinction between themental and the corporeal economy of man, thatwhereas the evidence is more rich and manifold44 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER,in the bodily structure itself, than even in itscomplex and numerous adaptations to the outerworld ;* the like evidence, in our peculiar department,is meagre, as afforded by the subjectivemind, when compared with the evidence of itsvarious adjustments and witnesses to the objectiveuniverse around it, whether of man's moral constitutionto the state of human society, or of hisintellectual to the various objects of physicalinvestigation.27. The great object of philosophy is to ascertainthe simple or ultimate principles, into whichall the phenomena of nature may by analysis beresolved. But it often happens that in thisattempt she stops short at a secondary law,which might be demonstrated by further analysisto be itself a complex derivative of the primitiveor elementary laws. Until this work of analysisbe completed, we shall often mistake what iscompound for what is simple, both in the philosophyof mind and the philosophy of matter —being frequently exposed to intractable substancesor intractable phenomena in both, whichlong withstand every effort that science makesfor their decomposition. It is thus that the timeis not yet come, and may never come, when weYet Paley has a mohit interesting chapter on the adaptationsof external nature to the human frame-work, though the mainstrength and copiousness of his argument lie in the anatomy oftill' frame-work it. elf.INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 45shall fully understand, what be all the simpleelements or simple laws of matter ; and what beall the distinct elementary laws, or, as they havesometimes been termed, the ultimate facts in theconstitution of the human mind. But we do notneed to wait for this communication, ere we cantrace, in either department, the wisdom andbeneficence of a Deity — for many are both thematerial and the mental processes which mightbe recognized as pregnant with utility, and so,pregnant with evidence for a God, long beforethe processes themselves are analyzed. Thetruth is, that a secondary law, if it do not exhibitany additional proof of design, in a distinct usefulprinciple, exhibits that proof in a distinct anduseful disposition of parts — for, generally speaking,a secondary law is the result of an operation bysome primitive law, in peculiar and new circumstances.For example, the law of the tides is asecondary law, resolvable into one more generaland elementary — even the law of gravitation.But we might imagine a state of things, in whichthe discovery of this connection would havebeen impossible, — as a sky perpetually mantledwith a cloudy development, which, while it didnot intercept the light either of the sun or moon,still hid these bodies from our direct observation.In these circumstances, the law of the tides andthe law of gravitation, though identical in themselves,could not have been identified by us ;46 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.and so, we might have ascribed this wholesomeagitation of the sea and of the atmosphere to adistinct power or principle in nature — affordingthe distinct indication of both a kind and intelligentCreator. Now this inference is notannihilated — it is not even enfeebled by thediscovery in question ; for although the goodarising from tides in the ocean and tides in theair, is not referable to a peculiar law — it is atleast referable to a peculiar collocation. Andthis holds of all the useful secondary laws in thematerial world. If they cannot be alleged inevidence for the number of beneficial principlesin nature — they can at least be alleged inevidence for the number of nature's beneficialarrangements. If they do not attest the multitudeof usefid properties, they at the least attestthe multitude of useful parts in nature ; and theskill, guided by benevolence which has beenput forth in the distribution of them. So thatlong ere the philosophy of matter is perfected,or all its phenomena and its secondary laws havebeen resolved into their original and constituentprinciples — may we, in their obvious and immediateutility alone, detect as many separateevidences in nature as there are separate factsin nature, for a wise and benevolent Deity.28. And the same will be found true of thesecondary laws in the mental world, which, ifnot as many distinct beneficial principles in theINTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 47constitution of the mind, are the effect of asmany distinct and beneficial arrangements inthe objects or circumstances by which it is surrounded.We have not to wait the completionof its still more subtle and difficult analysis,ere we come within sight of those varied indicationsof benevolent design which are so abundantlyto be met with, both in the constitutionof the mind itself, and in the adaptation theretoof external nature. Some there are, for example,who contend that the laws of taste arenot primitive but secondary ; that our admirationof beauty in material objects is resolvable intoother and original emotions, and, more especially,by means of the associating principle,into our admiration of moral excellence. Letthe justness of this doctrine be admitted ; andits only effect on our peculiar argument is, thatthe benevolence of God in thus multiplying ourenjoyments, instead of being indicated by a distinctlaw for suiting the human mind to theobjects which surround it, is indicated both bythe distribution of these objects and by theirinvestment with such qualities as suit them tothe previous constitution of the mind — that hehath pencilled them with the very colours, ormoulded them into the very shapes which suggesteither the graceful or the noble of humancharacter ; that he hath imparted to the violet itshue of modesty, and clothed the lily in its robe48 intkoi>iu:tor\ chapter.of purest innocence, and given to the trees ofthe forest their respective attitudes of strength ordelicacy, and made the whole face of nature onebright reflection of those virtues which the mindand character of man had originally radiated.If it be not by the implantation of a peculiarlaw in mind, it is at least by a peculiar dispositionof tints and forms in external nature, that he hathspread so diversified a loveliness over the panoramaof visible things ; and thrown so manywalks of enchantment around us; and turned thesights and the sounds of rural scenery into theministers of so much and such exquisite enjoyment; and caused the outer world of matter toimage forth in such profusion those various qualities,which at first had pleased or poAverfidlyaffected us in the inner world of consciousnessand thought. It is by the modifying operationof circumstances that a primary is transmutedinto a secondary law ; and if the blessings whichwe enjoy under it cannot be ascribed to the insertionof a distinct principle in the nature ofman, they can at least be ascribed to a usefuldisposition of circumstances in the theatrearound him. J . / -2.9. It is thus that philosophical discovery,which is felt by many to enfeeble the argumentfor a God, when it reduces two or more subordinateto simpler and anterior laws, does in factleave that argument as entire as before — for if,INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 49by analysis, it diminish the number of beneficialproperties in matter, it replaces the injury whichit may be supposed to have done in this way tothe cause of theism, by presenting us with asgreat an additional number of beneficial arrangementsin nature. And further, it may not beout of place to observe, that there appear to betwo distinct ways by which an artificer mightmake manifest the wisdom of his contrivances.He may either be conceived of, as forming asubstance and endowing it with the fit properties ;or as finding a substance with certain given properties,and arranging it into fit dispositions forthe accomplishment of some desirable end. Boththe former and the latter of these we ascribe tothe divine artificer— of whom we imagine, thatHe is the Creator as well as the Disposer of allthings. It is only the latter that we can ascribeto the human artificer, who creates no substance,and ordains no property ; but finds the substancew with all its properties ready made and put intohis hands, as the raw material out of which hefashions his implements and rears his structuresof various design and workmanship. Now it is acommonly received, and has indeed been raisedinto a sort of universal maxim, that the highestproperty of wisdom is to achieve the most desirableend, or the greatest amount of good, by thefewest possible means, or by the simplest machinery.When this test is applied to the laws ofC. E50 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.nature — then we esteem it, as enhancing themanifestation of intelligence, that one single law,as gravitation, should, as from a central and commandingeminence, subordinate to itself a wholehost of most important phenomena ; or that fromone great and parent property, so vast a familyof beneficial consequences should spring. Andwhen the same test is applied to the dispositions,whether of nature or art — then it enhances themanifestation of wisdom, when some great end isbrought about with a less complex or cumbersomeinstrumentality, as often takes place in the amplificationof machines, when, by the device ofsome ingenious ligament or wheel, the apparatusis made equally, perhaps more effective, whilstless unwieldy or less intricate than before. Vetthere is one way in which, along with an exceedingcomplication in the mechanism, there mightbe given the impression, of the very highest skilland capacity having been put forth on the contrivanceof it. It is when, by means of a veryoperose and complex instrumentality, the triumphof art has been made all the more conspicuous,by a very marvellous result havingbeen obtained out of very unpromising materials.It is true, that, in this case too, a still higherimpression of skill would be given, if the same oramore striking result were arrived at, even afterthe intricacy of the machine had been reduced,by some happy device, in virtue of which, certainIntroduce( TORY CHAP'IKR. Olof its parts or circiinivolutions had been superseded; and thus, without injury to the finaleffect, so much of the complication had beendispensed with. Still, however, the substance,whether of the machine or the manufacture, maybeconceived so very intractable as to put anabsolute limit on any further simplification, oras to create an absolute necessity for all themanifold contrivance which had been expendedon it. When this idea predominates in the mindthen all the complexity which we may beholddoes not reduce our admiration of the artist,but rather deepens the sense that we have, bothof the conciseness of his wisdom, and of thewondrous vastness and variety of his resources.It is the extreme wideness of the contrast, betweenthe sluggishness of matter and the finenessof the results in physiology, which so enhancesour veneration for the great Architect of Nature,when we behold the exquisite organizations ofthe animal and vegetable kingdoms.* The Prohibitionsare wholly distinct from each other —yet each of them may be perfect in its own way.The first is held forth to us, Avhen one law ofpervading generality is found to scatter a myriadof beneficent consequences in its train. Thesecond is held forth, when, by an infinite com-** Dr. Paley would state the problem thus. The laws of matterbeing given, so to organize it, as that it shall produce or sustainthe phenomena, whether of vegetation or of life.62 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.plenty of means, a countless variety of expedientswith their multiform combinations, someonedesign, such as the upholding of life in plantsor animals is accomplished. Creation presents visin marvellous profusion with specimens of boththese — at once confirming the doctrine, andillustrating the significancy of the expression inwhich Scripture hath conveyed it to us, when ittells of the manifold wisdom of God.30. But while, on a principle already oftenrecognised, this multitude of necessary conditionsto the accomplishment of a given end,enhances the argument for a God, because eachseparate condition reduces the hypothesis ofchance to a more violent improbability thanbefore ; yet it must not be disguised that thereis a certain transcendental mystery which it hasthe effect of aggravating, and which it leavesunresolved. We can understand the complexmachinery and the circuitous processes to whicha human artist must resort, that he might overcomethe else uncomplying obstinacy of inertmatter, and bend it in subserviency to hisspecial designs. But that the Divine artistwho first created the matter and ordained itslaws, should find the same complication necessaryfor the accomplishment of his purposes ;that such an elaborate workmanship, for example,should be required to establish the functionsof sight and hearing in the animal economy.INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER. 53is very like the lavish or ostensible ingenuity ofa Being employed in conquering the difficultywhich himself had raised. It is true, the oneimmediate purpose is served by it which we havejust noticed, — that of presenting, as it were, tothe eye of enquirers a more manifold inscriptionof the Divinity. But if, instead of being theobject of inference, it had pleased God to makehimself the object of a direct manifestation,then for the mere purpose of becoming knownto his creatures, this reflex or circuitous methodof revelation would have been altogether uncalledfor. That under the actual system ofcreation, and with its actual proofs, he has madehis existence most decisively known to us, wemost thankfully admit. But when question ismade between the actual and the conceivablesystems of creation which God might haveemanated, we are forced to confess, that thevery circumstances which, in the existing orderof things, have brightened and enhanced theevidence of His being, have also cast adeeper secrecy over what may be termed thegeneral policy of His government and ways.And this is but one of the many difficulties,which men of unbridled speculation and unobservantof that sound philosophy that keepswithin the limits of human observation, will findit abundantly possible to conjure up on the fieldof natural theism. It does look an impracticable^4 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.enigma that the Omnipotent God, who couldhave grafted all the capacities of thought andfeeling on an elementary atom, should havedeemed tit to incorporate the human soul in themidst of so curious and complicated a frame work.For what a variegated structure is mans animaleconomy. What an apparatus of vessels andbones and ligaments. What a complex mechanism.What an elaborate chemistry. . What amultitude of parts in the anatomy, and of processesin the physiology of this marvelloussystem. What a medley, we had almost said,what a package of contents. What an unweariedplay of secretions and circulations and otherchanges incessant and innumerable. In short,what a laborious complication ; and all to upholda living principle, which, one might think, couldby a simple fiat of omnipotence, have sprungforth at once from the great source and centreof the spiritual system, and mingled with theworld of spirits — just as each new particle of lightis sent forth by the emanation of a sunbeam, toplay and glisten among fields of radiance.31. But to recall ourselves from this digressionamong the possibilities of what might have been,to the realities of the mental system, such as itactually is. Ere we bring the very general observationsof this chapter to a close, we wouldbriefly notice an analogy between the realitiesof the mcnt;d and those of the corporeal system.INTUODIK TORY CHAPTER. 55The enquirers into the latter have found it ofsubstantial benefit to their science, to havemixed up with the prosecution of it a referenceto final causes. Their reasoning on the likelyuses of a part in anatomy, has, in some instances,suggested or served as a guide to speculations,which have been at length verified by adiscovery. We .believe, in like manner, thatreasoning on the likely or obvious uses of a principlein the constitution of the human mind,might lead, if not to the discovery, at least tothe confirmation of important truth — not perhapsin the science itself, but in certain of the cognatesciences which stand in no very distant relationto it. For example, we think it should rectifycertain errors which have been committed bothin jurisprudence and political economy, if it canbe demonstrated that some of the undoubtedlaws of human nature are traversed by them ;and so, that violence is thereby done to theobvious designs of the Author of Nature. Weshall not hold it out of place, though we noticeone or two of these instances, by which it mightbe seen that the mental philosophy, whenstudied in connection with the palpable viewsof Him by whom all its principles and processeswere ordained, is fitted to enlighten the practiceof legislation, and more especially to determinethe w wisdom of certain arrangements which have56 INTRODUCTORY CHAPTER.lor their object the economic well-being ofsociety.3*2. We feel the tediousness of our peculiartask, and the feeling is not at all alleviated byour sense of its surpassing dignity. The superiorityof mind to matter has often been thetheme of eloquence to moralists. For what wereall the wonders of the latter and all its glories,without a spectator mind that could intelligentlyview and that could tastefully admire them ? Letevery eye be irrevocably closed, and this wereequivalent to the entire annihilation in nature ofthe element of light ; and in like manner, if thelight of all consciousness were put out in theworld of mind, the world of matter, though asrich in beauty, and in the means of benevolenceas before, were thereby reduced to a virtualnonentity. In these circumstances, the lightingup again of even but one mind would restore itsbeing, or at least its significancy, to that systemof materialism, which, untouched itself, had justbeen desolated of all those beings in whom itcould kindle reflection, or to whom it couldminister the sense of enjoyment. It were tantamountto the second creation of it, — or, in otherwords, one living intelligent spirit is of higherreckoning and mightier import than a deaduniverse.PART I.ON THE ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN.Chapter I.On the Supremacy of Conscience.1. An abstract question in morals is distinctfrom a question respecting the constitution ofman's moral nature ; and the former ought nomore to be confounded with the latter, than thetruths of geometry with the faculties of the reasoningmind which comprehends them. Thevirtuousness of justice was a stable doctrine inethical science, anterior to the existence of thespecies ; and would remain so, though the specieswere destroyed — just as much as the propertiesof a triangle are the enduring stabilitiesof mathematical science ; and that, though nomatter had been created to exemplify the positionsor the figures of geometry. The objectivenature of virtue is one thing. The subjectivenature of the human mind, by which virtue isfelt and recognized, is another. It is not from58 ON Thai SUPREMACY OF ( Conscience.the former, any more than from the eternaltruths of geometry, that we can demonstratethe existence or attributes of God — but from thehitter, as belonging to the facts of a creationemanating from His will, and therefore bearingupon it the stamp of His character. The natureand constitution of virtue form a distinct subjectof enquiry from the nature and constitution ofthe human mind. Virtue is not a creation ofthe Divine will, but has had everlasting residencein the nature of the Godhead. The mindof man is a creation ; and therefore indicates,by its characteristics, the character of Him, tothe fiat and the foregoing of whose will it owesits existence. We must frequently, in thecourse of this discussion, advert to the principlesof ethics ; but it is not on the system of ethicaldoctrine that our argument properly is founded.It is on the phenomena and the laws of actualhuman nature, which itself, one of the greatfacts of described by the mere enumeration ofits parts. There must also enter into the description,the relation which the parts bear toeach other ; and more especially, the paramountrelation of rightful ascendency and direction,which that part, in which the functions of Governmentare vested, bears to the whole. Neitheris the mechanism of man's personal constitutionfully or adequately described, by merely tellingus in succession the several parts of which it iscomposed — as the passions, and the appetites,and the affections, and the moral sense, and theintellectual capacities, which make up this complexand variously gifted creature. The parsON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.circulars of his mental system must not only bestated, each in their individuality ; but the bearingor connection which each has with the rest —else it is not described as a system at all. Inmaking out this description, we should not onlynot overlook the individual faculty of conscience,but we must not overlook its relative place amongthe other feelings and faculties of our nature.That place is the place of command. Whatconscience lays claim to is the mastery or regulationover the whole man. Each desire of ournature rests or terminates in its own appropriateobject, as the love of fame in applause, or hungerin food, or revenge in the infliction of pain uponits object, or affection for another in the happinessand company of the beloved individual.But the object of the moral sense is to arbitrateand direct among all these propensities. It claimsthe station and the prerogative of a mistress overthem. Its peculiar office is that of superintendence,and there is a certain feeling of violenceor disorder, when the mandates which itissues in this capacity, are not carried into effect.Every affection in our nature is appeased by theobject that is suited to it. The object of conscienceis the subordination of the whole to itsdictates. Without this it remains unappeased,and as if bereft of its rights. It is not a singlefaculty, taking its own separate and unconnectedplace among the other feelings and facultiesON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 71which belong to us. Its proper place is that of aguide or a governor. It is the ruling power in ournature ; and its proper, its legitimate business, isto prescribe that man shall be as he ought, anddo as he ought. But instead of expatiating anyfurther at present in language of our own, let vishere admit a few brief sentences from Butlerhimself, that great and invaluable expounder bothof the human constitution, and of moral science.That principle by which we survey, and eitherapprove or disapprove our own heart, temper,and actions, is not only to be considered as whatin its turn is to have some influence, which maybesaid of every passion, of the basest appetites :but likewise as being superior ; as from its verynature manifestly claiming superiority over allothers : insomuch that you cannot form a notionof this faculty conscience, without taking injudgment direction and superintendency. Thisis a constituent part of the idea, that is of thefaculty itself: and to preside and govern, fromthe very ceconomy and constitution of man, belongsto it. Had it strength, as it has right ; hadit power, as it has manifest authority ; it wouldabsolutely govern the world." " This facultywas placed within us to be our proper governor ;to direct and regulate all under principles, passions,and motives of action. This is its rightand office. Thus sacred is its authority. Andhow often soever men violate and rebelliously72 ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.refuse to submit to it, for supposed interest whichthey cannot otherwise obtain, or for the sake ofpassion which they cannot otherwise gratify ;this makes no alteration as to the natural rightand office of conscience.9. Now it is in these phenomena of Consciencethat Nature offers to us, far her strongest argument,for the moral character of God. Had Hebeen an unrighteous Being himself, would Hehave given to this the obviously superior facultyin man, so distinct and authoritative a voice onthe side of righteousness? Would He have soconstructed the creatures of our species, as tohave planted in every breast a reclaiming witnessagainst himself? Would He have thus inscribedon the tablet of every heart the sentence ofhis own condemnation ; and is not this just asunlikely, as that He should have inscribed it inwritten characters on the forehead of each individual? Would He so have fashioned the workmanshipof His own hands ; or, if a God ofcruelty, injustice, and falsehood, would He haveplaced in the station of master and judge thatfaculty which, felt to be the highest in ournature, would prompt a generous and high-mindedrevolt of all our sentiments against theBeing who formed us ? From a God possessedof such characteristics, we should surely haveexpected a differently-moulded humanity ; orinother words, from the actual constitution ofON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 73man, from the testimonies on the side of allrighteousness, given by the vicegerent withinthe heart, do we infer the righteousness of theSovereign who placed it there. He would neverhave established a conscience in man, and investedit with the authority of a monitor, andgiven to it those legislative and judicial functionswhich it obviously possesses ; and then so framedit, that all its decisions should be on the side ofthat virtue which he himself disowned, and condemnatoryof that vice which he himself exemplified.This is an evidence for the righteousnessof God, which keeps its ground, amid all thedisorders and aberrations to which humanity isliable ; and can no more, indeed, be deafened oroverborne by these, than is the rightful authorityof public opinion, by the occasional outbreakingsof iniquity and violence which take place insociety. This public opinion may, in thoseseasons of misrule when might prevails overright, be deforced from the practical ascendencywhich it ought to have ; but the very sentimentthat it so ought, is our reason for believing theworld to have been originally formed, in orderthat virtue might have the rule over it. In likemanner, when, in the bosom of every individualman, we can discern a conscience, placed therewiththe obvious design of being a guide and acommander, it were difficult not to believe, that,whatever the partial outrages may be which the74 ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.cause of virtue has to sustain, it has the publicmind of the universe in its favor ; and thattherefore He, who is the Maker and the Rulerof such a universe, is a God of righteousness.Amid all the subsequent observations and errors,the original design, both of a deranged watchand of a deranged human nature, is alike manifest; first, of the maker of the watch, that itsmotions should harmonize with time ; second, ofthe maker of man, that his movements shouldharmonize with truth and righteousness. Wecan, in most cases, discern between an aberrationand an original law ; between a direct or primitivetendency and the effect of a disturbing force,by which that tendency is thwarted and overborne.And so of the constitution of man. Itmay be now a loosened and disproportionedthing, yet we can trace the original structure —even as from the fragments of a ruin, we canobtain the perfect model of a building from itscapital to its base. It is thus that, howeverprostrate conscience may have fallen, we canstill discern its place of native and original preeminence,as being at once the legislator andthe judge in the moral system, though the executiveforces of the system have made insurrectionagainst it, and thrown the whole intoanarchy. There is a depth of mystery in everythingconnected with the existence or the originof evil in creation ; yet, even in the fiercestON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 75uproar of our stormy passions, Conscience,though in her softest whispers, gives to thesupremacy of rectitude the voice of an undyingtestimony ; and her light still shining in a darkplace, her unquelled accents still heard in theloudest outcry of Nature's rebellious appetites,form the strongest argument within reach of thehuman faculties, that, in spite of all partial ortemporary derangements. Supreme Power andSupreme Goodness are at one. It is true thatrebellious man hath, with daring footstep,trampled on the lessons of Conscience ; but why,in spite of man's perversity, is conscience, onthe other hand, able to lift a voice so piercingand so powerful, by which to remonstrate againstthe wrong, and to reclaim the honours that aredue to her? How comes it that, in the mutinyand uproar of the inferior faculties, that facultyin man, which wears the stamp and impress ofthe highest, should remain on the side of truthand holiness ? Would humanity have thus beenmoulded by a false and evil spirit ; or would hehave committed such impolicy against himself,as to insert in each member of our species aprinciple which would make him feel the greatestcomplacency in his own rectitude, when he feelsthe most high-minded revolt of indignation anddislike against the Being who gave him birth ?It is not so much that Conscience takes a partamong the other faculties of our nature; but76 ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.that Conscience takes among them the part of agovernor, and that man, if he do not obey hersuggestions, still, in despite of himself, acknowledgesher rights. It is a mighty argument for thevirtue of the governor above, that all the laws andinjunctions of the governor below are on the sideof virtue. It seems as if He had left this representative,or remaining witness, for Himself, in aworld that had cast off its allegiance ; and that,from the voice of the judge within the breast, wemay learn the will and the character of Himwho hath invested with such authority his dictates.It is this which speaks as much moredemonstratively for the presidency of a righteousGod in human affairs, than for that of impure orunrighteous demons, as did the rod of Aaron,when it swallowed the rods of the enchantersand magicians in Egypt. In the wildest anarchyof man's insurgent appetites and sins, there isstill a reclaiming voice — a voice which, evenwhen in practice disregarded, it is impossible notto own ; and to which, at the very moment thatwe refuse our obedience, we find that we cannotrefuse the homage of what ourselves do feeland acknowledge to be the best, the highestprinciples of our nature.10. However difficult from the very simplicityof the subject it may be, to state or to reasonthe argument for a God, which is founded onthe supremacy of conscience— still, historicallyON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 77and experimentally, it will be found, that it is ofmore force than all other arguments put together,for originating and upholding the natural theismwhich there is in the world. The theology ofconscience is not only of wider diffusion, but offar more practical influence than the theology ofacademic demonstration. The ratiocination bywhich this theology is established, is not theless firm or the less impressive, that, instead ofa lengthened process, there is but one step betweenthe premises and the conclusion — or, thatthe felt presence of a judge within the breast,powerfully and immediately suggests the notionof a Supreme Judge and Sovereign, \^ ho placedit there. Upon this question, the mind does notstop short at mere abstraction ; but, passing atonce from the abstract to the concrete, from thelaw of the heart, it makes the rapid inference ofa lawgiver. It is the very rapidity of this inferencewhich makes it appear like intuition ;and which has given birth to the mystic theologyof innate ideas. Yet the theology of consciencedisclaims such mysticism, built, as it is, on afoundation of sure and sound reasoning ; for thestrength of an argumentation in nowise dependsupon the length of it. The sense of a governingprinciple within, begets in all men the sentimentof a living governor without and above them, andit does so with all the speed of an instantaneousfeeling ; yet it is not an impression, it is an in-78 ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.terence notwithstanding — and as much so as anyinference from that which is seen, to that whichis unseen. There is, in the first instance, cognizancetaken of a fact — if not by the outwardeye, yet as good, by the eye of consciousnesswhich has been termed the facuky of internalobservation. And the consequent belief of aGod, instead of being an instinctive sense of theDivinity, is the fruit of an inference grounded onthat fact. There is instant transition made,from the sense of a Monitor within to the faith ofa living Sovereign above ; and this argument,described by all, but with such speed as almostto warrant the expression of its being felt by all,may be regarded, notwithstanding the force andfertility of other considerations, as the great propof natural religion among men.1 1 . And we mistake, if we think it was everotherwise, even in the ages of darkest and mostlicentious paganism. This theology of consciencehas often been greatly obscured, butnever, in any country or at any period in thehistory of the world, has it been wholly obliterated.We behold the vestiges of it in thesimple theology of the desert ; and, perhaps,more distinctly there, than in the complex superstitionsof an artificial and civilized heathenism.In confirmation of this, we might quote the invocationsto the Great Spirit from the wilds ofNorth America. But, indeed, in every quarterON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 79of the globe, where missionaries have held conversewith savages, even with the rudest ofnature's children — when speaking on the topicsof sin and judgment, they did not speak to themin vocables unknown. And as this sense of auniversal law and a Supreme Lawgiver neverwaned into total extinction among the tribes offerocious and untamed wanderers — so neitherwas it altogether stifled by the refined and intricatepolytheism of more enlightened nations.The whole of classic authorship teems withallusions to a Supreme Governor and Judge :And when the guilty Emperors of Rome weretempest-driven by remorse and fear, it was notthat they trembled before a spectre of their ownimagination. When terror mixed, which it oftendid, with the rage and cruelty of Nero, it wasthe theology of conscience which haunted him.It was not the suggestion of a capricious fancywhich gave him the disturbance — but a voiceissuing from the deep recesses of a moral nature,as stable and uniform throughout the species asis the material structure of humanity ; and inthe lineaments of which we may read that thereis a moral regimen among men, and thereforea moral Governor who hath instituted, and whopresides over it. Therefore, it was that theseimperial despots, the worst and haughtiest ofrecorded monarchs, stood aghast at the spectacleof their own worthlessness. It is true, there is a80 ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.wretchedness which naturally and essentiallybelongs to a state of great moral enhancement ;and this may account for their discomforts, but itwill not account for their fears. They may,because of this, have felt the torments of a presentmisery. But w hence their fears of a comingvengeance ? They would not have trembled atnature's law, apart from the thought of nature'slawgiver. The imagination of an unsanctionedlaw would no more have given disquietude, thanthe imagination of a vacant throne. But thelaw, to their guilty apprehensions, bespoke ajudge. The throne of heaven, to their troubledeye, was filled by a living monarch. Righteousness,it was felt, would not have been so enthronedin the moral system of man, had it not been previouslyenthroned in the system of the universe ;nor would it have held such place and preeminencein the judgment of all spirits, had notthe father of spirits been its friend and ultimateavenger. This is not a local or geographicalnotion. It is a universal feeling — to be foundwherever men are found, because interwovenwith the constitution of humanity. It is not,therefore, the peculiarity of one creed, or of onecountry. It circulates at large throughout thefamily of man. We can trace it in the theologyof savage life ; nor is it wholly overborne by theartificial theology of a more complex and idolatrouspaganism. Neither crime nor civilianTHE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 81tion can extinguish it ; and, whether in theconscience sceleriira" of the fierce and frenziedCataUne, or in the tranquil contemplative musingsof Socrates and Cicero, we find the impressionof at once a righteous and a reigningSovereign.12. And it confirms still more our idea of agovernment — that conscience not only gives forthher mandates with the tone and authority of aSuperior ; but, as if on purpose to enforce theirobservance, thus follows them up with an obviousdiscipline of rewards and punishments. It isenough but to mention, on the one hand, that feltcomplacency which is distilled, like some preciouselixir, upon the heart by the recollection ofvirtuous deeds and virtuous sacrifices ; and, onthe other hand, those inflictions of remorse,which are attendant upon wickedness, andwherewith, as if by the whip of a secret tormentor,the heart of every conscious sinner isagonized. We discern in these the naturalsanctions of morality, and the moral characterof Him who hath ordained them. We cannototherwise explain the peace and triumphantsatisfaction which spring from the consciousnessof well doing — nor can we otherwise explain thedegradation as well as bitter distress, which asense of demerit brings along with it. Our onlyadequate interpretation of these phenomena is,that they are the present remunerations or theC. G82 ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.present chastisements of a God who loveth righteousness,and who hateth iniquity. Nor do weview them as the conclusive results of virtue andvice, but rather as the tokens and the precursorseither of a brighter reward or of a heaviervengeance, that are coming. It is thus that thedelight of self-approbation, instead of standingalone, brings hope in its train ; and remorse,instead of standing alone, brings terror in itstrain. The expectations of the future are blendedwith these joys and sufferings of the present ; andall serve still more to stamp an impression, ofwhich traces are to be found in every quarter ofthe earth — that we live under a retributive economy,and that the God who reigns over it takesa moral and judicial cognizance of the creatureswhom He hath formed.13. What then are the specific injunctions ofconscience? for on this question essentially dependsevery argument that we can derive fromthis power or property of our nature, for themoral character of God. If, on the one hand,the lessons given forth by a faculty, which somanifestly claims to be the pre-eminent andruling faculty of our nature, be those of deceitand licentiousness and cruelty — then, from thecharacter of such a law, should we infer the characterof the lawgiver ; and so feel the conclusionto be inevitable, that we are under the governmentof a malignant and unrighteous God, atON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 83once the patron of vice and the persecutor ofvirtue in the world. If on the other hand, temperance,and chastity, and kindness, and integrity,and truth, be the mandates which generally, ifnot invariably proceed from her — then, on thesame principles of judgment, should we reckonthat He who is the author of conscience, andwho gave it the place of supremacy and honour,which it so obviously possesses in the moralsystem of man, was himself the friend and theexemplar of all those virtues which enter into thecomposition of perfect moral rectitude. In thelaws and the lessons of human conscience, wouldwe study the character of the Godhead, just aswe should study the views and dispositions of amonarch, in the instructions given by him to theviceroy of one of his provinces. If, on the onehand, virtue be prescribed by the authority ofconscience, and followed up by her approval, inwhich very approval there is felt an inwardsatisfaction and serenity of spirit, that of itselfforms a most delicious reward ; and if, on theother hand, the perpetration of wickedness arefollowed up by the voice of her rebuke, in which,identical with remorse, there is a sting ofagony and discomfort, amounting to the severestpenalty — then, are we as naturally disposed toinfer of Him who ordained such a mental constitutionthat He is the righteous Governor of menas,if seated on a visible throne in the midst of84 ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.US, He had made the audible proclamation ofHis law, and by His own immediate hand, haddistributed of His gifts to the obedient, andinflicted chastisements on the rebellious. Thelaw of conscience may be regarded as comprisingall those virtues which the hand of theDeity hath inscribed on the tablet of the humanheart, or on the tablet of natural jurisprudence ;and an argument for these being the veryvirtues which characterize and adorn Himself,is that they must have been transcribed fromthe prior tablet of His own nature.14. We are sensible that there is much to obscurethis inference in the actual circumstancesof the world. More especially — it has beenalleged, on the side of scepticism, that thereis an exceeding diversity of moral judgmentsamong men ; that, out of the multifarious decisionsof the human conscience, no consistentcode of virtue can be framed ; and that, therefore,no consistent character can be ascribed toHim, who planted this faculty in the bosom ofour species, and bade it speak so uncertainly andso variously.* But to this it may be answered,in the first place, that the apparent diversity is• On the uniformity of our moral judgments, we would referto the 74th and 75th of Dr. Brown's Lectures on the Philosophyof the Human Mind. *' If we bear in mind" says Sir JamesMackintosh, " that the question relates to the coincidence of allmen in considering' the same qualities as virtues, and not to thepreference of one class of virtues by some, and of a different classON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 85partly reducible into the blinding, or, at least, thedistorting effect of passion and interest, whichsometimes are powerful enough to obscure ourperception, even of mathematical and historicaltruths, as well as of moral distinctions ; and withouttherefore affecting the stability of either.It is thus, for example, that mercantile cupidityhas blinded many a reckless adventurer to theenormous injustice of the slave-trade ; that passionand interest together have transmutedrevenge into a virtue ; and that the robbery,which, if prosecuted only for the sake of individualgain, would have appeared to all under anaspect of most revolting selfishness, puts on theguise of patriotism, when a whole nation deliberateson the schemes, or is led by a career ofdaring and lofty heroism, to the spoliations ofconquest. In all such cases, it is of capital importanceto distinguish between the real characterof any criminal action, when looked to calmly,comprehensively, and fully ; and what that is inthe action which the perpetrator singles out andfastens upon as his plea, when he is either defendingit to others, or reconciling it to his ownconscience. In as far as he knows the deed tobyothers, the exceptions from the agreement of mankind, in theirsystems of practical morality, will be reduced to absolute insignificance; and we shall learn to view them as no more affecting theharmony of the moral faculties, than the resemblance of the limbsand features is affected by monstrous conformations, or by the unfortunateeffects of accident and disease in a very few individuals."86 ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.be incapable of vindication, and yet rushes onthe performance of it, there is but delinquencyof conduct incurred, not a diversity of moraljudgment ; nor does Conscience, in this case, atall betray any caprice or uncertainty in herdecisions. It is but the conduct, and not theconscience, which is in fault ; and to determinewhether the latter is in aught chargeable withfluctuation, we must look not to the man's performance,but to his plea. Two men may differas to the moral character of an action ; but ifeach is resting the support of his own view on adifferent principle from the other, there may stillbe a perfect uniformity of moral sentiment betweenthem. They own the authority of thesame laws ; they only disagree in the applicationof them. In the first place, the most vehementdenouncer of a guilty commerce is at one with themost strenuous of its advocates, on the dutywhich each man owes to his family ; and again,neither of them would venture to maintain thelawfulness of the trade, because of the miseriesinflicted by it on those wretched sufferers whowere its victims. The defender of this ruthlessand rapacious system disowns not, in sentimentat least, however much he may disown in practice,the obligations of justice and humanity —nay, in all the palliations which he attempts ofthe enormity in question, he speaks of these asundoubted virtues, and renders the homage ofON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. B7his moral acknowledgments to them all. In thesophistry of his vindication, the principles of theethical system are left untouched and entire.He meddles not with the virtuousness either ofhumanity or justice ; but he tells of the humanityof slavery, and the justice of slavery. It is true,that he heeds not the representations which aregiven of the atrocities of his trade — that he doesnot attend because he wills not to attend ; andin this there is practical unfairness. Still it butresolves itself into perversity of conduct, and notinto perversity of sentiment. The very dreadand dislike he has for the informations of thesubject, are symptoms of a feeling that his consciencecannot be trusted with the question ; orinother words, prove him to be possessed of aconscience which is just like that of other men.The partialities of interest and feeling may giverise to an infinite diversity of moral judgmentsin our estimate of actions ; while there may bethemost perfect uniformity and stability ofjudgment in our estimate of principles : and, onall the great generalities of the ethical code.Conscience may speak the same language, andown one and the same moral directory all theworld over. ^j^^^^15. When consciences then pronounce differentlyof the same action, it is for the most part,or rather, it is almost always, because understandingsview it differently. It is either because^ ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.the controversialists are regarding it with unequaldegrees of knowledge ; or, each, through themedium of his own partialities. The consciencesof all would come forth with the same moraldecision, were all equally enlightened in thecircumstances, or in the essential relations andconsequences of the deed in question ; and, whatis just as essential to this uniformity of judgment,were all viewing it fairly as well as fully. Itmatters not, whether it be ignorantly or wilfully,that each is looking to this deed, but in the oneaspect, or in the one relation that is favourableto his own peculiar sentiment. In either case,the diversity of judgment on the moral qualitiesof the same action, is just as little to be wonderedat as a similar diversity on the material qualitiesof the same object — should any of the spectatorslabour under an involuntary defect of vision, orvoluntarily persist either in shutting or in avertinghis eyes. It is thus that a quarrel has wellbeen termed a misunderstanding, in which eachof the combatants may consider, and often honestlyconsider, himself to be in the right ; andthat, on reading the hostile memorials of twoparties in a litigation, we can perceive no differencein their moral principles, but only in theirhistorical statements ; and that, in the publicmanifestoes of nations when entering upon war,we can discover no trace of a contrariety of conflictin their ethical systems, but only in theirON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 89differently put or differently coloured representationsof fact ; all proving, that, with the utmostdiversity of judgment among men respecting themoral qualities of the same thing, there may beaperfect identity of structure in their moralorgans notwithstanding ; and that Conscience,true to her office, needs but to be rightly informed,that she may speak the same language,and give forth the same lessons in all the countriesof the earth.16. It is this which explains the moral peculiaritiesof different nations. It is not that justice,humanity, and gratitude are not the canonizedvirtues of every region ; or that falsehood, cruelty,and fraud would not, in their abstract and associatednakedness, be viewed as the objects ofmoral antipathy and rebuke. It is, that, in oneand vie same material action, when looked to inall the lights of which, whether in reality or bythe power of imagination, it is susceptible, various,nay, opposite moral characteristics maybeblended ; and that while one people look tothe good only without the evil, another may lookto the evil only without the good. And thus theidentical acts which in one nation are the subjectsof a most reverent and religious observance, may,in another be regarded with a shuddering senseof abomination and horror. And this, not becauseof any difference in what may be termed themoral categories of the two people, nor ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.cause, if moral principles in their unmixed generalitywere offered to the contemplation of either,either would call evil good or good evil. Whentheft was publicly honoured and rewarded inSparta, it was not because theft in itself wasreckoned a good thing ; but because patriotism,and dexterity, and those services by which theinterests of patriotism might be supported, werereckoned to be good things. When the nativesof Hindostan assemble with delight around theagonies of a human sacrifice, it is not becausethey hold it good to rejoice in a spectacle of pain ;but because they hold it good to rejoice in aspectacle of heroic devotion to the memory ofthe dead. When parents are exposed or childrenare destroyed, it is not because it is deemed tobe right that there should be the infliction ofmisery for its own sake ; but because it is deemedto be right that the wretchedness of old ageshould be curtailed, or that the world should besaved from the miseries of an over-crowdedspecies. In a word, in the very worst of theseanomalies, some form of good may be detected,which has led to their establishment ; and still,some universal and undoubted principle of morality,however perverted or misapplied, canbe alleged in vindication of them. A peoplemay be deluded by their ignorance ; or misguidedby their superstition ; or, not only hurried intowrong deeds, but even fostered into wrong mentionTHE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 91ments, under the influences of that cupidity orrevenge, which are so perpetually operating in thewarfare of savage or demi savage nations. Yet,in spite of all the topical moralities to which thesehave given birth, there is an unquestioned anduniversal morality notwithstanding. And inevery case, where the moral sense is unfetteredby these associations ; and the judgment isencamped, either by the partialities of interestor by the inveteracy of national customs whichhabit and antiquity have rendered sacred — Conscienceis found to speak the same language,nor, to the remotest ends of the world, is there acountry or an island, where the same uniformand consistent voice is not heard from her. Letthe mists of ignorance and passion and artificialeducation be only cleared away ; and the moralattributes of goodness and righteousness andtruth be seen undistorted, and in their ownproper guise ; and there is not a heart or a consciencethroughout earth's teeming population,which could refuse to do them homage. And itis precisely because the Father of the humanfamily has given such hearts and conscience, toall his children, that we infer these to be thevery sanctities of the Godhead, the very attributesof his own primeval nature.17. There is a countless diversity of tastes inthe world, because of the infinitely various circumstancesand associations of men. Yet is92 ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.there a stable and correct standard of taste notwithstanding,to which all minds, that have thebenefit of culture and enlargement, are graduallyassimilating and approximating. It holdsfar more emphatically true, that, in spite of thediversity of moral judgments, which are vastlyless wide and numerous than the former, thereis a fixed standard of morals, rallying arounditself all consciences, to the greater principles ofwhich, a full and unanimous homage is renderedfrom every quarter of the globe ; and even tothe lesser principles and modifications of which,there is a growing and gathering consent, withevery onward step in the progress of light andcivilization. In proportion as the understandingsof men become more enlightened, do theirconsciences become more accordant with eachother. Even now there is not a single peopleon the face of the earth, among w hom barbarityand licentiousness and fraud are deified as virtues,— where it does not require the utmoststrength, whether of superstition or of patriotismin its most selfish and contracted form, to upholdthe delusion. Apart from these local and, weventure to hope, these temporary exceptions,the same moralities are recognized and honoured ;and, however prevalent in practice, in sentimentat least, the same vices are disowned and execratedall the world over. In proportion as superstitionis dissipated, and prejudice is graduallyON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 93weakened by the larger intercourse of nations,these moral peculiarities do evidently wearaway ; till at length, if we may judge from theobvious tendency of things, conscience will, inthe full manhood of our species, assert theuniversality and the unchangeableness of herdecisions. There is no speech nor language,where her voice is not heard ; her line is goneout through all the earth ; and her words to theends of the world.18. On the whole, then, conscience, whether itbe an original or a derived faculty, yet as foundedon human nature, if not forming a constituentpart of it, may be regarded as a faithful witnessfor God the author of that nature, and as renderingto his character a consistent testimony.It is not necessary, for the establishment of ourparticular lesson, that we should turn that whichis clear into that which is controversial by ourentering into the scientific question respectingthe physical origin of conscience, or tracing theimagined pedigree of its descent from simpleror anterior principles in the constitution of man.For, as has been well remarked by Sir JamesMackintosh — " If conscience be inherent, thatcircumstance is, according to the common modeof thinking, a sufficient proof of its title toveneration. But if provision be made, in theconstitution and circumstances of all men foruniformity, producing it by processes similar to94 ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.those which produce other acquired sentiments,may not our reverence be augmented by admirationof that supreme wisdom, which, in suchmental contrivances, yet more highly than in thelower world of matter, accomplish mighty purposesby instruments so simple?" It is nottherefore the physical origin, but the fact, of theuniformity of conscience, wherewith is concernedthe theological inference that we attempt to drawfrom it. This ascendant faculty of our nature,which has been so often termed the divinity withinus, notwithstanding the occasional sophistry ofthe passions, is on the whole, representative of theDivinity above us ; and the righteousness andgoodness and truth the lessons of which it givesforth every where, may well be regarded, bothas the laws which enter into the juridical constitution,and as the attributes which enter intothe moral character of God.19. We admit a considerable diversity ofmoral observation in the various countries of theearth, but without admitting any correspondentdiversity of moral sentiment between them.When human sacrifices are enforced and applaudedin one nation — this is not because oftheir cruelty, but notwithstanding of their cruelty.Even there, the universal principle of humanitywould be acknowledged, that it were wrong toinflict a wanton and uncalled for agony on any ofour fellows — but there is a local superstition whichON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 95counteracts the universal principle, and overbearsit. When in the republic of Sparta, theft,instead of being execrated as a crime, was dignifiedinto an art and an accomplishment, andon that footing admitted into the system of theiryouthful education — it was not because of itsinfringement on the rights of property, but notwithstandingof that infringement, and only becausea local patriotism made head against theuniversal principle, and prevailed over it. Apartfrom such disturbing forces as these, it will befound that the sentiments of men gravitate towardsone and the same standard all over theglobe ; and that, when once the observations ofsuperstition and selfishness are dissipated, therewill be found the same moral light in everymind, a recognition of the same moral law, asthe immutable and eternal code of righteousnessfor all countries and all ages. The following isthe noble testimony of a heathen, who tells uswith equal eloquence and truth, that, even amidall the perversities of a vitiated and endlesslydiversified creed, conscience sat mistress overthe whole earth, and asserted the supremacy ofher OAW unalterable obligations. " Est quidemvera lex, recta ratio, natures congress, diffusain omnes, constans, sempiterna, quae voce adofficium jubendo, veranda a fraude deterred ;quae tamen neque propos frustra jubet aut vetat,nee improves jubendo aut veranda move. Hic96 ON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE.legs nee obrogari fas est, neque derogate ex hacaliquid licet, neque tota abrogate protest. Neevero, aut per senatus aut per populus solve haclege possumus. Neque est quatenus explanatoryaut interpret ejus alius. Nee erst alialex Rome, alia Aliens, alia nunc, alia pontiac;sed et omnes gentes, et omni tempore, una lexet sempiterna et immortalise continent ; uniqueerst communis quasi magister, et imperatoromnium Deus ille, legis humus inventor, discernlater ; cui qui non parent, ipse se fugit,ac naturam hominis aspernabitur, atque hoc ipsolet maxims poena, etiam si caetera suppliciaquae putantur efFugerit."20. Such then is our first argument for themoral character of God — even the moral characterof the law of conscience ; that consciencewhich He hath inserted among the faculties ofour nature ; and armed with the felt authority ofa master ; and furnished with sanctions for theenforcement of its dictates ; and so framed, that,apart from local perversities of the understandingor the habits, all its decisions are on the side ofrighteousness. The inference is neither a distantnor an obscure one, from the character of such alaw to the character of its law-giver. Neither isit an inference, destroyed by the insurrectionwhich has taken place on the part of our lowerfaculties, or by the actual prevalence of vice inthe world. For this has only enabled conscienceON THE SUPREMACY OF CONSCIENCE. 97to come forth with another and additional demonstrationof its sovereignty — just as the punishmentof crime in society bears evidence to thejustice of the government which is establishedthere. In general, the inward complacency feltby the virtuous, does not so impressively bespeakthe real purpose and character of this the rulingfaculty in man, as do the remorse, and the terror,and the bitter dissatisfaction, wherewith thehearts of the wicked are exercised. It is true,that, by every act of iniquity, outrage is done tothe law of conscience ; but there is a felt reactionwithin which tells that the outrage isresented ; and then it is, that conscience makesmost emphatic assertion of its high prerogative,when, instead of coming forth as the benign andgenerous dispenser of its rewards to the obedient,it comes forth like an offended monarch in thecharacter of an avenger. Were we endowedwith prophetic vision, so as to behold, among theyet undisclosed secrets of futurity, the spectacleof a judge, and a judgment-seat, and an assembledworld, and the retribution of pleasure andpain to the good and to the evil ; this werefetching from afar an argument for the righteousnessof God. But the instant pleasure and theinstant pain wherewith conscience follows up thedoings of man, brings this very argument withinthe limits of actual observation. Only, insteadof being manifested by the light of a preterna-c. H98 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDtiiral revelation, it is suggested to us by one ofthe most familiar certainties of experience, for inthese phenomena and feelings of our own moralnature, do we behold not only a present judgment,but a present execution of the sentence.Chapter II.SECOND GENERAL ARGUMENT.On the inherent Pleasure of the Virtuous, andMisery of the Vicious Affections.1 . We are often told by moralists, that there is anative and essential happiness in moral worth ;and a like native and essential wretchednessin moral depravity — insomuch that the one mayberegarded as its own reward, and the other asits own punishment. We do not always recollectthat this happiness on the one hand, andthis misery on the other, are each of them madeup, severally of distinct ingredients ; and thatthus, by mental analysis, we might strengthenour argument both for the being and the characterof God. When we discover, that, into thisalleged happiness of the good there enter moreenjoyments than one, we thereby obtain two orMISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 99more testimonies of the divine regard for virtue ;and the proof is enhanced in the same peculiarway, that the evidence of design is, in anyother department of creation, when we perceivethe concurrence of so many separate and independentelements, which meet together for theproduction of some complex and beneficialresult.*2. We have already spoken of one such ingredient.There is a felt satisfaction in the thoughtof having done what we know to be right ; and,in counterpart to this complacency of self approbation,there is a felt discomfort, amounting oftento bitter and remorseful agony, in the thought ofhaving done what conscience tells us to bewrong. This implies a sense of the rectitude ofwhat is virtuous. But without thinking of itsrectitude at all, without viewing it in referenceeither to the law of conscience or to the law ofGod, with no regard to jurisprudence in thematter — there is, in the virtuous affection itself,another and a distinct enjoyment. We ought tocherish and to exercise benevolence ; and thereis a pleasure in the consciousness of doing whatwe ought : but beside this moral sentiment, andbeside the peculiar pleasure appended to benevolenceas moral, there is a sensation in themerely physical affection of benevolence ; andSee Chap. I. 6.100 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDthat sensation, of itself, is in the highest degreepleasurable. The primary or instant gratificationwhich there is in the direct and immediatefeeling of benevolence is one thing : the secondaryor reflex gratification which there is in theconsciousness of benevolence as moral is anotherthing. The two are distinct of themselves ; butthe contingent union of them, in the case ofevery virtuous affection, gives a multiple forceto the conclusion, that God is the lover, and,because so, the patron or the rewarder of virtue.He hath so constituted our nature, that, in thevery flow and exercise of the good affections,there shall be the oil of gladness. There is instantdelight in the first conception of benevolence.There is sustained delight in its continuedexercise. There is consummated delight in thehappy smiling and prosperous result of it. Kindness,and honesty, and truth, are, of themselves,and irrespective of their rightness, sweet unto thetaste of the inner man. Malice, envy, falsehood,injustice, irrespective of their wrongness, haveof themselves, the bitterness of gall and wormwood.. The Deity hath annexed a high mentalenjoyment, not to the consciousness only ofgood affections, but to the very sense and feelingof good affections. However closely these mayfollow on each other — nay, however implicatedor blended together they may be at the samemoment into one compound state of feeling •MISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 101they are not the less distinct on that account, ofthemselves. They form two pleasurable sensations,instead of one ; and their apposition, in thecase or every virtuous deed or virtuous desire,exhibits to us that very concurrence in theworld of mind, which obtains with such frequencyand fulness in the world of matter — affording, inevery new part that is added, not a simply repeatedonly, but a vastly multiplied evidence fordesign, throughout all its combinations. Thereis a pleasure in the very sensation of virtue ; andthere is a pleasure attendant on the sense of itsrectitude These two phenomena are independentof each other. Let there be a certain numberof chances against the first in a randomeconomy of things, and also a certain number ofchances against the second. In the actualeconomy of things, where there is the conjunctionof both phenomena — it is the product ofthese two numbers which represents the amountof evidence afforded by them, for a moral governmentin the world, and a moral Governorover them.3. In the calm satisfactions of virtue, this distinctionmay not be so palpable, as in the pungentand more vividly felt disquietudes whichare attendant on the wrong affections of ournature. The perpetual corrosion of that heart,for example, which frets in unhappy peevishnessall the day long, is plainly distinct from the102 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDbitterness of that remorse which is felt, in therecollection of its harsh and injurious out-breakingon the innocent sufferers within itsreach. It is saying much for the moral characterof God, that he has placed a consciencewithin us, which administers painful rebuke onevery indulgence of a wrong affection. But it issaying still more for such being the character ofour Maker — so to have framed our mental constitution,that, in the very working of these badaffections there should be the painfulness of afelt discomfort and discordancy.' Such is themake or mechanism of our nature, that it isthwarted and put out of sorts, by rage and envy,and hatred ; and this, irrespective of the adversemoral judgments which conscience passes uponthem. Of themselves, they are unsavoury ; andno sooner do they enter the heart, than theyshed upon it an immediate distillation of bitternessJust as the placid smile of benevolencebespeaks the felt comfort of benevolence ; sointhe frown and tempest of an angry countenance,do we read the unhappiness of that manwho is vexed and agitated by his own malignantaffections — eating inwardly as they do on thevitals of his enjoyment. It is, therefore, that heis often styled, and truly, a self-tormentor ; or,his own worst enemy. The delight of virtue initself, is a separate thing from the delight of theconscience which approves it. And the painMISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 103of moral evil in itself, is a separate thing fromthe pain inflicted by conscience in the act ofcondemning it. They offer to our notice twodistinct ingredients, both of the present rewardattendant upon virtue, and of the present penaltyattendant upon vice ; and so, enhance the evidencethat is before our eyes, for the moralcharacter of that administration, under whichthe world has been placed by its author. Theappetite of hunger is rightly alleged, in evidenceof the care, wherewith the Deity hathprovided for the well-being of our natural constitution; and the pleasurable taste of food isrightly alleged as an additional proof of thesame. And so, if the urgent voice of consciencewithin, calling us to virtue, be alleged in evidenceof the care, wherewith the Deity hathprovided for the well-being of our moral constitution; the pleasurable taste of virtue in itself,with the bitterness of its opposite, may well bealleged as additional evidence thereof. Theyalike afford the present and the sensible tokensof a righteous administration, and so of arighteous God.4. Our present argument is grounded, neitheron the rectitude of virtue, nor on its utility inthe grosser and more palpable sense of that termbut on the immediate sweetness of it. It isthe office of conscience to tell us of its rectitude.It is by experience that we learn its utility.104 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDBut the sweetness of it — the dulce of virtue, asdistinguished from its utile, is a thing of instantsensation. It may be decomposed into twoingredients, with one of which conscience hasto do — even the pleasure we have, when anydeed or any affection of ours receives from herafavourable verdict. But it has another ingredientwhich forms the proper and the distinctargument that we are now urging — even thepleasure we have in the mere relish of theaffection itself. If it be a proof of benevolencein God, that our external organs of taste shouldhave been so framed, as to have a liking forwholesome food ; it is no less the proof both ofa benevolent and a righteous God, so to haveframed our mental economy, as that right andwholesome morality should be palatable to thetaste of the inner man. Virtue is not only seento be right — it is felt to be delicious. There ishappiness in the very wish to make othershappy. There is a heart's ease, or a heart'senjoyment, even in the first purposes of kindness,as well as in its subsequent performances.There is a certain rejoicing sense of clearness inthe consistency, the exactitude of justice andtruth. There is a triumphant elevation of spiritin magnanimity and honour. In perfect harmonywith this, there is a placid feeling ofserenity and blissful contentment in gentlenessand humility. There is a noble satisfaction inMISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 105those victories, which, at the bidding of principle,or by the power of self-command, may have beenachieved over the propensities of animal nature.There is an elate independence of soul, in theconsciousness of having nothing to hide, andnothing to be ashamed of. In a word, by theconstitution of our nature, each virtue has itsappropriate charm ; and virtue, on the whole, isa fund of varied, as well as of perpetual enjoyment,to him who hath imbibed its spirit, andis under the guidance of its principles. He feelsall to be health and harmony within ; and withouthe seems as if to breathe in an atmosphere ofbeauteous transparency — proving how much thenature of man and the nature of virtue are inunison with each other. It is hunger whichurges to the use of food ; but it strikingly demonstratesthe care and benevolence of God, soto have framed the organ of taste, as that thereshall be a superadded enjoyment in the use of it.It is conscience which urges to the practice ofvirtue ; but it serves to enhance the proof of amoral purpose, and therefore of a moral characterin God, so to have framed our mentaleconomy, that, in addition to the felt obligationof its Tightness, virtue should of itself, be soregaling to the taste of the inner man. / ^V5. In counterpart to these sweets and satisfactionsof virtue, is the essential and inherent bitternessof all that is morally evil. We repeat,106 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDthat, with this particular argument, we do notmix up the agonies of remorse. It is the wretchednessof vice in itself, not the wretchednesswhich we suffer because of its recollected and feltwrongness that we now speak of. It is not thepainfulness of the compunction felt because ofour anger, upon which we at this moment insist ;but the painfulness of the emotion itself; and thesame remark applies to all the malignant desiresof the human heart. True, it is inseparable fromthe very nature of a desire, that there must besome enjoyment or other, at the time of its gratification; but, in the case of these evil affections,it is not unmixed enjoyment. The most ordinaryobserver of his own feelings, however incapableof analysis, must be sensible, even at themoment of wreaking, in full indulgence of hisresentment, on the man who has provoked orinjured him, that all is not perfect and entireenjoyment within ; but that, in this, and indeedin every other malignant feeling, there is a soreburden of disquietude — an unhappiness tumultin the heart, and visibly pictured on thecountenance. The ferocious tyrant who has onlyto issue forth his mandate, and strike dead atpleasure the victim of his wrath, with any circumstancetoo of barbaric caprice and cruelty, whichhis fancy in the very waywardness of passionunrestrained and power unbounded might suggestto him — he may be said to have experiencedMISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 107through life a thousand gratifications, in thesolaced rage and revenge, which, though everbreaking forth on some new subject, he canappease again every day of his life by some newexecution. But we mistake it if we think otherwisethan that, in spite of these distinct and verynumerous nay daily gratifications if he so choose,it is not a life of fierce internal agony notwithstanding.It seems indispensable to the nature ofevery desire, and to form part indeed of its veryidea, that there should be a distinctly felt pleasure,or at least, a removal at the time of adistinctly felt pain, in the act of its fulfilment —yet, whatever recreation or relief may have thusbeen rendered, without doing away the miseryoften in the whole amount of it the intensemisery, inflicted upon man by the evil propensitiesof his nature. Who can doubt for examplethe unhappiness of the habitual drunkard? —and that, although the ravenous appetite, bywhich he is driven along a stormy career,meets every day, almost every hour of the day,with the gratification that is suited to it. Thesame may be equally affirmed of the voluptuary,or of the depredator, or of the extortioner, or ofthe liar. Each may succeed in the attainmentof his specific object ; and we cannot possiblydisjoin from the conception of success, the conceptionof some sort of pleasure — yet in perfectconsistency, we affirm, with a sad and heavy108 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDburthen of unpleasantness or unhappiness onthe whole. He is little conversant with ournature who does not know of many a passionbelonging to it, that it may be the instrumentof many pleasurable, nay delicious or exquisitesensations, and yet be a wretched passion still ;the domineering tyrant of a bondsman, who atonce knows himself to be degraded, and feelshimself to be unhappy. A sense of guilt isone main ingredient of this misery — yet physically,and notwithstanding the pleasure or therelief inseparable at the moment from every indulgenceof the passions, there are other sensationsof bitterness, which of themselves, and apartfrom remorse, would cause the suffering to preponderate.6. There is an important discrimination madeby Bishop Butler in his sermons ; and, by thehelp of which, this phenomenon, of apparent contradictionor mystery in our nature, may besatisfactorily explained. He distinguishes betweenthe final object of any of our desires, andthe pleasure attendant on or rather inseparablefrom its gratification. The object is not thepleasure, though the pleasure be an unfailingand essential accompaniment on the attainmentof the object. This is well illustrated by theappetite of hunger, of which it were more properto say that it seeks for food, than that it seeks forthe pleasure which there is in eating the food.MISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 109The food is the object ; the pleasure is the accompaniment.AVe do not here speak of the distinctand secondary pleasure which there is in the tasteof food, but of that other pleasure which strictlyand properly attaches to the gratification of theappetite of hunger. This is the pleasure, orrelief, which accompanies the act of eating ;while the ultimate object, the object in whichthe appetite rests and terminates, is the fooditself. The same is true of all our special affections.Each has a proper and peculiar object ofits own, and the mere pleasure attendant on theprosecution or the indulgence of the affection isnot, as has been clearly established by Butlerand fully reasserted by Dr. Thomas Brown, isnot that object. The two are as distinct fromeach other, as a thing loved is distinct from thepleasure of loving it. Every special inclinationhas its special and counterpart object. Theobject of the inclination is one thing ; the pleasureof gratifying the inclination is another ;and, in most instances, it were more proper tosay, that it is for the sake of the object than forthe sake of the pleasure that the inclination isgratified. The distinction that we now urge thoughfelt to be a subtle, is truly a substantial one ;and pregnant, both with important principle andimportant application. The discovery and clearstatement of it by Butler may well be regardedas the highest service rendered by any philosPLEASURE OF Virtuous, ANDsophie to moral science ; and that, from the lightwhich it casts, both on the processes of thehuman constitution and on the theory of virtue.As one example of the latter service, the principlein question, so plainly and convincinglyunfolded by this great Christian philosopher inhis sermon on the love of our neighbour, strikes,and with most conclusive effect, at the root ofthe selfish system of morals ; a system whichprofesses that man's sole object, in the practiceof all the various moralities, is his own individualadvantage. Now, in most cases of a special, andmore particularly of a virtuous affection, it canbe demonstrated, that the object is a somethingout of himself and distinct from himself. Takecompassion for one instance out of the many.The object of this affection is the relief of another'smisery, and, in the fulfilment of this, doesthe affection meet with its full solace and gratification; that is, in a something altogetherexternal from himself. It is true, that there isan appropriate pleasure in the indulgence of thisaffection, even as there is in the indulgence ofevery other ; and in proportion, too, to thestrength of the affection, will be the greatness ofthe pleasure. The man who is doubly morecompassionate than his fellow, will have doublya greater enjoyment in the relief of misery; yetthat, most assuredly, not because he of the twois the more intently set on his own gratification.MISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. Illbut because he of the two is the more intentlyset on an outward accomplishment, the relief ofanother's wretchedness. The truth is, that, justbecause more compassionate than his fellow, themore intent is he than the other on the object ofthis affection, and the less intent is he than theother on himself the subject of this affection.His thoughts and feelings are more drawn awayto the sufferer, and therefore more drawn awayfrom himself. He is the most occupied with theobject of this affection ; and, on that very account,the least occupied with the pleasure of its indulgence.And it is precisely the objective qualityof these regards, which stamps upon compassionthe character of a disinterested affection. Hesurely is the most compassionate whose thoughtsand feelings are most drawn away to the sufferer,and most drawn away from self; or, in otherwords, most taken up with the direct considerationof him who is the object of this affection, andleast taken up with the reflex consideration ofthe pleasure that he himself has in the indulgenceof it. Yet this prevents not the pleasure frombeing actually felt ; and felt, too, in very proportionto the intensity of the compassion ; orinother words, more felt the less it has beenthought of at the time, or the less it has beenpursued for its own sake. It seems unavoidablein every affection, that, the more a thing is loved,the greater must be the pleasure of indulging the112 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDlove of it : yet it is equally unavoidable, that thegreater in that case will be our aim towards theobject of the affection, and the less will be ouraim towards the pleasure which accompanies itsgratification. And thus, to one who reflectsprofoundly and carefully on these things, it is noparadox that he who has had doubly greaterenjoyment than another in the exercise of compassion,is doubly the more disinterested of thetwo ; that he has had the most pleasure in thisaffection who has been the least careful to pleasehimself with the indulgence of it ; that he whosevirtuous desires, as being the strongest, have intheir gratification ministered to self the greatestsatisfaction, has been the least actuated of allhis fellows by the wishes, and stood at the greatestdistance from the aims of selfishness.*7. And moreover, there is a just and philosophicalsense, in which many of our special affections,besides the virtuous, are alike disinterestedwith these ; even though they have been commonlyranked among the selfish affections of ournature. The proper object of self-love is thegood of self; and this calm general regard toour own happiness may be considered, in fact,as the only interested affection to which ournature is competent. The special affections are,The purely disinterested character of a right religious affectionmight be proved by these considerations.MISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 113one and all of them, distinct from self-love, bothin their objects, and in the real psychologicalcharacter of the affections themselves. Theobject of the avaricious affection is the acquirementof wealth ; of the resentful, the chastisementof an offender ; of the sensual, somethingappropriate or suited to that corporeal affectionwhich forms the reigning appetite at the time.In none of these, is the good of self the properdiscriminative object of the affection ; and themind of him who is under their power, andengaged in their prosecution, is differently employed,from the mind of him, who, at the time,is either devising or doing aught for the generalor abstract end of his own happiness. None ofthese special affections is identical with theaffection which has happiness for its object. Sofarfrom this, the avaricious man often, consciousof the strength of his propensity, and atthe moment of being urged forward by it to newspeculations, acknowledges in his heart, that hewould be happier far, could he but moderate itsviolence, and be satisfied with a humbler fortunethan that to which his aspirations would carryhim. And the resentful man, in the very actof being tempest driven to some furious onsetagainst the person who lias affronted or betrayedhim, may yet be sensible that, instead of seekingfor any benefit to himself, he is rushing on thec. I114 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDdestruction of his character, or fortune, or evenlife. And many is the drunkard who underthe goading of an appetite which he cannotwithstand, in place of self-love being the principle,and his own greatest happiness the object,knows himself to be on the road to inevitableruin. There is an affection which has happinessfor its object ; but this is not the affectionwhich rules and has the ascendency in any ofthese instances. These are all special affections,grounded on the affinities which obtain betweencertain objects and certain parts of human nature; and which cannot be indulged beyond agiven extent, without distemper and discomfortto the whole nature ; so that, in spite of all theparticular gratifications which follow in theirtrain, the man over whom they tyrannize maybeunhappy upon the whole. The very distinctionbetween the affection of self-love and thespecial affections proves that there is a correspondingdistinction in their objects ; and thisagain, that many of the latter may be gratified,while the former is disappointed, — or, in otherwords, that, along with many particular enjoyments,the general state of man may bethat of utter and extreme wretchedness. It istherefore a competent question, what those specialaffections are, which most consist with thegeneral happiness of the mind ; and this, notwithstandingthat they all possess one circum-miseryOF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 115Stance in common — the unavoidable pleasureappendant to the gratification of each of them.*8. This explanation will help us to understandwherein it is that the distinction in point of enjoyment,between a good and an evil affectionThe following are the clear and judicious observations of SirJames Mackintosh on this subject : —In contending, therefore, that the benevolent affections are disinterested,no more is claimed for them than must be granted tomere animal appetites and to malevolent passions. Each of theseprinciples alike seeks its own object, for the sake simply of obtainingit. Pleasure is the result of the attainment, but no separatepart of the aim of the agent. The desire that another personmay be gratified, seeks that outward object alone, according to thegeneral course of human desire. Resentment is as disinterestedas gratitude or pity, but not more so. Hunger or thirst may beas much as the purest benevolence, at variance with self-love. Aregard to our own general happiness is not a vice, but in itself anexcellent quality. It were well if it prevailed more generally overcraving and shortsighted appetites. The weakness of the socialaffections, and the strength of the private desires, properly constituteselfishness ; a vice utterly at variance with the happiness ofhim who harbours it, and as such, condemned by self-love. Thereare as few who attain the greatest satisfaction to themselves, aswho do the greatest good to others. It is absurd to say with some,that the pleasure of benevolence is selfish, because it is felt byself. Understanding and reasoning are acts of self, for no mancan think by proxy; but no man ever called them selfish, why?Evidently because they do not regard self. Precisely the samereason applies to benevolence. Such an argument is a grossconfusion ©f self, as it is a subject of feeling or thought, with selfconsidered as the object of either. It is no more just to referthe private appetites to self-love because they commonly promotehappiness, than it would be to refer them to self-hatred, in thosefrequent cases where their gratification obstructs it."116 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDof our nature, properly lies. For there is a certainspecies of enjoyment common to them all.It were a contradiction in terms to affirm otherwise; for it were tantamount to saying, that anaffection may be gratified, without the actualexperience of a gratification . There must be somesensation or other of happiness, at the time whena man obtains that which he is seeking for ; andif it be not a positive sensation of pleasure, it willat least be the sensation of a relief from pain, aswhen one meets with the opportunity of wreakingupon its object, that indignation which hadlong kept his heart in a tumult of disquietude.We therefore would mistake the matter, if wethought, that a state even of thorough and unqualifiedwickedness was exclusive of all enjoyment— for even the vicious affections must sharein that enjoyment, which inseparably attaches toevery affection, at the moment of its indulgence.And thus it is, that even in the veriest Pandemonium,might there be lurid gleams of ecstacy, andshouts of fiendish exultation — the merriment ofdesperadoes in crime, who send forth the outcriesof their spiteful and savage delight, whensome deep-laid villany has triumphed ; or whenin some dire perpetration of revenge, they havegiven full satisfaction and discharge to themalignity of their accursed nature. The assertiontherefore may be taken too generally, when it isstated, that there is no enjoyment whatever inMISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 117the veriest hell of assembled outcasts ; for eventhere, might there be many separate and specificgratifications. And we must abstract the pleasureessentially involved in every affection, atthe instant of its indulgence, and which cannotpossibly be disjoined from it, ere we see clearlyand distinctively wherein it is that, in respect ofenjoyment, the virtuous and vicious affectionsdiffer from each other. For it is true, that thereis a common resemblance between them ; andthat, by the universal law and nature of affection,there must be some sort of agreeable sensation, inthe act of their obtaining that which they areseeking after. Yet it is no less true, that, didthe former affections bear supreme rule in theheart, they would brighten and tranquillize thewhole of human existence — whereas, had thelatter the entire and practical ascendency, theywould distemper the whole man, and make himas completely wretched as he were completelyworthless.9. There is one leading difference then betweena virtuous and a vicious affection — that there isalways a felt sweetness in the very presence and.contact of the former ; whereas, in the presenceand contact of the latter, there is generally orvery often at least, a sensation of bitterness. Letthem agree as they may in the undoubted factof a gratification in the attainment of theirrespective ends, the affections themselves may118 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDbe long in existence and operation before theirends are arrived at ; and then it is, we affirm,that if compared, there will be found a widedistinction and dissimilarity between them.The very feeling of kindness is pleasant to theheart ; and the very feeling of anger is a painfuland corrosive one. The latter, we know, is oftensaid to be a mixed feeling — because of both thepleasure and the pain which are said to enterinto it. But it will be found that the pleasure,in this case, lies in the prospect of full andfinal gratification ; and very often, in a sort ofcurrent or partial gratification which one mayexperience beforehand, in the mere vent or utteranceby words, of the labouring violence that iswithin — seeing that words of bitterness, whendischarged on the object of our wrath, are sometimesthe only, and even the most effective executionersof all the vengeance that we meditate ;besides that by their means, we may enlist inour favour the grateful sympathy of other men —thus obtaining a solace to ourselves, and aggravatingthe punishment of the offender, byexciting against him, in addition to our ownhostility, the hostile indignation of his fellows.And thus too is it, that, in the case of anger,there may not only be a completed gratificationat the last, by the infliction of a full and satisfactorychastisement ; but a gratification, as it wereby instalments, with every likely purpose ofMISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 119retaliation that we may form in our bosoms, andevery sentence of keen and reproached eloquencethat may fall from our lips. And so anger hasbeen affirmed to be a mixed emotion, from confoundingthe pleasure that lies in the gratificationof the emotion, with the pleasure that is supposedto lie in the feeling of the emotion. But thetruth is, that, apart from the gratification, theemotion is an exceedingly painful one — insomuchthat the gratification mainly lies in the removal ofa pain, or in the being ridded of a felt uneasiness.Compassion may in the same way be termeda mixed feeling. But on close attention to thesetwo affections and comparison between them, itwill be found, that all the pleasure of anger liesin its gratification, and all the pain of it in thefeeling itself — whereas all the pain of compassionlies in the disappointment of its gratification,while in the feeling itself there is nought butpleasure. Let the respective gratifications ofthese two affections — the one, by the fulfilledretaliation of a wrong ; the other, by the fulfilledrelief of a suffering — let these gratifications beput out of notice altogether, that we might butattend to the yet ungratified feelings themselves :and we cannot imagine a greater difference ofstate between two minds, than that of one whichluxuriates in the tenderness of compassion, andthat of another which breathes and is infuriatedwith the dark passions and the still darker PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDposes of resentment. Or we may appeal to theexperience of the same mind, which at one timemay have its hour of meditated kindness, and atanother its hour of meditated revenge. Wespeak of these two, not in the moment of theirrespective triumphs, not of the sensations attendanton the success of each — but of the directand instant sensations which lie in the feelingsthemselves. They form two as distinct statesin the moral world, as sunshine and tempest arein the physical world. We have but to namethe elements which enter into the compositionof each, in order to suggest the utter contrarietywhich obtains between them — between the calmand placid cheerfulness on the one hand of thatheart which is employed in conceiving thegenerous wishes, or in framing the liberal andfruitful devices of benevolence ; and, on the otherhand, the turbulence and fierce disorder of thesame heart, when burning disdain, or fell andimplacable hatred has taken possession of it — thereaction of its own affronted pride, or aggrievedsense of the injury which has been done to it.10. But perhaps the most favourable momentfor comparison between them, is when each isfrustrated of its peculiar aim ; and so each issent back upon itself, with that common sufferingto which all the affections are liable — thesuffering of a disappointment. We shall be atno loss to determine on which side the advantageMISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 121lies, if we have either felt or witnessed benevolencein tears, because of the misery which itcannot alleviate ; and rage, in the agonies of itsdefeated impotence, because of the haughty orsuccessful defiance of an enemy, whom withvain hostility it has tried to assail, but cannotreach. We have the example of a good affectionunder disappointment, in the case of virtuousgrief or virtuous indignation ; and of a badaffection under disappointment, in the case ofenvy, when, in spite of every attempt to calumniateor depress its object, he shines forth touniversal acknowledgment and applause, in allthe lustre of his vindicated superiority. Itmarks how distinct these two sets of feelings arefrom each other, that, with the former, evenunder the pain of disappointment, there is asomething in the very taste and quality of thefeelings themselves, which acts as an emollientor a charm, and mitigates the painfulness — while,with the latter, there is nought to mitigate, butevery thing to exasperate, and more fiercely toagonize. The malignant feelings are no soonerturned inwardly, by the arrest of a disappointmentfrom without, than they eat inwardly ; and,when foiled in the discharge of their purposedviolence upon others, they recoil — and, withoutone soothing ingredient to calm the labouringeffervescence, they kindle a hell in the heart ofthe unhappy owner. Internally, there is a celestePLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDtial peace and satisfaction in virtue, even thoughin the midst of its outward discomfiture, it becompelled to weep over the unredressed wrongsand sufferings of humanity. On the other hand,the very glance of disappointed malevolence, bespeaksof this evil affection, that, of itself, it is afierce and fretting distemper of the soul, an executionerof vengeance for all the guilty passions itmay have fanned into mischievous activity, andfor all the crimes it may have instigated.1 1 . And this contrast between a good and anevil affection, this superiority of the former tothe latter is fully sustained, when, instead oflooking to the state of mind which is left by thedisappointment of each, we look to the state ofmind which is left by their respective gratifications— the one a state of sated compassion, theother of sated resentment. There is one mostobservable distinction between the states of feeling,by which an act of compassion on the onehand, and of resentment on the other, are succeeded.It is seldom that man feasts his eyeson that spectacle of prostrate suffering which, inamoment of fury, he hath laid at his feet ; inthe same way that he feasts his eyes on thatpicture of family comfort which smiles upon himfrom some cottage home, that his generosity hadreared. This looks as if the sweets of benevolencewere lasting, whereas the sweets of revengefulmalice, such as they are, are in general but OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 123mentarj^. An act of compassion may extinguishfor a time the feeling of compassion, by doingaway that suffering which is the object of it ;but then it generally is followed up by a feelingof permanent regard. An act of revenge, whenexecuted to the full extent of the desire or purpose,does extinguish and put an end to thepassion of revenge ; and is seldom, if ever, followedup by a feeling of permanent hatred. Anact of kindness but attaches the more, and augmentsa friendly disposition towards its object.It were both untrue in itself, and impair to ournature to say, that an act of revenge but exasperatesthe more, and always augments, or evenoften augments, a hostile disposition towards itsobject. It has been said that we hate the manwhom we have injured : but whatever the truthof this observation may be, certain it is, that wedo not so hate the man of whom we have takenfull satisfaction for having injured us ; or, if wecould imagine aught so monstrous, and happilyso rare, as the prolonged, the yet unquelledsatisfaction of one, who could be regaled for hourswith the sighs of him whom his own hands hadwounded ; or, for months and years, with thepining destitution of the household whom himselfhad impoverished and brought low : this werebecause the measure of the revenge had notequalled the measure of the felt provocation,only perhaps to be appeased and satiated by124 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDdeath. This, at length, would terminate theemotion. And here a new insight opens upon usinto the distinction between a good and a badaffection. Benevolence, itself of immortal quality,would immortalize its objects : malignity, if notappeased by an infliction short of death, woulddestroy them.* The one is ever strengtheningitself upon old objects, and fastening upon newones ; the other is ever extinguishing its resentmenttowards old objects by the pettier acts ofchastisement, or, if nothing short of a capitalpunishment will appease it, by dying with theirdeath. The exterminating blow, the death which*' clears all scores" — this forms the natural andnecessary limit even to the fiercest revenge ;whereas, the outgoings of benevolence are quiteindefinite. In revenge, the affection is successivelyextinguished ; and, if returned, it is uponnew objects. In benevolence, the affection iskept up for old objects, while ever open to excitementfrom new ones ; and hence a living and amultiplying power of enjoyment, which is peculiarlyits own. On the same principle that wewater a shrub just because we had planted it,does our friendship grow and ripen the moretowards him on whom we had formerly exercisedit. The affection of kindness for each individualSo true it is, that he who hateth his brother with implacablehatred is a murderer.IMISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 125object siirvises the act of kindness, or, rather, isstrengthened by the act. Whatever sweetnessmay have been originally in it, is enhanced bythe exercise ; and, so far from being stifled bythe first gratification, it remains in greater freshnessthan ever for higher and larger gratificationsthan before. It is the perennial quality of theirgratification, which stamps that superiority onthe good affections, we are now contending for.Benevolence both perpetuates itself upon its oldobjects, and expands itself into a wider circle asit meets with new ones. Not so with revenge,which generally disposes of the old object byone gratification ; and then must transfer itselfto a new object, ere it can meet with anothergratification. Let us grant that each affectionhas its peculiar walk of enjoyment. The historyof the one walk presents us with a series of accumulations; the history of the other with a seriesof extinctions.1*2. But in dwelling on this beautiful peculiarity,by which a good affection is distinguishedfrom a bad one, we are in danger of weakeningour immediate argument. We bring forward thematter a great deal too favorably for the malignantdesires of the human heart, if, while reasoningon the supposition of an enjoyment, howevertransitory in their gratification, we give any roomfor the imagination that even this is unmixedenjoyment. We have already stated, that, of126 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDthemselves, and anterior to their gratification,there is a painfulness in these desires ; and thatwhen by their gratification we get quit of thispainfuhiess, we might after all obtain little morethan a relief from misery. But the truth is, that,generally speaking, we obtain a great deal lessonthe side of happiness than this ; for, in mostcases, all that we obtain by the gratification of amalignant passion, is but the exchange of onemisery for another ; and this apart still from theremorse of an evil perpetration. There is onefamiliar instance of it, which often occurs inconversation — when, piqued by something offensivein the remark or manner of our fellows, wereact with a severity which humbles and overwhelmshim. In this case, the pain of the resentmentis succeeded by the pain we feel in thespectacle of that distress which ourselves havecreated ; and this, too, aggravated perhaps bythe reprobation of all the by-sanders, affordingthereby a miniature example of the painful alternationswhich are constantly taking place in thehistory of moral evil ; when the misery of wrongaffections is but replaced, to the perpetrator himself,by the misery of the wrong actions to whichthey have hurried him. It is thus that a life offrequent gratification may, notwithstanding, be alife of intense wretchedness. It may help ourimagination of such a state, to conceive of one,subject every hour to the agonies of hunger, withMISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 127such a mal conformation at the same time in hisorgan of taste, that, in food of every description,he felt a bitter and universal nausea. Therewere here a constant gratification, yet a constantand severe endurance — a mere alternation ofcruel sufferings — the displacement of one set ofagonies, by the substitution of other agonies intheir room. This is seldom, perhaps neverrealized in the physical world ; but in the moralworld it is a great and general phenomenon. Theexample shows at least the possibility of a constitution,under which a series of incessant gratificationsmay be nothing better than a restlesssuccession of distress and disquietude ; and thatsuch should be the constitution of our moralnature as to make a life of vice a life of vanityand cruel vexation, is strong experimental evidenceof Him who ordained this constitution, thatHe hateth iniquity, that He loveth righteousness.13. But the peculiarity Which we have beenincidentally led to notice, is, in itself, pregnantwith inference also. We should augur hopefullyof the final issues of our moral constitution, aswell as conclude favorably of Him who hathordained it — when we find its workings to besuch, that, on the one hand, the feeling of kindnesstowards an individual object, not only survives,but is indefinitely strengthened by the actsof kindness ; and, on the other hand, that, notonly does an act of revenge satiate and put an128 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDend to the feeling of revenge, but even, thatcertain acts of hostility towards the individualobject of our hatred will make us relent fromthis hatred, and at length extinguish it altogether.May we not perceive in this economy abalance in point of tendency, and at length ofultimate effect on the side of virtue ? May it notwarrant the expectation, that, while benevolence,that great conservative principle of being, has init a principle conservative of itself as well as ofits objects, the outbreakings of evil are but partialand temporary ; and that the moral world,viewed as a progressive system and now only inits transition state, has been so constructed as tosecure both the perpetuity of all the good affections,and the indefinite expansion of them tonew objects and over a larger and ever-wideningterritory 1 At all events, whatever reason theremay be to fear, that, in the future arrangementsof nature and providence, both virtue and vicewill be capable of immortality — we might gatherfrom what passes under our eyes, in this rudimentaland incipient stage of human existence,that even with our present constitution virtuealone is capable of a blissful immortality. Formalice and falsehood carry in them the seeds oftheir own wretchedness, if not of their own destruction.Only grant the soul to be imperishable ;and if the character of the governor is to begathered from the final issues of the governmentMISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 129over which lie presides — it says much for themoral character of Him who framed us, that,unless there be an utter reversal of the naturewhich Himself has given, then, in respect to thepower of conferring enjoyment or of maintaining*the soul in its healthiest and happiest mood, itis righteousness alone which endure for ever,and charity alone which never falleth.14. And beside taking account of the specialenjoyments which attach to the special virtues,we might observe on the general state of thatmind, which, under the consistent and comprehensiveprinciple of being or doing what it ought,studies rightly to acquit itself of all the moralobligations. Beside the perpetual feast of anapproving conscience, and the constant recurrenceof those particular gratifications whichattach to the indulgence of every good affectionisit not quite obvious of every mind whichplaces itself under a supreme regimen of morality,that then, it is in its best possible conditionwith regard to enjoyment : like a well strunginstrument, in right and proper tone, because allits parts are put in right adjustment with eachother ? If conscience be indeed the superiorfaculty of our nature, then, every time it is castdown from this pre-eminence, there must be asensation of painful dissonance ; and the wholeman feels out of sorts, as one unhinged or denaturalized.This perhaps is the main reason thatc. K130 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS, ANDa State of well-doing stands associated with astate of well-being ; and why the special virtueof temperance is not more closely associated withthe health of the body, than the general habitof virtue is with a wholesome and well-conditionedstate of the soul. There is then noderangement as it were in the system of ournature — all the powers, whether superior or subordinate,being in their right places, and allmoving without discord and without dislocation.It were anticipating our argument, did we referat present to the confidence and regard wherewitha virtuous man is surrounded in the world.We have not yet spoken of the adaptations toman'smoral constitution from without, but onlyof the inward pleasures and satisfactions whichare yielded in the workings of the constitutionitself. And surely when we find it to have beenso constructed and attuned by its maker, that,in all the movements of virtue there is a felt andgrateful harmony, while a certain jarring senseof violence and discomposure ever attends uponthe opposite — we cannot imagine how the moralcharacter of that being who Himself devised thisconstitution and established all its tendencies,can be more clearly or convincingly read, thanin phenomena like these.15. We have already said that the distinctionso well established by Butler, between the objectof our affection and its accompanying, nay,inseparable pleasure, was the most effectualMISERY OF VICIOUS AFFECTIONS. 131argument that could be brought to bear againstthe selfish system of morals. The virtuousaffection that is in a man's breast simply leadshim to do Avhat he ought ; and in that object herests and terminates. Like ever' other affection,there must be a pleasure conjoined with theprosecution of it ; and at last, a full and finalgratification in the attainment of its object. Butthe object must be distinct from the pleasure,which itself is founded on a prior suitablenessbetween the mind and its object. When a manis actuated by a virtuous desire ; it is the virtueitself that he is seeking, and not the gratificationthat is in it. His single object is to be or to dorightly — though, the more intent he is upon thisobject; the greater will, the greater must be hissatisfaction if he succeed in it. Nevertheless, itis not the satisfaction which he is seeking ; it isthe object which yields the satisfaction — theobject too for its own sake, and not for the sakeof its accompanying or its resulting enjoyment.Nay, the more strongly and therefore the moreexclusively set upon virtue for its own sake ; theless will he think of its enjoyment, and yet thegreater will his actual enjoyment be. In otherwords, virtue, the more disinterested it is, is themore prolific of happiness to him who follows it ;and then it is, that, when freed of all the taintsof mercenary selfishness, it yields to its votarythe most perfect and supreme enjoyment. Suchis the constitution of our nature, that virtue loses132 PLEASURE OF VIRTUOUS AFFECTIONS, ETC.not its disinterested character; and yet manloses not his reward ; and the author of thisconstitution, He who hath ordained all its lawsand its consequences, has given signal proof ofHis own supreme regard for virtue, and thereforeof the supreme virtue of His own character, inthat He hath so framed the creatures of His will,as that their perfect goodness and perfect happinessare at one. Yet the union of these doesnot constitute their unity. The union is a contingentappointment of the Deity ; and so is atonce the evidence and the effect of the goodnessthat is in His own nature.16. This then is our second general argumentfor the moral character of God, grounded on themoral constitution of man ; and prior, as yet, toany view of its adaptation to external nature. Itis distinct from the first argument, as groundedon the phenomena of conscience, which assumesthe office of a judge within the breast, all whosedecisions are on the side of benevolence andjustice ; and which is ever armed with a certainpower of enforcement, both in the pains of remorseand the pleasures of self approbation.These, however, are distinct and ought to be distinguishedfrom the direct pleasures of virtuein itself, and the direct pains of vice in itself,which form truly separate ingredients, on theone hand of a present and often very painful correction,on the other hand, of a present and veryprecious reward.Chapter III.THIRD GENERAL ARGUMENT.The Power and Operation of Habit.1 . We have as yet been occupied with what maybetermed the instant sensations, wherewith moralityis beset in the mind of man — with the voiceof conscience which goes immediately before, orwith the sentence whether of approval or condemnation,which comes immediately after it ;and latterly, with those states of feeling whichare experienced at the moment when under thepower of those affections, to which any moraldesignation, be it of virtue or vice, is applicable —the pleasure which there is in the very presenceand contact of the one, the distaste, the bitternesswhich there is in the presence and contactof the other.2. These phenomena of juxtaposition, as theymay be termed ; these contiguous antecedents andconsequents of the moral and the immoral in man,speak strongly the purpose of Him who ordainedour mental constitution, in having inserted theresuch a constant power of command and encouragementon the side of the former, and a likeconstant operation of checks and discouragementagainst the latter. But, perhaps, POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT.thing more may be collected of the design andcharacter of God, by stretching forward ourobservation prospectively in the history of man,and so extending our regards to the more distantconsequences of virtue or vice, both on the frameof his character and the state of his enjoyments.By studying these posterior results, we approximateour views towards the final issues of thatadministration under which we are placed. Thatdefensive apparatus, wherewith the embryo seedof plants is guarded and protected, might indicatea special care or design in the preserver ofit. What that design particularly is comes tobe clearly and certainly known, when, in thefuture history of the plant, we learn what thefunctions of the seed are, after it has come tomaturity ; and then observe, that, had it beensuffered universally to perish, it would have led,not to the mortality of the individual, for thatis already an inevitable law, but to the extinctionand mortality of the species.3. For tracing forward man's moral history, orthe changes which take place in his moral state,it is necessary that we should advert to the influenceof habit. Yet it is not properly thephilosophy of habit wherewith our argument isconcerned, but with the leading facts of its practicaloperation. A beneficial effect might stillremain an evidence of the divine goodness, bywhatever steps it should be efficiently or physicAND OPERATION OF HABIT. 135call brought about — its power in this way dependingnot on the question how it is, but on thefact that so it is. It were really, therefore, deviatingfrom our owai strict and pertinent line ofenquiry, did we stop to discuss the philosophictheory of habit, or suspend our own independentreasoning till that theory was settled — beside mostunwisely and unnecessarily attaching to ourtheme, all the discredit of an obscure or questionablespeculation. It is with palpable andsure results both in the material and mentalworld, more than with the recondite processes ineither, that theism has chiefly to do ; and it isby the former more than by the latter that thecause of theism is upholden.4. We might only observe, in passing, thatthe modification introduced by Dr. ThomasBrown into the theory of habit, was perhapsuncalled for, even for the accomplishment of hisown purpose, which was to demonstrate that itrequired no peculiar or original law of thehuman constitution to account for its phenomena.He resolves, and we are disposed to thinkrightly, the whole operation of habit into the lawof suggestion — only, he would extend that law tostates of feelings, as well as to thoughts or statesof thoughts.* We are all aware that if twoThe following is the passage taken from his forty-third lecture,in which Dr. Brown seems to connect feeling with feelingby the same mental law which connects thought with thought.136 POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT.objects have been seen or thought of together onany former occasion, then the thought of one ofthem is apt to suggest the thought of the other,and the more apt the more frequently that thesuggestion has taken place — insomuch, that, ifthe suggestion have taken place very often, weshall find it extremely difficult, if not impossible,to break the succession between the thoughtwhich suggests and the thought which is suggestedby it. Now Dr. Brown has conceived itnecessary to extend this principle to feelings aswell as thoughts— insomuch, that, if on a formeroccasion a certain object have been followed upby a certain feeling, or even if one feeling havebeen followed up by another, then the thought ofthe object introduces the feeling, or the onefeeling introduces the other feeling into themind, on the same principle that thought introducesthought. Now we should rather be inclinedto hold that thought introduces feeling,To explain the influence of habit in increasing the tendency tocertain actions I must remark — what I have already more thanonce repeated — that the suggesting influence which is usually expressedin the phrase association of ideas, though that very improperphrase would seem to limit it to our ideas or conceptions only,and has unquestionably produced a mistaken belief of this partialoperation of a general influence — is not limited to those more thanto any other states of mind, but occurs also with equal force in otherfeelings, which are not commonly termed ideas or conceptions ;that our desires or other emotions, for example, may, like them,form a part of our trains of suggestion," &c. See anotherequally ambiguous passage in his sixty-fourth lecture.POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT. 137not in consequence of the same law of suggestionwhereby thought introduces thought, but invirtue of the direct power which lies in theobject of the thought to excite that feeling.When a voluptuous object awakens a voluptuousfeeling, this is not by suggestion, but by a directinfluence of its own. When the picture of thatvoluptuous object awakens the same voluptuousfeeling, we would not ascribe it to suggestion,but still put it down to the power of the object,w whether presented or only represented, to awakencertain emotions. And as little would we ascribethe excitement of the feeling to suggestion, butstill to the direct and original power of theobject — though it were pictured to us only inthought, instead of being pictured to us in visibleimagery. In like manner, when the thought ofan injury awakens in us anger, even as theinjury itself did at the moment of its infliction,we should not ascribe this to that peculiar lawwhich is termed the law of suggestion, and whichundoubtedly connects thought with thought.But we should ascribe it wholly to that lawwhich connects an object with its appropriateemotion — whether that object be present to thesenses, or have only been recalled by thememory and is present to the thoughts. Wesustain an injury, and we feel resentment inconsequence,Without, surely, the law of suggestionhaving had aught to do with the sequence.138 POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT.We see the aggressor afterwards, and our angeris revived against him, and with this particularsuccession the law of suggestion has certainlyhad to do— not, however, in the way of thoughtsuggesting feeling, but only in the way of thoughtsuggesting thought. In truth it is a successionof three terms. The sight of the man awakensa recollection of the injury ; and the thought ofthe injury awakens the emotion. The firstsequence, or that which obtains between the firstand second term, is a pure instance of the suggestionof thought by thought, or, to speak inthe old language, of the association of ideas. Thesecond sequence, or that which obtains betweenthe middle and last term, is still, Dr. Brownwould say, an instance of suggestion, but ofthought suggesting the feeling wherewith it wasformerly accompanied. Whereas, in our apprehension,it is due, not to the law of suggestion,but to the law which connects an object, whetherpresent at the time or thought upon-afterwards,with its counterpart emotion. Still the result isthe same, however differently accounted for.One can think, surely, of the resentment whichnow occupies him, as well as he can think of apast resentment — indeed it is difficult to imaginehow he can feel a resentment without thinkingof it. Let some one thought, then, by the properlaw of suggestion, have introduced the thoughtof an injury that had been done to us ; this secondPOWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT. 139thought introduces the feeling of resentment, notby the law of suggestion, but by the law Whichrelates an object, whether present or thoughtupon, to its appropriate emotion ; this emotion isthought upon, and, not the emotion, but thethought of the emotion recalls the thought of thefirst emotion that was felt at the original intimationof the injury ; and this thought again recallsto us the thought of the injury itself, and perhapsthe thought of other or similar injuries, which, asat the first, excites anew the feeling of anger,but, at this particular step, by means of a lawdifferent from that of suggestion, even the law ofour emotions, in virtue of which, certain objects,when present in any way to the cognizance of theunderstanding, awaken certain sensibilities in theheart. It is thus that thoughts and feelingsmight reciprocally introduce each other, not bymeans of but one law of suggestion extendingin common to them both, but by the interminglingof two laws in this repeating or circulatingprocess, — even the law of suggestion,acting only upon the thoughts ; and the law ofemotion, by which certain objects, when presentedto the senses or to the memory, have thepower to awaken certain correspondent emotions.We in this way get quit of the mysticism whichattaches to the notion of mere feelings eithersuggesting or being suggested by other feelings,separately from thoughts— more especially when.140 POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT.by the association of thoughts or of ideas alone,and the direct power which lies in the objects ofthese ideas to awaken certain emotions, all thephenomena are capable of being explained. Acertain thought or object may suggest the thoughtof a former provocation; this thought mightexcite a feeling of resentment ; the resentment,thus felt or thought upon, might send back themind to a still more vivid impression of itsoriginal cause ; and this again might prolong orwaken the resentment anew, and in greaterfreshness than before. The ultimate effect mightbe a fierce and fiery effervescence of irasciblefeeling. Yet not by the operation of one law,but of two distinct laws in the human constitution; the first that, in virtue of which, thoughtssuggest thoughts ; the second that, in virtue ofwhich, the object thus thought upon awakensthe emotion that is suited to it. yy5. But though for once we have thus advertedto the strict philosophy of the subject, it will beapparent, that, in this instance, it is of no practicalnecessity for the purposes of our argument ;and it is truly the same in many other instances,where, if instead of reasoning theologically onthe palpable operations of the mechanism, weshould reason scientifically on the modus operandi,we would run into really irrelevant discussions.The theme of our present chapter is the effectsof Habit, in as far as these effects serve to in-POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT. 141dictate the design or character of Him who is theauthor of our mental constitution. It matters notto any conclusion of ours, by what recondite, or,it may be, yet undiscovered process these effectsare brought about ; and whether the commontheory, or that of Dr. Brown, or that again asmodified and corrected by ourselves, is the justone. It is enough to know, that, if any givenprocess of intermingled thought and feeling havebeen described by us once, there are laws atwork, which, on the first step of that processagain recurring, would incline us to describe thewhole of the process over again ; and with thegreater power and certainty, the more frequentlythat process has been repeated. We are perfectlysure that the more frequently any particularsequence between thought and thought mayhave occurred, the more readily will it recur ; —so that when once the first thought has enteredthe mind, we may all the more confidentlyreckon on its being followed up by the second.This we hold enough for explaining the everrecurring force and facility, wherewith feelingsalso will arise and be followed up by their indulgence— and that, just in proportion to thefrequency wherewith in given circumstances theyhave been awakened and indulged formerly. Inas far as the objects of gratification are the excitingcauses which stimulate and awaken thedesires of gratification ; then, any process which142 POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT.ensures the presence and application of the causes,will also ensure the fulfilment of the effectswhich result from them. If it be the presenceor perception of the wine that stands before uswhich stirs up the appetite ; and if, instead ofacting on the precept of looking not unto thewine when it is red, we continue to look till theappetite be so enflamed that the indulgencebecomes inevitable — then, as we looked at itcontinuously when present, will we, by the lawof suggestion, be apt to think of it continuouslywhen absent. If the one continuity was notbroken by any considerations of principle orprudence— so the less readily will the other continuitybe broken in like manner. When werevisit the next social company, we shall probablyresign ourselves to the very order of sensationsthat we did formerly ; and the moresurely, the oftener that that order has alreadybeen described by us. And as the order of objectswith their sensations when present, so is theorder of thoughts with their desires when absent.This order forces itself upon the mind with astrength proportional to the frequency of its repetition; and desires, when not evaded by the mindshifting its attention away from the objects ofthem, can only be appeased by their indulgence.6. It is thus that he who enters on a career ofvice, enters on a career of headlong degeneracy.If even for once we have described that processPOWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT. 143of thought and feeling, Which leads, whetherthrough the imagination or the senses, from thefirst presentation of a tempting object to a guiltyindulgence — this of itself establishes a probability,that, on the recurrence of that object,we shall pass onward by the same steps to thesame consummation. And it is a probabilityever strengthening with every repetition of theprocess, till at length it advances towards themoral certainty of a helpless surrender to thetyranny of those evil passions, which we cannotresist, just because the will itself is in thraldom,and we choose not to resist them. It is thus thatwe might trace the progress of intemperance andlicentiousness, and even of dishonesty, to whoserespective solicitations we have yielded at thefirst — till, by continuing to yield, we become thepassive, the prostrate subjects of a force that isuncontrollable, only because we have seldom ornever in good earnest tried to control it. It isnot that we are struck of a sudden with moralimpotency ; but we are gradually benumbed intoit. The power of temptation has not madeinstant seizure upon the faculties, or taken themby storm. It proceeds by an influence that isgently and almost insensibly progressive — justas progressive in truth, as the association betweenparticular ideas is strengthened by the frequencyof their succession. But even as that associationmay at length become inveterate, inso-144 POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT.much that when the first idea finds entry intothe mind, we cannot withstand the importunitywherewith the second insists upon following it ;so might the moral habit become alike inveteratethoughts succeeding thoughts, and urging onwardtheir counterpart desires, in that wontedorder, which had hitherto connected the beginningof a temptation with its full and finalvictory. At each repetition, would we find itmore difficult to break this order, or to lay anarrest upon it — till at length, as the fruit of thiswretched regimen, its unhappy patient is lordedover by a power of moral evil, which possessesthe whole man, and wields an irresistible orrather an unresisted ascendency over him.7. But this melancholy process, leading to avicious indulgence, may be counteracted by anopposite process of resistance, though with fargreater facility at the first — yet a facility everaugmenting, in proportion as the effectual resistanceof temptation is persevered in. That balancingmoment, at which pleasure would allure,and conscience is urging us to refrain, may beregarded as the point of departure or divergency,whence one or other of the two processeswill take their commencement. Each of themconsists in a particular succession of ideas withtheir attendant feelings ; and whichever of themmay happen to be described once, has, by thelaw of suggestion, the greater chance, in thePOWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT. 14-5same circumstances, of being described overagain. Should the mind dwell on an object ofallurement, and the considerations of principlenot be entertained — it will pass onward from thefirst incitement to the final laid guilty indulgenceby a series of stepping stones, each of whichwill present itself more readily in future ; andwith less chance of arrest or interruption by thesuggestions of conscience than before. Butshould these suggestions be admitted, and farmore should they prevail — then, on the principleof association, will they be all the more apt tointervene, on the repetition of the same circumstances; and again break that line of continuity,which, but for this intervention, would have ledfrom a temptation to a turpitude or a crime. Ifon the occurrence of a temptation formerly, consciencedid interpose, and represent the evil of acompliance, and so impress the man with a senseof obligation, as led him to dismiss the fascinatingobject from the presence of his mind, or tohurry away from it — the likelihood is, that therecurrence of a similar temptation will suggestthe same train of thoughts and feelings and leadto the same beneficial result ; and this is a likelihoodever increasing with every repetition ofthe process. The train which woidd have terminatedin a vicious indulgence, is dispossessedby the train which conducts to a resolution andan act of virtuous self-denial. The thoughtsC. L146 POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT.which tend to awaken emotions and purposes onthe side of duty find readier entrance into themind ; and the thoughts which awaken and urgeforward the desire of what is evil more readilygive way. The positive force on the side ofvirtue is augmented, by every repetition of thetrain which leads to a virtuous determination.The resistance to this force on the side of viceis weakened, in proportion to the frequencywherewith that train of suggestions which wouldhave led to a vicious indulgence, is broken anddiscomfited. It is thus that when one is successfullyresolute in his opposition to evil, the powerof making the achievement and the facility ofthe achievement itself are both upon the increase; and virtue makes double gain to herself,by every separate conquest which she may havewon. The humbler attainments of moral worthare first mastered and secured ; and the aspiringdisciple may pass onward in a career that isquite indefinite to nobler deeds and nobler sacrifices.8. And this law of habit when enlisted on theside of righteousness, not only strengthens andmakes sure our resistance to vice, but facilitatesthe most arduous performances of virtue. Theman whose thoughts, with the purposes anddoings to which they lead, are at the bidding ofconscience, will, by frequent repetition, at lengthdescribe the same track almost spontaneously —POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT. 147even as in physical education, things, laboriouslylearned at the first, come to be done at last withoutthe feeling of an effort. And so, in moraleducation, every new achievement of principlesmooths the way to future achievements of thesame kind ; and the precious fruit or purchase ofeach moral victory is to set us on higher andfirmer vantage-ground for the conquests ofprinciple in all time coming. He who resolutelybids away the suggestions of avarice, when theycome into conflict with the incumbent generosity; or the suggestions of voluptuousness,when they come into conflict with the incumbentself-denial ; or the suggestions of anger, whenthey come into conflict with the incumbent actof magnanimity and forbearance — will at lengthobtain, not a respite only, but a final deliverancefrom their intrusion. Conscience, the longer it hasmade way over the obstacles of selfishness andpassion— the less will it give way to these adverseforces, themselves weakened by the repeateddefeats which they have sustained in the warfareof moral discipline : Or, in other words, theoftener that conscience makes good the supremacywhich she claims — the greater would bethework of violence, and less the strength forits accomplishment, to cast her down from thatstation of practical guidance and commandwhich of right belongs to her. It is just because,in virtue of the law of suggestion, those148 POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT.trains of thought and feeling, which connecther first bidding with their final execution, arethe less exposed at every new instance to bedisturbed, and the more likely to be repeatedover again, that every good principle is morestrengthened by its exercise, and every goodaffection is more strengthened by its indulgencethan before. The acts of virtue ripen intohabits ; and the goodly and permanent resultis, the formation or establishment of a virtuouscharacter.9. This then forms the subject of our thirdgeneral argument. The voice of authoritywithin, bidding us to virtue ; and the immediatedelights attendant on obedience, certainly, speakstrongly for the moral character of that administrationunder which we are placed. But, bylooking to posterior and permanent results, wehave the advantage of viewing the system ofthat administration in progress. Instead of theinsulated acts, we are led to regard the abidingand the accumulating consequences — and bystretching forward our observation through largerintervals and to more distant points in the moralhistory of men ; we are in likelier circumstancesfor obtaining a glimpse of their final destination; and so of seizing on this mighty andmysterious secret — the reigning policy of thedivine government, whence we might collect thecharacter of Him who hath ordained it. AndPOWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT. 149surely, it is of prime importance to be noted inthis examination, that by every act of virtue webecome more powerful for its service ; and byevery act of vice we become more helplessly itsslaves. Or, in other words, were these respectivemoral regimens fully developed intotheir respective consummation, it would seem,as if by the one, we should be conducted to thatstate, where the faculty within, which is felt tobe the rightful, would also become the reigningsovereign, and then we should have the fullenjoyment of all the harmony and happinessattendant upon virtue — whereas, by the other,those passions of our nature felt to be inferior,would obtain the lawless ascendency, and subjecttheir wretched bondsmen to the turbulence,and the agony, and the sense of degradation,which, by the very constitution of our being, areinseparable from the reign of moral evil.10. We might not fully comprehend the designor meaning of a process, till we have seen theend of it. Had there been no death, themystery of our present state might have beensomewhat alleviated. We might then have seen,in bolder relief and indelible character, therespective consummation of vice and virtue —perhaps the world partitioned into distinct moralterritories, where the habit of many centurieshad given fixture and establishment, first, to asociety of the upright, now in the firm possessPOWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT.sion of all goodness, as the well-earned result ofthat wholesome discipline through which theyhad passed ; and, second, to a society of thereprobate, now hardened in all iniquity, andabandoned to the violence of evil passions nolonger to be controlled and never to be eradicated.We might then have witnessed thepeace, the contentment, the universal confidenceand love, the melody of soul, that reigned inthe dwellings of the righteous ; and contrastedthese with the disquietudes, the strife, the felland fierce collisions of injustice and mutualdisdain and hate implacable, the frantic bacchanalianexcesses with their dreary intervals ofremorse and lassitude, which kept the otherregion in perpetual anarchy, and which, constitutedas we are, must trouble or dry up all thewell-springs of enjoyment, whether in the heartsof individuals or in the bosom of families. Wecould have been at no loss, to have divined, fromthe history and state of such a world, the policyof its ruler. We should have recognized inthat peculiar economy, by which every actwhether of virtue or vice, made its performerstill more virtuous or more vicious than before,a moral remuneration on the one hand and amoral penalty on the other — with an enhancementof all the consequences, whether good orevil, which flowed from each of them. Wecould not have mistaken the purposes and mindPOWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT. 151of the Deity — when we saw thus palpably, andthrough the demonstrations of experience, theultimate effects of these respective processes ;and, in this total diversity of character, witha like total diversity of condition, were madeto perceive, that righteousness was its owneternal reward, and that wickedness was followedup, and that for ever, w with the bitter fruitof its own ways.1 1 . Death so far intercepts the view of thisresult, that it is not here the object of sight orof experience. Still, however, it remains theobject of our likely anticipation. The truth is,that the process which we are now contemplating,the process by which character is formedand strengthened and perpetuated, suggests oneof the strongest arguments within compass ofthe light of nature, for the immortality of thesoul. In the system of the world we behold somany adaptations, not only between the facultiesof sentient beings, and their counterpartobjects in external nature ; but between everyhistorical progression in nature, and a fulfilmentof corresponding interest or magnitude which itultimately lands in — that we cannot believe ofman's moral history, as if it terminated in death.More especially when we think of the virtuouscharacter, how laboriously it is reared, and howslowly it advances to perfection ; but, at length,how indefinite its capabilities of power and of152 POWER Apse OPERATION OF HABIT.enjoyment are, after this education of habitshas been completed — it seems like the breachof a great and general analogy, if man is to besuddenly arrested on his way to the magnificentresult, for which it might well be deemed thatthe whole of his life was but a preparation ;having just reached the full capacity of anenjoyment, of which he had only been per-mitted in this evanescent scene, a few brief andpassing foretastes. It were like the infliction ofa violence on the continuity of things, of whichwe behold no similar example, if a being sogifted were thus left to perish in the full maturityof his powers and moral acquisitions. Thevery eminence that he has won, we naturallylook upon as the guarantee and the precursor ofsome great enlargement beyond it — warrantingthe hope, therefore, that Death but transformswithout destroying him, or, that the present isonly an embryo or rudimental state, the finaldevelopment of which is in another and futurestate of existence.12. This is not the right place for a fullexposition of this argument. We might onlyobserve, that there is an evidence of man'simmortality, in the moral state and history ofthe bad upon earth, as well as of the good.The truth is, that nature's most vivid anticipationsof a conscious futurity on the otherside of death, are the forebodings of guiltyPOWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT. 153fear, not the bright anticipations of confidentand rejoicing hope. We speak not merelyof the unredressed wrongs inflicted by the evilupon the righteous, and which seem to demandan afterlife of reparation and vengeance.Beside those unsettled questions between manand man, which death breaks off at the middle,and for the adjustment of which one feels asif it were the cry of eternal justice that thereshould be a reckoning afterwards — beside these,there is felt, more directly and vividly still,the sense of a yet unsettled controversy, betweenthe sinner and the God whom he hasoffended. The notion of immortality is farmore powerfully and habitually suggested bythe perpetual haunting or misgivings of thissort of undefined terror, by the dread of acoming penalty — rather than by the consciousnessof merit, or of a yet unsatisfied claim toa well-earned reward. Nor is the argument atall lessened by that observed phenomenon inthe history of guilt, the decay of conscience ;a hebetude, if it may be so termed, of the moralsensibilities, which keeps pace with the growthof a man's wickedness, and, at times, becomesquite inveterate towards the termination of hismortal career. The very torpor and tranquillityof such a state, would only appear all the moreemphatically to tell, that a day of account isyet to come, when, instead of rioting, as POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT.fore, in the impunity of a hardihood thatshields him alike from reproach and fear, consciencewill at length re-awaken to upbraidhim for his misdoings ; at once the assertorof its own cause, and the executioner of itsown sentence. And even the most desperatein crime, do experience, at times, such gleamsand resuscitation of moral light, as themselvesfeel to be the precursors of a revelation stillmore tremendous — when their own conscience,fully let loose upon them, shall, in the handsof an angry God, be a minister of fiercestvengeance. Certain it is, that, if death, insteadof an entire annihilation, be but a removal toanother and a different scene of existence, wesee in this, when combined with the knownlaws and processes of the mind, the possibility,at least, of such a consummation. There ismuch in the business, and entertainments, andconverse, and day-light of that urgent andobtruding world by which we are surrounded,to carry off the attention of the mind from itsown guiltiness, and so, to suspend that agony,which, when thrown back upon itself and disseveredfrom all its objects of gratification, willbe felt, without mitigation and without respite.In the busy whirl of life, the mind, drawnupon in all directions, can find, outwardly andabroad, the relief of a constant diversion fromthe misery of its own internal processes. ButPOWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT. 155a slight change in its locality or its circumstances,would deliver it up to the full burdenand agony of these ; nor can we imagine amore intense and intolerable wretchedness, thanthat which would ensue, simply by rescindingthe connexion which obtains in this worldbetween a depraved mind and its externalmeans of gratification-when, forced inwardlyon its own haunted tenement, it met withnothing there but revenge insatiate, and ragingappetites, that never rest from their unappeasedfermentation ; and withal, to this perpetualsense of want, a pungent and pervading senseof worthlessness. It is the constant testimonyof criminals, that, in the horrors and the tediumof solitary imprisonment, they undergo the mostappalling of all penalties — a penalty, therefore,made up of moral elements alone ; as neitherpain, nor hunger, nor sickness, necessarily formsany of its ingredients. It strikingly demonstratesthe character of Him who so constructedour moral nature, that from the workings ofits mechanism alone, there should be evolveda suffering so tremendous on the children ofiniquity, insomuch that a sinner meets withsorest vengeance when simply left to the fruitof his own ways — whether by the death whichcarries his disembodied spirit to its Tartarus ;or by a resurrection to another scene of existence,where, in full possession of his earthly156 POWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT.habits and earthly passions, he is neverthelessdoomed to everlasting separation from theirpresent counterpart and earthly enjoyments.13. There is a distinction sometimes madebetween the natural and arbitrary rewards ofvirtue, or between the natural and arbitrarypunishments of vice. The arbitrary is exemplifiedin the enactments of human law ; there ingeneral being no natural or necessary connexionbetween the crimes which it denounces, andthe penalties which it ordains for them — asbetween the fine, or the imprisonment, or thedeath, upon the one hand ; and the act ofviolence, whether more or less outrageous, uponthe other. The natural again is exemplified inthe workings of the human constitution ; therebeing a connexion, in necessity and nature,between the temper which prompted the actof violence, and the wretchedness which itinflicts on him who is the unhappy subject,in his own bosom, of its fierce and restlessagitations. It is thus that not only is virtuetermed its own reward, but vice its own greatestplague or self-tormentor. We have no informationof the arbitrary rewards or punishmentsin a future state, but from revelation alone.But of the natural, we have only to suppose,that the existing constitution of man, andhis existing habits, shall be borne with himto the land of eternity ; and we may informPOWER AND OPERATION OF HABIT. 157ourselves now of these, by the experienceof our own felt and familiar nature. Our ownexperience can tell that the native delights ofvirtue, unaided by any high physical gratifications,and only if not disturbed by grievousphysical annoyances, were enough of themselvesto constitute an elysium of pure andperennial happiness : and again, that the nativeagonies of vice, unaided by any inflictions ofphysical suffering, and only if unalleviated by aperpetual round of physical enjoyments, whereenough of themselves to constitute a dire anddreadful Pandemonium. They are not judiciallyawarded, but result from the workings of thatconstitution which God hath given to us ; andthey speak as decisively the purpose and characterof Him who is the author of thatconstitution — as would any code of jurisprudenceproclaimed from the sanctuary of heaven, andwhich assigned to virtue on the one hand, thehonovu's and rewards of a blissful immortality,to vice on the other a place of anguish amongthe outcasts of a fiery condemnation.Chapter IV.On the General Adaptation of External Natureto the Moral Constitution of Man,1. It needs but a cursory observation of lifeto be made sensible, that man has not beenendowed with a conscience, without, at the sametime, being placed in a theatre which affordedthe most abundant scope and occasion for itsexercise. The truth is, that, in the multitudeof fellow-beings by whom he is surrounded,and in the manifold variety of his social andfamily relations, there is a perpetual call onhis sense of right and wrong— insomuch, thatto the doings of every hour throughout hiswaking existence, one or other of these moraldesignations is applicable. It might havebeen stigmatized as the example of a mal-adjustmentin the circumstances of our species,had man been provided with a waste feelingor a waste faculty, which remained dormantand unemployed from the want of counterpartobjects that were suited to it. The wisdomof God admits of glorious vindication againstany such charge in the physical departmentMORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 159of our nature, where the objective and subjectivehave been made so marvellously to harmonizewith each other; there being, in the materialcreation, sights of infinitely varied loveliness,and sounds of as varied melody, and manythousand tastes and odours of exquisite gratification,and distinctions innumerable of touchand feeling, to meet the whole compass anddiversity of the human senses — multiplyingwithout end, both the notice that we receivefrom external things, and the enjoyments thatwe derive from them. And as little in themoral department of our nature, is any of itsfaculties, and more especially the great andmaster faculty of all, left to languish from thewant of occupation. The whole of life, in fact,is crowded with opportunities for its employment— or, rather, instead of being representedas the subject of so many distinct and ever-recurringcalls, conscience may well be representedas the constant guide and guardian ofhuman life ; and, for the right discharge of thisits high office, as being kept on the alert perpetually.The creature on whom consciencehath laid the obligation of refraining from allmischief, and rendering to society all possiblegood, lives under a responsibility which neverfor a single moment is suspended. He may besaid to possess a continuity of moral being ; andmorality whether of a good or evil hue, tinges the1(50 ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOwhole current of his history. It is ^ thing ofconstancy as well as a thing of frequency — for,even when not carried forth into action, it is notdormant ; but possesses the mind in the form ofa cherished purpose or cherished principle, or,as the Romans expressed it, of a perpetual willeither to that which is good or evil. But overand above this, the calls to action are innumerable.In the wants of others ; in their powersof enjoyment ; in their claims on our equity, ourprotection, or our kindness ; in the various openingsand walks of usefulness ; in the serviceswhich even the humblest might render to thoseof their own family, or household, or country ;in the application, of that comprehensive precept,to do good unto all men as we have opportunity— we behold a prodigious number anddiversity of occasions for the exercise of moralprinciple It is possible that the lessons of aschool may not be arduous enough nor diversifiedenough for the capacity of a learner.But this cannot be affirmed of that school ofdiscipline, alike arduous and unremitting, towhich the great author of our being hath introducedus. Along with the moral capacity bywhich He hath endowed us, He hath provideda richly furnished gymnasium for its exercisesand its trials— where we may earn, if not thetriumphs of virtue at least some delicious foretastesof that full and final blessedness for whichTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 161the scholarship of human life, with its manifoldengagements and duties, is so obviously fittedto prepare us.2. But let us now briefly state the adaptationof external nature to the moral constitution ofman, m with a reference to that three-fold generalitywhich we have already expounded. Wehave spoken of the supremacy of conscience,and of the inherent pleasures and pains of virtueand vice, and of the law and operation of habit —as forming three distinct arguments for themoral goodness of Him, who hath so constructedour nature, that by its workings alone, manshould be so clearly and powerfully warned toa life of righteousness — should in the native andimmediate joys of rectitude, earn so preciousa reward — and, finally, should be led onward tosuch a state of character, in respect of its confirmedgood or confirmed evil, as to afford oneof the likeliest prognostications which natureoffers to our view of an immortality beyond thegrave, where we shall abundantly reap the consequenceof our present doings, in either thehappiness of established virtue, or the utterwretchedness and woe of our then inveteratedepravity. But hitherto we have viewed thisnature of man, rather as an individual andinsulated constitution, than as a mechanismacted upon by any forces or influences fromwithout. It is in this latter aspect that we arec.M162 ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOhenceforth to regard it ; and now only it is thatwe enter on the proper theme of our volume, orthat the adaptations of the objective to the subjectivebegin to open upon us. It will still berecollected, however,* that in our view of externalnature, we comprehend, not merely all that isexternal to the world of mind — for this wouldhave restricted us to the consideration of thosereciprocal actings which take place betweenmind and matter. We further comprehend allthat is external to one individual mind, andtherefore the other minds which are around it;and so we have appropriated, as forming a part ofour legitimate subject, the actings and reactingthat take place between man and man in society.3. And first, in regard to the power and sensibilityof conscience, there is a most importantinfluence brought to bear on each individualpossessor of this faculty from without, and byhis fellow men. It will help us to understand itaright, if we reflect on a felt and familiar experienceof all men — even the effect of a veryslight notice, often of a single word from one ofour companions, to recall some past scene ortransaction of our lives, which had long vanishedfrom our remembrance ; and would, but for thisreawakening, have remained in deep oblivion tothe end of our days. The phenomenon caneasily be explained by the laws of suggestion.See Introductory Chapter, 1, 2, 3.THE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 163Our wonted trains of thought might never haveconducted the mind to any thought or recollectionof the event in question — Whereas, on the occurrenceof even a very partial intimation, all theassociated circumstances come into vivid recognition; and eye are transported back again tothe departed realities of former years, that hadlain extinct within us for so long a period, andmight have been extinct for ever, if not lightedup again by an extraneous application. Howmany are the days since early boyhood, of m whichnot one trace or vestige now abides upon thememory. Yet perhaps there is not one of thesedays, the history of which could not be recalled,by means of some such external or foreign helpto the remembrance of it. Let us imagine forexample, that a daily companion had, unknownto us, kept a minute and statistical journal ofall the events we personally shared in ; and thelikelihood is, that, if admitted to the perusal ofthis document, even after the lapse of half alife time, our memory would depone to manythousand events which had else escaped, intoutter and irrecoverable forgetfulness. It is certainlyremarkable, that, on some brief utteranceby another, the stories of former days shouldsuddenly reappear, as if in illumined characters,on the tablet from which they had so totallyfaded ; that the mention of a single circumstance,if only the link of a train, should conjure to life164 ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOagain a whole host of sleeping recollections :And so, in each of our fellow men, might wehave a remembrancer, who can vivify our consciousnessanew, respecting scenes and transactionsof our former history which had longgone by ; and which, after having vanished oncefrom a solitary mind left to its own processes,would have vanished everlastingly.4. It is thus, that, not only can one man makeinstant translation of his own memory ; but oncertain subjects, he can even make instant translationof his own intelligence into the mind ofanother. A shrewd discerner of the heart, whenlaying open its heretofore unrevealed mysteries,makes mention of things which at the momentwe feel to be novelties ; but which, almost atthe same moment, are felt and recognized by usas truths — and that, not because we receive themupon his authority, but on the independent viewthat ourselves have of their own evidence. Hisutterance, in fact, has evoked from the cell oftheir imprisonment, remembrances, which butfor him, might never have been awakened ; andwhich, when thus summoned into existence, areso many vouchers for the perfect wisdom andtruth of what he tells. A thousand peculiaritiesof life and character, till then unnoticed, are nosooner heard by us, although for the first timein our lives, than they shine before the mind'seye, in the light of a satisfying demonstration.THE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 165And the reason is, that the materials of theirproof have been actually stored up within us,by the history and experience of former years,though in chambers of forgetfulness — whence,however, they are quickly and vividly calledforth, as if with the power of a talisman, by thevoice of him, who no sooner announces his proposition,than he suggests the by-gone recollectionsof our own which serve to confirm it. Thepages of the novelist, or the preacher, or themoral essayist, though all of them should dealin statements alone, without the formal allegationof evidence, may be informed throughout withevidence, notwithstanding ; and that, becauseeach of them speaks to the consciousness of hisreaders, unlocking a treasury of latent recollections,which no sooner start again into being,than they become witnesses for the sagacity andadmirable sense of him with whom all this luminousand satisfying converse is held. It is likethe holding up of a mirror, or the response ofan echo to a voice. What the author discovers,the reader promptly and presently discerns.The one utters new things ; but that light ofimmediate manifestation in which the otherbeholds them, is struck out of old materialswhich himself too had long since appropriated,but laid up in a dormitory, where they mighthave slumbered for ever — had it not been forthat voice which charmed them anew into life166 ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOand consciousness. This is the only way inwhich the instant recognition of truths beforeunheard of and unknown can possibly be explained.It is because their evidence lies envelopedin the reminiscences of other days,which had long passed into oblivion ; but areagain presented to the notice of the mind bythe power of association.5. This is properly a case of intellectual ratherthan of moral adaptation ; and is only now advertedto for the purpose of illustration. For adecayed conscience is susceptible of like resuscitationwith a decayed memory. In treatingof the effects of habit, we briefly noticed* thegradual weakening of conscience, as the indulgencesof vice were persisted in. Its remonstrances,however ineffectual, may, at the first,have had a part in that train of thought andfeeling, which commences with a temptation,and is consummated in guilt ; but in proportionto the frequency, wherewith the voice of conscienceis hushed, or overborne, or refused entertainmentby the mind, in that proportion doesit lift a feebler and a fainter voice afterwards —till at length it may come to be unheard ; andany suggestions from this faculty may eitherpass unheeded, or perhaps drop out of the trainaltogether. It is thus that many a foul or horrid"• See Chap. iii. 6. of this Section.THE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 167immorality may come at length to be perpetratedwithout the sense or feeling of its enormity.Conscience, with the repeated stifling it hasundergone, may, as if on the eve of extinction,have ceased from its exercises. This moral insensibilityforms, in truth, one main constituentin the hardihood of crime. The conscience iscradled into a state of stupefaction ; and thecriminal, now a desperado in guilt, may prosecutehis secret depravities, with no relentingfrom within, and no other dread upon his spirit,than that of discovery by his fellow-men.6. And it is on the event of such discovery,that we meet with the phenomenon in question.When that guilt, to which he Iliad himselfbecome so profoundly insensible, is at lengthbeheld in the light of other minds— it is thenthat the scales are made to fall from the eyes ofthe offender; and he, as if suddenly awoke fromlethargy, stands aghast before the spectacle ofhis own worthlessness. It is not the shame ofdetection, nor the fear of its consequences, whichforms the whole of this distress. These mayaggravate the suffering ; but they do not altogethercompose it — for often besides, is there aresurrection of the moral sensibilities within thebosom of the unhappy criminal, as if relumedat the touch of sympathy, with the pronouncedjudgments and feelings of other men. Whentheir perverted and unwearied consciences,1(J8 ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TObecause free from the delusions which encompasshis own, give forth a righteous sentence — theyenlist his conscience upon their side, which thenreasserts its power, and again speaks to himin a voice of thunder. When that continuoustrain between the first excitement of some guiltypassion, and its final gratification, from whichthe suggestions of the moral faculty had beenso carefully excluded, is thus arrested andbroken — then does conscience, as if emancipatedfrom a spell, at times recover from the infatuationwhich held it ; and utter reproaches of itsown, more terrible to the sinner's heart, than allthe execrations of general society. And whatevershall forcibly terminate the guilty indulgence,may, by interrupting the accustomedseries of thoughts and purposes and passions,also dissipate and put an end to the inveteracyof this moral or spiritual blindness. The confinementof a prison-house may do it. Theconfinement of a death-bed may do it. Andaccordingly, on these occasions, does conscience,after an interval it would seem, not of death butonly of suspended animation, come forth withthe might of an avenger, and make emphaticrepresentation of her wrongs.7. But this influence which we have attemptedto exhibit in bold relief, by means of rare andstrong exemplification, is in busy and perpetualoperation throughout society — and that, moreTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 169to prevent crime than to punish it ; rather, tomaintain the conscience in freshness and integrity,than to reanimate it from a state of decay,or to recal its aberrations. Indeed its restorativeefficacy, though far more striking, is notso habitual, nor in the whole amount so salutary,as its counteractive efficacy. The truth is, thatwe cannot frequent the companionship of humanlife, without observing the constant circulationand reciprocal play of the moral judgmentsamong men — with whom there is not a morefavourite or familiar exercise, than that of discussingthe conduct and pronouncing on thedeserts of each other. It is thus that everyindividual, liable in his own case to be misledor blinded by the partialities of interest and passion,is placed under the observation and guardianshipof his fellows — who, exempted from hispersonal or particular bias, give forth a righteoussentence and cause it to be heard. A puremoral light is by this means kept up in society,composed of men whose thoughts are ever employedin 'accusing or else excusing one another'so that every individual conscience receives animpulse and a direction from sympathy with theconsciences around it. We are aware that thelove of applause intervenes at this point as adistinct and auxiliary influence. But the primaryinfluence is a moral one. Each man livesunder a consciousness of the vigilant and ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOceiling witnesses who are on every side of him ;and his conscience, kept on the alert and keptin accordance with theirs, acts both more powerfullyand more purely, than if left to the decayand the self-deception of its own withering-solitude.The lamp which might have waxeddim by itself, revives its fading lustre, by contactand communication with those which burnmore brightly in other bosoms than its own ; andthis law of interchange between mind and mind,forms an important adaptation in the mechanismof human society.8. But, to revert for a moment to the revivalof conscience after that its sensibilities hadbecome torpid for a season ; and they are quickenedanew, as if by sympathy, with the moraljudgments of other men. This phenomenon ofconscience seems to afford another glimpse orindication of futurity. It at least tells with whatfacility that Being, who hath all the resources ofinfinity at command, could, and that by anoperation purely mental, inflict the vengeance ofa suffering the most exquisite, on the children ofdisobedience. He has only to re-open thefountains of memory and conscience ; and thiswill of itself cause distillation within the soul ofthe waters of bitterness. And if in the voice ofearthly remembrancers and earthly judges, weobserve such a power of re-awakening — wemight infer, not the possibility alone, but theTHE Moral CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 171extreme likelihood of a far more vivid re-awakening,when the offended lawgiver himself takesthe judgment into His own hands. If the rebukeof human tongues and human eyes be of suchforce to revive the sleeping agony within us,what may we not feel, when the adverse sentenceis pronounced against us from the throne of God,and in the midst of a universal theatre ? If, inthis our little day, the condemnation is felt to beinsupportable, that twinkles upon us from thethousand secondary and subordinate lustres bywhich we are surrounded — what must it be,when He, by whose hand they have all beenlighted up, turns towards us the strength ofHis own countenance ; and, with His look of reprobationsends forth trouble and dismay overthe hosts of the rebellious.*9. But besides the pleasures and pains ofconscience, there is, in the very taste andfeeling of moral qualities, a pleasure or apain. This formed our second general argumentin favour of God's righteous administration; and our mental constitution, even Whenviewed singly, furnishes sufficient materials onDr. Abercromby, in his interesting work on the intellectualpowers, states some remarkable cases of resuscitated and enlargedmemory, which remind one of the explanation given by Mr. Coleridgeof the opening of the books in the day of judgment. It ison the opening of the book of conscience that the sinner is made tofeel the truth and righteousness of his condemnation.17*2 ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOwhich to biiild it. But the argument is greatlystrengthened and enhanced by the adaptationto that constitution of external nature, moreespecially as exemplified in the reciprocal influenceswhich take place between mind andmind in society : for the effect of this adaptationis to multiply both the pleasures of virtueand the sufferings of vice. The first, theoriginal pleasure, is that which is felt by thevirtuous man himself ; as, for example, bythe benevolent, in the very sense and feelingof that kindness whereby his heart is actuated.The second is felt by him who is the objectof this kindness — for merely in the consciouspossession of another's good will, there is agreat and distinct enjoyment. And then themanifested kindness of the former awakensgratitude in the bosom of the latter ; and this,too, is a highly pleasurable emotion. Andlastly, gratitude sends back a delicious incenseto the benefactor who awakened it. By thepurely mental interchange of these affections,there is generated a prodigious amount ofhappiness ; and that, altogether independent ofthe gratifications which are yielded by thematerial gifts of liberality on the one hand,or by the material services of gratitude onthe other. Insomuch, that we have only toimagine a reign of perfect virtue ; and then,in spite of the physical ills which essentiallyTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF xMAN. 173and inevitably attach to our condition, weshould feel as if we had approximated verynearly to a state of perfect enjoyment amongmen — or, in other words, that the bliss ofparadise would be almost fully realized uponearth, were but the moral graces and charitiesof paradise firmly established there, and infull operation. Let there be honest and universalgood-will in every bosom, and this beresponded to from all who are the objects ofit by an honest gratitude back again ; let kindness,in all its various effects and manifestations,pass and repass from one heart and countenanceto another ; let there be a universal courteousnessin our streets, and let fidelity and affectionand all the domestic virtues take up their secureand lasting abode in every family ; let the succourand sympathy of a willing neighbourhoodbe ever in readiness to meet and to overpassall the want and wretchedness to which humanityis liable ; let truth, and honour, andinviolable friendship between man and man,banish all treachery and injustice from theworld ; in the walks of merchandise, let anunfailing integrity on the one side, have thehomage done to it of unbounded confidenceon the other, insomuch, that each man reposingwith conscious safety on the uprightness andattachment of his fellow, and withal rejoicingas much in the prosperity of an acquaintance,174 ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOas he should in his own, there would come tobe no place for the harassments and the heart-burningsof mutual suspicion or resentment orenvy : who does not see, in the state of asociety thus constituted and thus harmonized,the palpable evidence of a nature so framed,that the happiness of the world and therighteousness of the world kept pace the onewith the other? And it is all important toremark of this happiness, that, in respect bothto quality and amount, it mainly consists ofmoral elements — so that while every giver whofeels as he ought, experiences a delight inthe exercise of generosity which rewards hima hundred-fold for all its sacrifices ; everyreceiver who feels as he ought, rejoices infinitelymore in the sense of the benefactor's kindness,than in the physical gratification or fruit ofthe benefactor's liberality. It is saying muchfor the virtuousness of Him who hath somoulded and so organized the spirit of man,that, apart from sense and from all its satisfactions,but from the ethereal play of the goodaffections alone, the highest felicity of ournature should be generated ; that, simply bythe interchange of cordiality between man andman, and one benevolent emotion re-echoingto another, there should be yielded to humanhearts, so much of the truth and substanceof real enjoyment — so that did justice, andTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 175charity, and holiness, descend from heaven toearth, taking full and universal possession ofour species, the happiness of heaven wouldbe sure to descend along with them. Couldany world be pointed out, where the universalityand reign of vice effected the same state ofblissful and secure enjoyment that virtue wouldin ours— we should infer that he was the patronand the friend of vice, who had dominion overit. But when assured, on the experience wehave of our actual nature, that in the worldwe occupy, a perfect morality would, but forcertain physical calamities, be the harbingerof a perfect enjoyment — we regard this as anincontestable evidence for the moral goodnessof our own actual Deity.10. And in such an argument as ours,although the main beatitudes of virtue are ofa moral and spiritual character, its subserviencyto the physical enjoyments of life ought notto be overlooked, though, perhaps, too obviousto be dwelt upon. The most palpable of thesesubserviencies is the effect of benevolence indiffusing abundance among the needy, andso alleviating the ills of their destitution. Thisis so very patent as not to require being expatiatedon. Yet we might notice here oneimportant adaptation, connected with the exerciseof this morality — realized but in part,so long as virtue has only a partial occupation176 ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOin society ; but destined, we hope, to receiveits entire and beautiful accomplishment, whenvirtue shall have become universal. It is wellknown that certain collateral but very seriousmischiefs attend the exercise of a profuse andcapricious and indiscriminate charity ; that itmay, in fact, augment and aggravate the indigencewhich it tries to relieve, beside workinga moral deterioration among the humbler classes,by ministering to the reckless improvidenceof the dissipated and the idle ; an operationalike injurious to the physical comfort of theone party, and to the moral comfort of theother. These effects are inevitable, so longas the indiscriminate benevolence of the richmeets with an indefinite selfishness and rapacityon the part of the poor. But this evil will bemitigated and at length done away, with thegrowth of principle among mankind ; and moreespecially, when, instead of being confined toone of these classes, it is partitioned among both.Let the wealthy be as generous as they ought intheir doings, and the poor be as moderate asthey ought in their expectations and desires ;and then will that problem, which has so baffledthe politicians and economists of England, findits own spontaneous, while, at the same time, itsbest adjustment. Let an exuberant yet welldirected liberality on the one side come intoencounter, instead of a sordid and insatiableTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 177appetency, with the recoil of delicacy and self-respectupon the other, and the noble independenceof men who will work with their ownhands rather than be burdensome ; and thenwill the benefactions of the wealthy and thewants of the indigent, not only meet but overpass.The willingness of the one party to give,will exceed the willingness of the other toreceive ; and an evil which threatens to rendsociety asunder, and which law in her attemptsto remedy has only exasperated, will at lengthgive way before the omnipotence of moralcauses. This, as being one of many specimens,tells most significantly that man was made forvirtue, or that this was the purpose of God inmaking him— when we find, that through noother medium than the morality of the people,can the sorest distempers of society be healed.The impotence of human wisdom, and of everypolitical expedient which this wisdom can devisefor the well-being of a state, when virtue languishesamong the people, is one of the strongestproofs which experience affords, that virtue wasthe design of our creation. And we know nothow more emphatic demonstration can be givenof a virtuous Deity, than when we find societyto have been so constructed by His hands, thatvirtue forms the great alternative on which thesecure or lasting prosperity of a commonwealthis hinged-so that for any aggregate of humanc. N178 ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TObeings to be right physically and right economically,it is the indispensable, while at thesame time the all effectual condition, that theyshould be right morally.11. Nothing can be more illustrative of thecharacter of God, or more decisive of the question,whether His preference is for universalvirtue or for universal vice in the world, than toconsider the effect of each on th-e well-being ofhuman society — even that society which He didHimself ordain, and whose mechanism is thecontrivance of His own intellect, and the workof His own hands. It may not be easy to explainthe origin of that moral derangement into whichthe species has actually fallen ; but it affords noobscure or uncertain indication of what thespecies was principally made for, when we pictureto ourselves the difference between a commonwealthof vice and a commonwealth of virtue.We have already said enough on the obviousconnection which obtains between the righteousnessof a nation and the happiness of its families ;and it were superfluous to dilate on the equallyobvious connection Which obtains between astate of general depravity, and a state of generalWretchedness and disorder. And the counterpartobservation holds true, that, as the beatitudesof the one condition, so the sufferings of theother are chiefly made hip of moral elements.If, in the former, there be a more precious andTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 179heartfelt enjoyment in the possession of another'skindness, than in all the material gifts andservices to which that kindness has promptedhim— so in the latter, may it often happen, thatthe agony arising from simple consciousness ofanother's malignity, will greatly exceed anyphysical hurt, whether in person or property,that we ever shall sustain from him. A loss thatwe suffer from the dishonesty of another is farmore severely felt, than a ten fold loss occasionedby accident or misfortune— or, in otherwords, we find the moral provocation to begreatly more pungent and intolerable than thephysical calamity. So that beside the materialdamage, too palpable to be insisted on at anylength, which vice and violence inflict uponsociety, there should be taken into account thesoreness of spirit, the purely mental distress anddisquietude which follow in their train— of whichwe have already seen, how much is engenderedeven in the workings of one individual mind ;but susceptible of being inflamed to a degreeindefinitely higher, by the reciprocal working ofminds, all of them hating and all hateful to eachother. In this mere antipathy of the heart,more especially when aided by nearness andthe opportunities of mutual expression, there aresensations of most exquisite bitterness. Thereis a wretchedness in the mere collision of hostilefeelings themselves, though they should breakIBO ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOnot forth into overt-acts of hostility ; in thesimple demonstrations of malignity, apart fromits doings ; in the war but of words and looksand fierce gesticulations, though no violenceshould be inflicted on the one side or sustainedupon the other. To make the aggressor in thesepurely mental conflicts intensely miserable, it isenough that he should experience within him theagitations and the fires of a resentful heart. Tomake the recipient intensely miserable, it isenough that he should be demoniacally glaredupon by a resentful eye. Were this powerwhich resides in the emotions by themselvessufficiently reflected on, it would evince howintimately connected, almost how identified,wickedness and wretchedness are with eachother. To realize the miseries of a state of war,it is not necessary that there should be contestsof personal strength. The mere contests ofpersonal feeling will suffice. Let there bemutual rage and mutual reviling; let there bethepangs and the outcries of fierce exasperation; let there be the continual droppings ofpeevishness and discontent ; let disdain meetwith equal disdain ; or even, instead of scornfrom the lofty, let there be but the slights andthe insults of contempt from men, who themselvesare of the most contemptible ; let therebe haughty defiance, and spiteful derision, andthe mortifications of affronted and irritatedTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 181pride — in the tumults of such a scene, thoughtumults of the mind alone, there were enoughto constitute a hell of assembled maniacs or ofassembled malefactors. The very presence andoperation of these passions Mould form theirown sorest punishment. To have them perpetuallyin ourselves is to have a hell in theheart. To meet with them perpetually in othersis to be compassed about with a society oftends, to be beset with the miseries of a Pandemonium.12. Whether we look then to the separate orthe social constitution of humanity, we observeabundant evidence for the mind and meaning ofthe Deity, who both put together the elementsof each individual nature, and the elementswhich enter into the composition of society. Wecannot imagine a more decisive indication of Hisfavour being on the side of moral good, and Hisdispleasure against moral evil, than that, by theworking of each of these constitutions, virtueand happiness on the one hand, vice andwretchedness on the other, should be so intimatelyand inseparably allied. Such sequencesor laws of nature as these, speak as distinctlythe character of him who established them, asany laws of jurisprudence would the characterof the monarch by whom they were enacted.And to learn this lesson, we do not need to waitfor the distant consequences of vice or virtue.182 ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOWe at once feel the distinction put upon themby the hand of the Almighty, in the instant sensationswhich He hath appended to each of themimplicated as their effects are with the veryfountain-head of moral being, and turning thehearts which they respectively occupy, into theseats either of wildest anarchy, or of serene andblissful enjoyment.1.3. The law and operation of habit, as exemplifiedin one individual mind, formed the themeof our third general argument. The only adaptationwhich we shall notice to this part of ourmental constitution in the frame-work of society,is that afforded by the changes which it undergoesin the flux of its successive generations —in virtue of which, the tender susceptibilities ofchildhood are placed under the influence of thatascendant seniority which precedes or goesbefore it. At first sight it may be thought ofthis peculiarity, that it tells equally in bothdirections — that is, either in the transmissionand accumulation of vice, or in the transmissionand accumulation of virtue in the world. Butthere is one circumstance of superiority in favourof the latter, which bids us look hopefullyonward to the final prevalence of the good overthe evil. We are aware of the virulence wherewith,in families, the crime and profligacy of adepraved parentage must operate on the habitsof their offspring ; and of the deadly poisonTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 183which, in crowded cities, passes with quickdescent from the older to the younger, along thelinks of youthful companionship ; and even ofthose secret, though we trust rare and monstroussocieties, which, in various countries and variousages, were held for the celebration of infernalorgies, for the initiation of the yet unknowingor unpractised in the mysteries of vice. Butafter every deduction has been made for these,who does not see that the systematic and sustainedeffort, the wide and general enterprize, thecombination of numbers in the face of day andwith the sympathies of an approving public,give a prodigious balance on the side of moraleducation? The very selfishness of vice andpensiveness of virtue give rise to this differencebetween them — the one concentred on its ownpersonal enjoyments, and, A\ith a few casualexceptions, rather heedless of the principles ofothers than set on any schemes or speculationsof proselytism ; the other, by its very nature,aspiring after the good of the whole species,and bent on the propagation of its own likeness,till righteousness and truth shall have becomeuniversal amoris men. Accordingly, all theostensible countenance and exertion, in thecause of learning, whether by governments orassociations, is on the side of virtue ; while no mancould dare to front the public eye, with a schemeof discipleship in the lessons whether of fraud184 ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOor profligacy. The clear tendency then is toimpress a right direction on the giant power ofeducation ; and when this is brought to bear,more systematically and generally than heretofore,on the pliant boyhood of the land — webehold, in the operation of habit, a guarantee forthe progressive conquests, and at length theultimate and universal triumph of good over evilin society. Our confidence in this result isgreatly enhanced, when we witness the influenceeven of but one mind among the hundreds of anygiven neighbourhood— if zealously and wiselydirected to the object of moral and economicalimprovement. Let that most prolific of allphilanthropy then be fully and fairly set on foot,which operates, by means of education, on theearly germs of character ; and we shall have themost effective of all agency engaged, for theproduction of the likeliest of all results. Thelaw of habit, Avhen looked to in the manageableductility of its outset, presents a mighty openingfor the production of a new era in the moralhistory of mankind ; and the same law of habit,when looked to in the maturity of its fixed andfinal establishment, encourages the expectationof a permanent as well as universal reign ofvirtue in the world.14. Even in the yet chaotic and rudimentalstate of the world, we can observe the powersTHE Moral CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 185and the likelihoods of such a consummation ; andwhat gives an overbearing superiority to thechances on the side of virtue is, that parents,although the most sunken in depravity themselves,welcome the proposals, and receive withgratitude, the services of Christian or moralphilanthropy in behalf of their families. Howeverhopeless then of reformation among thosewhose vicious habits have become inveterate,it is well that there should be so wide and unobstructedan access to those, among whom thehabits have yet to be formed. It is this whichplaces education on such firm vantage-ground,if not for reclaiming the degeneracy of individuals,yet for reclaiming after the lapse of a fewgenerations the degeneracy of the species ; and,however abortive many of the schemes andenterprizes in this highest walk of charity mayhitherto have proved, yet the manifest andgrowing attention to the cause does open a brilliantmoral perspective for the ages that are tocome. The experience of what has been donelocally by a few zealous individuals, warrantsour most cheering anticipations of what mayyet be done universally — when the powers ofthat simple but mighty instrument which theyemploy, if brought to bear on that most malleableof all subjects, the infancy of humanexistence, come to be better understood, and put186 ADAPTATION OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOinto busy operation over the whole length andbreadth of the land. In the grievous defect ofour national institutions, and the wretched abandonmentof a people left to themselves, and whoare permitted to live recklessly and at randomas they list — we see enough to account both forthe profligacy of our crowded cities, and for thesad demoralization of our neglected provinces.But on the other hand we feel assured, that, inan efficient system of wise and well principledinstruction, there are capabilities within our reachfor a great and glorious revival. We might notknow the reason, why, in the moral world, somany ages of darkness and depravity shouldhave been permitted to pass by — any more thanwe know the reason, why, in the natural world,the trees of a forest, instead of starting all atonce into the full efflorescence and stateliness oftheir manhood, have to make their slow andlaborious advancement to maturity, cradled instorms, and alternately drooping or expandingwith the vicissitudes of the seasons. But, thoughunable to scan all the cycles either of the moralor natural economy, yet may we recognize suchinfluences at work, as when multiplied anddeveloped to the uttermost, are abundantlycapable of regenerating the world. One of thelikeliest of these influences is the power ofeducation — to the perfecting of which so manyminds are earnestly directed at this moment;THE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 187and for the general acceptance of which insociety, we have a guarantee, in the strongestaffections and fondest wishes of the fathers andmothers of families.Chapter V.On the special and subordinate Adaptations of externalNature to the moral Constitution of Man.1. We have hitherto confined our attention tocertain great and simple phenomena of ourmoral nature, which, though affording a differentsort of evidence for the being of God from theorganic and complicated strictures of the materialworld — yet, on the hypothesis of an existentDeity, are abundantly decisive of His preferencefor virtue over vice, and so of the righteousnessof His own character. That he should haveinserted a great master faculty in every humanbosom, all whose decisions are on the side ofjustice, benevolence, and truth, and condemnatoryof their opposites ; that He should haveinserted this conscience with such powers ofinstant retribution, in the triumphs of that complacencywherewith he so promptly rewards thegood, and the horrors of that remorse wherewith188 ADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOHe as promptly chastises the evil ; that besidethese, He should have so distinguishedbetween virtue and vice,* as that the emotionsand exercises of the former should all be pleasurable,and of the latter painful to the taste ofthe inner man ; that He should have so ordainedthe human constitution, as that by the law ofhabit, virtuous and vicious lives, or series of actshaving these respective moral qualities, shouldissue in the fixed and permanent results ofvirtuous and vicious characters — these form theimportant generalities of our moral nature : Andwhile they obviously and immediately announceto us a present demonstration in favour of virtue ;they seem to indicate a preparation and progressButler, in Part I, Chapter 3d of his Analog', makes thefollowing admirable discrimination between actions themselvesand that quality ascribed to them which we call virtuous or vicious." An action by which any natural passion is gratified, or fortuneacquired, procures delight or advantage, abstracted from allconsideration of the morality of such action, consequently thepleasure or advantage in this case is gained by the action itself,not by the morality, the virtuousness, or viciousness of it, thoughit be, perhaps, virtuous or vicious. Thus to say, such an actionor course of behaviour, procured such pleasure or advantage, orbrought on such inconvenience and pain, is quite a different thingfrom saying that such good or bad effect was owing to the virtueor vice of such action or behaviour. In one case, an action abstractedfrom all moral consideration, produced its effect. In theother case, for it will appear that there are such cases, the moralityof the action, the action under a moral consideration, i. e.the virtuousness or viciousness of it, produced the effect.THE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 189towards a state of things, when, after that themoral education of the present life has beenconsummated, the great Ruler of men will manifestthe eternal distinction which he putsbetween the good and the evil.2. Now in these few simple sequences, howeverstrongly and unequivocally they evincethe character of a God already proved oralready presupposed, we have not the sameintense evidence for design, which is affordedby the distinct parts or the distinct principlesof a very multifarious combination. Yet theconstitution of man's moral nature is not defectivein this evidence — though certainly neitherso prolific nor so palpable in our mental, as inour anatomical system. Still, however, there isa mechanism in mind as well as body, with adiversity of principles, if not a diversity of parts,consisting of so many laws, grafted it may be ona simple and indivisible substance, yet yieldingin the fact of their beneficial concurrence, noinconsiderable argument for the wisdom andgoodness of Him who framed us. Nor does itmatter, as we have already said, whether theseare all of them original, or some of them, as theanalysts of mind have laboured to manifest, onlyderivative laws in the human constitution. Ifthe former, we have an evidence grounded onthe beneficial conjunction of a greater numberof independent laws. If the latter, we are190 ADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOreduced to fewer independent laws — but theseall the more prolific of useful applications, eachof which applications is grounded on a beneficialadaptation of some peculiar circumstances,in the operation of which it is, that the primaryis transmuted into a secondary law.* Butwhether the one or the other, they exhibitphases of humanity distinct from any that wehave yet been employed in contemplating; anumber of special affections, each characterizedby its own name, and pointing to its ownseparate object, yet all of them performing animportant subsidiary part, for the moral goodboth of the individual and of the species ; andpresenting us, therefore, with the materials ofadditional evidence for a moral and beneficentdesign in the formation of our race.3. When we look to the beauty which overspreadsthe face of nature, and the exquisitegratification which it ministers to the senses ofman — we cannot doubt, either the taste forbeauty which resides in the primeval mind thatemanated all this gracefulness ; or the benevolencethat endowed man with a kindred taste,And besides this, would it not bespeak a more comprehensivewisdom on the part of a human artificer, that by means of onedevice, or by the application of one principle, he effected not a few,but many distinct and beneficial purposes ; and does it not in likemanner enhance the exhibition of divine skill in the workmanshipof nature, when a single law is found to subserve a vast andmanifold variety of important uses ?THE MORAL Constitution OF MAN. 191and so fitted him for a kindred enjoyment.This conclusion, however, like any moral conclusionwe have yet come to, respecting the perfectionsor the purposes of God, is founded ongeneralities, — on the general amount of beautyin the world, and the delight wherewith menbehold and admire it. Yet, beside this, we maydraw a corroborative evidence for the same,from the machinery of certain special contrivances— as the construction of the calyx inplants, for the defence of the tender blossomprevious to its expansion ; and the apparatus forscattering seeds, Whereby the earth is more fullyinvested with its mantle of rich and varied garniture.And notwithstanding the blight whichhas so obviously passed over the moral world,and defaced many of its original lineaments,while it has left the materialism of creation, theloveliness of its scenes and landscapes, in a greatmeasure untouched — still we possess very muchthe same materials for a Natural Theology, inreasoning on the element of virtue, as in reasoningon the element of beauty. We have firstthose generalities of argument which are alreadyexpounded by us at sufficient length ; and wehave also the evidence, now to be unfolded, ofcertain special provisions for the preservationand growth of the immortal plant, in the studyof which, we shall observe more of mechanismthan we have yet contemplated ; and more,192 ADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOtherefore, of that peculiar argument for design,which lies in the adaptation of varied means, inthe concurrence of distinct expedients, eachhelping the other onward to a certain beneficialconsummation.4. But we must here premise an observationextensively applicable in mental science. Whenrecognising the obvious subserviency of somegiven feeling or principle in the mind to a beneficialresult — we are apt to imagine that it wassomehow or other, in the contemplation of thisresult, that the principle was generated ; andthat therefore, instead of a distinct and originalpart of the human constitution, it is but aderivative from an anterior process of thoughtor calculation on the part of man, in the act ofreflecting on what was most for the good ofhimself, or the good of society. In this wayman is conceived to be in some measure thecreator of his own mental constitution ; or, atleast, there are certain parts of it regarded assecondary, and the formation of which is ascribedto the wisdom of man, which, if regardedas instinctive and primary, would have beendirectly ascribed to the wisdom of God. Thereare many writers, for example, on the originand rights of property, who, instead of admittingwhat may be termed an instinct of appropriation,would hold the appropriating tendencyto be the result of human intelligence, after ex-theMORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 193prince had of the convenience and benefits ofsuch an arrangement. Now on this subject, wemay take a lesson from the physical constitutionof man. It is indispensable to the presentationof our animal system, that food should be receivedat certain intervals into the stomach.Yet, notwithstanding all the strength which isascribed to the principle of self-preservation,and all the veneration which is professed by theexpounders of our nature for the wisdom andforesight of man — the author of our frame hasnot left this important interest merely to ourcare, or our consideration. He has not so trustedus to ourselves ; but has inserted among theother affections and principles wherewith Hehas endowed us, the appetite of hunger — a strongand urgent and ever recurring desire for food,which, it is most certain, stands wholly unconnectedwith any thought on our part, of itsphysical or posterior uses for the sustenance ofthe body ; and from which it would appear,that we need to be not only reminded at properintervals of this incumbent duty, but goaded ontoit. Could the analysts of our nature haveascertained of hunger, that it was the productof man's reflection on the necessity of food, itmight have been quoted as an instance of thecare which man takes of himself. But it seemsthat he could not be thus confided, either withhis own individual preservation, or with thec. o194 ADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOpreservation of his species ; and so, for thesecurity of both these objects, strong appetiteshad to be given him, which, incapable of beingresolved into any higher principles, stand distinctlyand unequivocally forth, as instances ofthe care that is taken of him by God.5. Now this, though it does not prove, yetmay prepare us to expect similar provisionsin the constitution of our minds. Indeed theoperose and complicated system, which thegreat Architect of nature hath devised for ourbodies, carries in it a sort of warning to those,who, enamoured of the significations of theory,would labour to reduce all our mental phenomenato one or two principles. There is nowarrant for this in the examples which Anatomyand Physiology, those sciences that haveto do with the animal economy of man, haveplaced before our eyes. Now, though we admitnot this as evidence for the actual complexityof man's moral economy — it may at least schoolaway those prepossessions of the fancy or ofthe taste, that would lead us to resist or todislike such evidence when offered. We holdit not unlikely that the same Being, who, tosupplement the defects of human prudence,hath furnished us with distinct corporeal appetites,that might prompt us to operations, ofthe greatest subservient benefit both to the individualand the species — might also, to sup-theMORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 195plemeiit the detects of human wisdom andprinciple, have furnished us with distinct mentalaffections or desires, both for our own particulargood and the good of society. If mancould not be left to his own guidance, in matterswhich needed but the anticipation of a fewhours; but to save him from the decay andthe death which must have otherwise ensued,had so powerful a remembrancer and instigatorgiven to him as the appetite of Inner — weought not to marvel, shoidd it be found thatnature, in endowing him mentally, hath presumedon his incapacity, either for wisely devisingor for reiiidarly acting, with a view todistant consequences, and amid the complicatedrelations of human society. It may, on the onehand, have inserted forces, when the mere considerationof good effects would not have impelled; or, on the other hand, may have insertedchecks, when the mere consideration of evileffects would not have arrested. Yet so it is,that, because of the soot that is thereby securedand of the evil that is thereby shunned — we areapt to imagine of some of the most useful principlesof our nature, that they are, somehow,the product of human manufacture ; the resultsof human intelligence, or of rapid processesof thought by man, sitting in judgment on theconsequences of his actions, and wisely provideADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE Toingeither for or against them. Now it is verytrue, that the anger, and the shame, and theemulation, and the parental affection, and thecompassion, and the love of reputation, and thesense of property, and the conscience or moralsense — are so many forces of a mechanism,which if not thus furnished, and that toowithin certain proportions, would run into adisorder that might have proved destructiveboth of the individual and of the species. Forreasons already hinted at, we howl it immaterialto the cause of natural theism, whether theseconstitutional propensities of the human mindare its original or its secondary laws ; but, atall events, it is enough for any argument ofours, that they are not so generated by thewisdom of man, as to supersede the inferencewhich we draw from them, in favour both of thewisdom and goodness of God.6. The common definition given of anger, is aninstance of the tendency on the part of philosophers,if not to derive, at least to connect theemotions of which we have been made susceptiblewith certain anterior or higher principlesof our nature. Dr. Reid tells us that the properobject of resentment is an injury; and that asno man can have the notion of injustice,without having the notion of justice," then, " ifresentment be natural to man, the notion ofTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 197justice must be no less natural"* And Dr.Brown defines anger to be " that emotion ofinstant displeasure, which arises from the feelingof injury done or the discovery of injury intended,or, in many cases, from the discoveryof the mere omission of good offices to w^liichwe conceived ourselves entitled, though thisvery omission may, of itself, be regarded asaspecies of injury." Now the sense of injuryimplies a sense of its opposite — a sense ofjustice, therefore, or the conception of a moralstandard from which the injury that hasawakened the resentment, is felt to be a deviation.But as nothing ought to form partof a definition, which is not indispensable tothe thing defined, it would appear, as if, inthe judgment of both these philosophers, allwho were capable of anger must also have,to a certain degree, a capacity of moraljudgment or moral feeling. The propertyof resenting a hurt inflicted upon ourselves.In glaring contradiction to this, is Dr. Reid's own affirmationregarding the brutes. He says, " that conscience is peculiarto man, we see no vestige of it in the brute animals. It is oneof those prerogatives by which we are raised above them." Butanimals are most abundantly capable of anger — even of thatwhich, by a very general definition, is said to be the emotion thatis awakened by a sense of injury, which sense of injury mustimply in it the sense of its opposite, even of justice, and so landus in the conclusion that brutes are capable of moral conception,or that they have a conscience.198 ADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOwould, at this rate, argue, in all cases, a perceptionof what the moral and equitable adjustmentwould be between ourselves and others.Now, that these workings of a moral natureare essential to the feeling of anger, is an ideawhich admits of most obvious and decisiverefutation — it being an emotion to which notonly infants are competent, anterior to the firstdawning of their moral nature ; but even idiots,with whom this nature is obliterated, or stillmore the inferior animals \\ ho want it altogether.There must be a sense of annoyance to originatethe feeling ; but a sense of injury, implying, asit does, a power of moral judgment or sensibility,can be in no way indispensable to anemotion, exemplified in its utmost force andintensity by sentient creatures, in whom therecannot be detected even the first rudimentsof a moral nature. Two dogs, when fightingfor a bone, make as distinct and declared anexhibition of their anger, as two human beingswhen disputing about the boundary of theircontiguous fields. The emotion flashes as unequivocallyfrom any of the inferior, as it doesfrom the only rational and moral species onthe face of our globe ; as in the vindictive glareof an infuriated bull, or of a lioness robbed ofher whelps, and who as if making proclamationof hers wrongs, gives forth her deep and reiteratedcry to the echoes of the wilderness. ItTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 199is an emotion, in fact, which seems coextensive,not only with moral, but with physical sensation.And, if any faith can be placed inthe physiognomy, or the natural signs, by whichirrational creatures represent what passes withinthem ; this passion announces itself as vividlyand discern ably in the outcries of mutual resentmentwhich ring throughout the amplitudesof savage and solitary nature, as in the contestsof civilized man.7. The truth, then, seems to be, that theoffice of the moral faculty is, not to originate,but rather to confine and qualify and regulatethis emotion. Answer, if we but study its historyand actual exhibitions. Mill be found the primaryand the natural response to a hurt orharm or annoyance of any sort inflicted onusby others; and, as such, may be quite expansiveand unrestrained and open to excitationfrom all points of the compass — anterior to andapart from any consideration of its justice, orwhether in the being who called it forth, therehave been the purpose or not of violating ourrights. Infants are fully capable of the feeling,long before they have a notion of equity, orof what is rightfully their own and rightfullyanother's. The anger of animals, too, is, inlike manner, destitute of that moral ingredient,which the definitions we have quoted supposeindispensable to the formation of it. And yet200 ADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOtheir emitted sounds have the very expressionof fierceness, that we meet with so often amongthe fellows of our own species. The provocation,the resentment, the kindling glance ofhostility, the gradual heightening of the wrath,its discharge in acts of mutual violence, andlastly, its glutted satisfaction in the flight andeven the death of the adversary — these are allindicative of kindred workings within, thathave their outward vent in a common andkindred physiognomy, between him who isstyled the lord of the creation, and those beneathhis feet, who are conceived to stand ata distance that scarcely admits of comparisonin the phenomena of their nature. Even man,in the full growth of his rational and moralnature, will often experience the outbreakingsof an anger merely physical ; as, to state oneinstance out of the many, may be witnessedin the anger wreaked by him on the inferioranimals, when, all unconscious of injury to him,they enter upon his fields, or damage the fruit ofhis labours. The object of a just resentmenttowards others, is the purposed injustice ofothers towards us ; and, so far from purposingthe injustice, animals have not even the faculty •of conceiving it. The moral consideration,then, does not enter as a constituent part intoall resentment. It is rather a superaddedquality which designates a species of it. ItTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 201is not the epithet which characterizes all anger,but is limited to a certain kind of it. It maybeas proper to say of one anger that it is just,and of another that justice or morality has hadnothing to do with it — as it is to say of oneblow by the hand that it has been rightfullyawarded, and of another blow that such a moralcharacteristic is wholly inapplicable. Moralitymay at times characterize both the mentalfeeling, and the muscular performance ; but itshould be as little identified with the one aswith the other. And however much analystsmay have succeeded on other occasions, inreducing to sameness what appeared to beseparate constituents of our nature, certain itis, that anger cannot thus be regarded as aresulting: manufacture from any of its higherprinciples. It forms a distinct and originalpart of our constitution, of which morality,whenever it exists and has the predominance,might take the direction, without being at allessential to the presence or operation of it. Sofarfrom this, it is nowhere exhibited in greatervivacity and distinctness than by those creatureswho possess but an animal, without so muchas the germ, or the rudest elements of a moralnature.8. Anger then is an emotion that may rageand tumultuary in a bosom into which one moralconception has never entered. For its excitesADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOintent nothing more seems necessary than tothwart any desire however reasonable, or todisappoint any one object which the heart maychance to be set ripon. So far from a sense ofjustice being needful to originate this emotion —it is the man who, utterly devoid of justice,would monopolize to himself all that lies withinthe visible horizon, who is most exposed to itsvisitation. He is the most vulnerable to wrathfrom every point of the vast circumferencearound him — who, conceiving the Universe tobe made for himself alone, is most insensible tothe rights and interests of other men. It is infact because he is so unfurnished with the ideasof justice, that he is so unbridled in resentment.Justice views the world and all its interests asalready partitioned among the various membersof the human population, each occupying hisown little domain ; and, instead of permittinganger to expatiate at random over the universalface of things, justice would curb and over-ruleits ebullitions in the bosom of every individual,till a trespass was made within the limits of thatterritory which is properly and peculiarly hisown. In other words, it is the office of thisvirtue, not to inspire anger, but to draw landmarksand limitations around it ; and, so farfrom a high moral principle originating thispropensity, it is but an animal propensity,THE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 203restrained and kept within check and confinementat the bidding of principle.9. The distinction between reflective and unreflectiveanger did not escape the notice of thesagacious Bitter, as may be seen in the followingpassages of a sermon upon resentment. —*' Resentment is of two kinds — hasty and sudden,or settled and deliberate. The former is calledanger and often passion, which, though a generalword, is frequently appropriated and confined tothe particular feeling, sudden anger, as distinctfrom deliberate resentment malice and revenge."** Sudden anger upon certain occasions is mereinstinct, as merely so, as the disposition to closeour eyes upon the apprehension of somethingfalling into them, and no more necessarily impliesany degree of reason. I say necessarily, for, tobe sure, hasty as well as deliberate anger, maybeoccasioned by injury or contempt, in whichcases reason suggests to our thoughts the injuryand contempt which is the occasion of theemotion : But I am speaking of the former,only in so far as it is to be distinguished fromthe latter. The only way in which our reasonand understanding can raise anger, is by representingto our mind an injustice or injury of somekind or other. Now momentary anger is frequentlyraised, not only without any rule, but withoutany reason ; that is, without any appearance204 ADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOof injury as distinct from hurt or pain. Itcannot, I suppose, be thought that this passionin infants and the lower species of animals,and which is often seen in man towards them,it cannot, I say, be imagined that these instancesof this emotion are the effect of reason : no,they are occasioned by mere sensation andfeeling. It is opposition, sudden hurt, violencewhich naturally excites this passion ; and thereal demerit or fault of him who offers thatviolence, or is the cause of that opposition orhurt, does not in many cases so much as comeinto thought." " The reason and end for whichman was made thus liable to this emotion, isthat he might be better qualified to prevent,and likewise or perhaps chiefly to resist anddefeat sudden force, violence, and opposition,considered merely as such, and without regardto the fault or demerit of him who is the authorof them ; yet since violence may be consideredin this other and further view, as implying fault,and since injury as distinct from harm may raisesudden anger, sudden anger may likewise accidentallyserve to prevent or remedy such faultand injury. But considered as distinct fromsettled anger, it stands in our nature for self-defence,and not for the administration of justice.There are plainly cases, and in the uncultivatedparts of the world, and where regulargovernments are not formed they frequentlyTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 205happen, in which there is no time for considering,and yet to be passive is certain destruction,in which sudden resistance is the onlysecurity/' —It is an exceeding good instance that BishopButler gives of the distinction between instinctiveand what may be called rational anger,when he specifies the anger that we often feeltowards the inferior animals. There is properlyno injures done, where there is no injury intended.And he who is incapable of conceivingwhat an injury is, is not a rightful object forat least any moral resentment. But that thereis what may be called a physical as well asamoral resentment, is quite palpable from thepositive wrath which is felt when any thinguntoward or hurtful is done to us even by theirrational creatures. The men who use them asinstruments of service often discharge the mostoutrageous wrath upon them — acting the part offerocious tyrants towards these wretched victimsof their cruelty. When a combat takes placebetween man and one of the inferior animals,there is a resentment felt by the former justas keen and persevering, as if it were betweentwo human combatants. This makes it quiteobvious that there may be anger without any-sense of designed injury on the part of himwho is the object of it. Even children, idiots,lunatics, might all be the objects of such aresentment.206 ADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TO10. The final cause of this emotion in the inferioranimals is abundantly obvious. It stimulatesand ensures resistance to that violence,which, if not resisted, would often terminate inthe destruction of its object. And it probablymuch oftener serves the purpose of preventionthan of defence. The first demonstration of aviolence to be offered on the one hand, whenmet by the preparation and the counter-menaceof an incipient resentment on the other, not onlyrepels the aggression after it has begun, butstill more frequently, we believe, through thereaction and restraint of fear on the otherwiseattacking party, prevents the aggression frombeing made. The stout and formidable antagonistseye each other with a sort of naturalrespect ; and, as if by a common though tacitconsent, wisely abstain on either side frommolestation, and pass onward without a quarrel.It is thus that many a fierce contest is forborne,which, but for the operation of anger on the oneside and fear upon the other, would most certainlyhave been entered upon. And so by asystem, or machinery of reciprocal checks andcounteracted, and where the mental affectionstoo perform the part of essential forces, there isnot that incessant warfare of extermination whichmight have depopulated the world. And herewe might observe, that, in studying that balanceof powers and of preserving influences, whichTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 207obtains even in a commonwealth of brutes, theuses of a mental are just as palpable as thoseof a material collocation. The anger whichprompts to the resistance of aggression is asobviously inserted by the hand of a contriver,as are the horns or the bristles or any otherdefensive weapons wherewith the body of theanimal is furnished. The fear which wings theflight of a pursued animal is as obviously intendedfor its safety, as is its muscular conformationor capacity for speed. The affection ofa mother for her young points as intelligiblyto a designer's care for the preservation of thespecies, as does that apparatus of nourishmentwherewith nature hath endowed her. The mothersfondness supplies as distinct and powerfulan argument as the mother's milk — or, in otherwords, a mental constitution might, as well as aphysical constitution, be pregnant with the indicationsof a God.1 1 . But to return to the special affection ofanger, with a reference more particularly to itsworkings in our own species, where we have theadvantage of nearer and distinct observation.We must be abundantly sensible of the painwhich there is, not merely in the feeling of resentment,when it burns and festers within ourown hearts, but also in being the objects ofanother's resentment. They are not the effectsonly of his anger that we are afraid of; we areI208 ADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOafraid of the anger itself, of but the looks andthe words of angry violence, though we shouldbe perfectly secure from all the deeds of violence.The simple displeasure of another is formidable,though no chastisement whatever shallfollow upon it. We are so constituted, thatwe tremble before the frown of an offendedcountenance, and perhaps as readily as wewould under the menace of an uplifted arm ; andwould often make as great a sacrifice to shunthe moral discomfort of another's wrath, as toshun the physical infliction which his wrathmight impel him to lay upon us. It is thus thatwhere there is no strength for any physicalinfliction, still there may be a power of correctionthat amply makes up for it, in the rebukeof an indignant eye or an indignant voice.This goes far to repair the inequalities of muscularforce among men ; and forms indeed a mostimportant mound of defence against the effervescenceand the outbreakings of brute violencein society. It is incalculable how much we oweto this influence for the peace and courteousnessthat obtain in every neighbourhood. The morepatent view of anger is, that it is an instrumentof defence against the aggressions ofviolence or injustice; and by which they arekept in check, from desolating, as they otherwisewould, the face of society. But it not onlyoperates as a corrective against the outrages thatTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 209are actually made. It has a preventive operationalso ; and we are wholly unable to say,in how far the dread of its forth-breaking,serves to soften and to subdue human intercourseinto those many thousand decencies of mutualforbearance and complaisance, by which it isgladdened and adorned. There is a recoil frOmanger in the heart of every man when directedagainst himself; and many who would disdainto make one sacrifice by which to appease it,after it had thrown down the gauntlet of hostility,will in fact make one continued sacrifice of theirtone and manner and habit, that it may not beawakened out of its slumbers. It were difficultto compute how much we are indebted, for theblandness and the amenity of human companionship,to the consciousness of so manysleeping fires, in readiness to blaze forth, at thetouch or on the moment of any provocationbeing offered. We doubt not, that, in militaryand fashionable, and indeed in all society, it actsas a powerful restraint on every thing that isoffensive. The domineering insolence of thosewho, with the instrument of anger too, wouldhold society in bondage, is most effectuallyarrested, when met by an anger which throwsback the fear upon themselves, and so quietsand composes all their violence. It is thus thata balance is maintained, without which humansociety might go into utter derangement ; andc. p210 ADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOwithout which too, even the animal creationmight lose its stability and disappear. Andthere is a kind of moral power in the angeritself, that is separate from the animal or thephysical strength which it puts into operation ;and which invests with command, or at leastprovides with defensive armour those who wouldotherwise be the most helpless of our species —so that decrepid age or feeble womanhood hasby the mere rebuke of an angry countenancemade the stoutest heart to tremble before them.It is a moral force, by which the inequalities ofmuscular force are repaired ; and, while itself afirebrand and a destroyer, yet, by the very terrorof its ravages, which it diffuses among all, wereit to stalk abroad and at large over the world —does it contribute to uphold the pacific virtuesamong men.12. When the anger of one individual in ahousehold is the terror of the rest, then thatindividual may become the little despot of theestablishment ; and thus it is that often thefeeblest of them all in muscular strength maywield a domestic tyranny by which the stoutestis overpowered. But when the anger of this oneis fortunately met by the spirit and resolution ofanother, then, kept at bay with its own weapon, itis neutralized into a state of innocence. It is notnecessary for the production of this effect, thatthe parties ever should have come to the extremeMORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 211city of an open and declared violence. If therebe only a mutual consciousness of each other'senergy of passion and of purpose, then a mutualawe and mutual forbearance may be the result ofit. And thus it is, that, by the operation of thesereciprocal checks in a family, the peace andorder of it may be securely upholden. We havewitnessed how much a wayward and outrageoustemper has been sweetened, by the very presencein the same mansion, of one who couldspeak again, and would not succumb to anyunreasonable violence. The violence is abated.And we cannot compute how much it is that theblandness and the mutual complaisance whichobtain in society, are due to the secret dread inwhich men stand of each other's irritation ; orinother words, little do we know to what extent,the smile and the courteousness and the urbanityof civilized life, that are in semblance so manyexpressions of human benevolence, may, reallyand substantially, be owing to the fears of humanselfishness. Were this speculation pursued, itmight lead to a very humiliating estimate indeedof the virtue of individuals — though we cannotbut admire the wisdom of that economy, bywhich, even without virtue, individuals may bemade, through the mutual action and reaction oftheir emotions, to form the materials of a societythat can stand. Anger does in private life,what the terrors of the penal code do in the212 ADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOcommunity at large. It acts with salutary influence,in a vast multiplicity of cases, which nolaw could possibly provide for ; and where thechastisements of law, whether in their correctiveor preventive influence, cannot reach. The goodof a penal discipline in society extends far andwide beyond the degree in which it is actuallyinflicted ; and many are the pacific habits of aneighbourhood, that might be ascribed, not tothe pacific virtues of the men who compose it,but to the terror of those consequences which allmen know would ensue upon their violation.And it is just so of anger, in the more frequentand retired intercourse of private life. Thegood which it does by the fear of its ebullitionsis greater far than all which is done by theactual ebullitions themselves. But we cannotfail to perceive that the amount of service whichis done in this way to the species at large, mustall be regarded as a deduction from the amountof credit which is due to the individuals whobelong to it. We have already remarked onthe propensity of moralists to accredit the wisdomof man with effects, which, as being providedfor not by any care or reflection of ours, but bythe operation of constitutional instincts— aremore properly and immediately to be ascribedto the wisdom of God. And in like manner,there is a propensity in moralists to accredit thewisdom of man with effects, which, as beingTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 213provided for not by any consciousness or exerciseof principle on our part, but by the operation stillof constitutional instincts— are more properlyand immediately to be ascribed to the goodnessof God.*13. There is another special affection whichwe feel more particularly induced to notice,from its palpable effect in restraining the excessof one of nature's strongest appetites. Itsposition in the mental system reminds one ofthe very obvious adaptation to each other of theantagonist muscles in anatomy. We allude tothe operation of shame between the sexes, consideredas a check or counteractive to the indulgenceof passion between the sexes. Theformer is as clear an instance of moral, as thelatter is of physical adaptation. And in theirThe following extract from Brown tends well to illustrate oneof the final causes for the implantation of this principle in ourconstitution. — " What human wants required, that all-foreseeingPower, who is the guardian of our infirmities, has supplied tohuman weakness. There is a principle in our mind, which is touslike a constant protector, which may slumber, indeed, but whichslumbers only at seasons when its vigilance would be useless,which awakes therefore, at the first appearance of unjust intention,and which becomes more watchful and more vigorous, inproportion to the violence of the attack which it has to dread.What should we think of the providence of nature, if, whenaggression was threatened against the weak and unarmed, at adistance from the aid of others, there were instantly and uniformly,by the intervention of some wonder-working power, torush into the hand of the defenceless a sword or other weapon ofdefence ? And yet this would be but a feeble assistance, if com-214 ADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOadjustment the one to the other, we observe thatsort of exquisite balancing, which, perhaps morethan any thing else, indicates the wisdom andthe hand of a master — as if when, in the executionof some very nice and difficult task, he ismanaging between contrary extremes, or is devisingin just proportion for contrary interests.We might better comprehend the design of thisstrikingly peculiar mechanism, by imagining ofthe two opposite instincts, that either of themwas in excess, or either of them in defect. Didthe constitutional modesty prevail to a certainconceivable extent — it might depopulate theworld. Did the animal propensity preponderate,on the other hand — it might land the world inan anarchy of unblushing and universal licensedwith that which we receive from the simple emotions whichHeaven has caused to rush, as it were, into our mind for repelling'every attack. What would be a sword in the trembling hand ofthe infirm, of the aged, of him whose pusillanimous spirit shrinksat the very appearance, not of danger merely, but even of thearms by the use of which danger might be averted, and to whomconsequently, the very sword, which he scarcely knew how tograsp, would be an additional cause of terror, not an instrument ofdefence and safety ? The instant anger which arises does morethan many such weapons. It gives the spirit, which knows howto make a weapon of every thing, or, which of itself does,without a weapon, what even a thunder-bolt would be powerlessto do, in the shuddering grasp of the coward. When angerarises, fear is gone ; there is no coward, for all are brave. Evenbodily infirmity seems to yield to it, like the very infirmities ofthe mind. The old are, for the moment, young again ; theweakest, vigorous." Let. Lxiii.THE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 215tediousness — to the entire breaking up of ourpresent blissful economy, by which society ispartitioned into separate families ; and, with theinterests of domestic life to provide for, and itsaffections continually to recreate the heart inthe midst of anxieties and labours, mankind arekept in a state both of most useful activity andof greatest enjoyment. We cannot conceive amore skilful, we had almost said a more delicateor dexterous adjustment, than the one actuallyfixed upon — by which, in the first instance,through an appetency sufficiently strong thespecies is upholden ; and, in the second instance,through the same appetency sufficiently restrained,those hallowed decencies of ife arekept inviolate, which are so indispensable toall order and to all moral gracefulness amongmen. We have only to conceive the frightfulaspect which society would put on, did unbridledlicentiousness stalk at large as a destroyer, andrifle every home of those virtues which at onceguard and adorn it. The actual and the beautifulresult, when viewed in connection with thatmoral force, by the insertion of which in ournature it is accomplished, strongly bespeaks apresiding intellect— Which in framing the mechanismof the human mind, had respect towhat was most beneficent and best for themechanism of human society.14. It is well that man is so much the creamADAPTATIONS OF EXTERNAL NATURE TOture of a constitution which is anterior to hisown wisdom and his own will, and of circumstanceswhich are also anterior to his wisdomand his will. It would have needed a far morecomprehensive view than we are equal to, bothof what was best for men in a community andfor man as an individual, to have left a creatureso short-sighted or of such brief and narrowsurvey, with the fixing either of his own principlesof action or of his relation with the externalworld. That constitutional shame, thatquick and trembling delicacy, a prompt andever-present guardian, appearing as it does invery early childhood, is most assuredly not aresult from any anticipation by us, either offuture or distant consequences. Even the moralsense within us, does not speak so loudly or sodistinctly the evil of this transgression, as itdoes of falsehood, or of injurious freedom withthe property of a neighbour, or of personalviolence. Other forces than those of humanprudence or human principle seem to havebeen necessary, for resisting a most powerfuland destructive fascination, which never isindulged, without deterioration to the wholestructure of the moral character and constitution; and which, when once permitted to lordit over the habits, so often terminates in thecruel disruption of families, and the irretrievableruin and disgrace of the offender. It isTHE MORAL CONSTITUTION OF MAN. 217not by any prospective calculation of ours, thatthis natural modesty, acting as a strong precautionarycheck against evils which howevertremendous, we are too heedless to reflect upon,has been established within us. It is directlyimplanted by one, who sees the end from thebeginning ; and so forms altogether a mostpalpable instance, in which we have reasonto congratulate ourselves, that the well-beingof man, instead of being abandoned to himself,has been placed so immediately under themanagement of better and higher hands.15. There are many other special affectionsin our nature— the principal of which will fallto be noticed in succeeding chapters; and theinterests to which they are respectively subservientform a natural ground of division, inour treatment of them. Certain of these affectionsstand related to the civil, and certain ofthem to the economic well-being of society;and each of these subserviencies will form thesubject of a separate argument.Chapter VI.On those special Affections which conduce to thecivil and political Well-being of Society.1. The first step towards the aggregation ofmen into a community, or the first departurefrom a state of perfect isolation, could thatstate ever have subsisted for a single day, isthe patriarchal arrangement. No sooner indeedis the infant creature ushered into being, thanit is met by the cares and the caresses of thosewho are around it, and who have either attendedor welcomed its entry on this scene ofexistence — as if, in very proportion to theextremity of its utter helplessness, was thestrength of that security which nature hathprovided, in the workings of the human constitution,for the protection of its weakness andthe supply of all its little wants. That thereshould be hands to receive and to manage thistender visitant, is not more obviously a benevolentadaptation, than that there should behearts to sympathise with its cries of impotencyor distress. The maternal affection is as expressan instance of this as the maternal nourishmentnor is the inference at all weakened, by theattempts, even though they should be successful,of those who would demonstrate of this universalWELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 219fondness of mothers, that, instead of an originalinstinct, it is but a derived or secondary law ofour nature. Were that analysis as distinct andsatisfactory as it is doubtful and obscure, whichwould resolve all mental phenomena into thesingle principle of association — still the argumentwould stand. A secondary law, if notthe evidence of a distinct principle, requires atleast distinct and peculiar circumstances for itsdevelopment ; and the right ordering of thesefor a beneficial result, is just as decisively theproof and the characteristic of a plan, as arethe collocations of Anatomy. It might nothave been necessary to endow matter with anynew property for the preparation of a child'saliment in the breast of its mother — yet theframe-work of that very peculiar apparatus bywhich the milk is secreted, and the suckling'smouth provided with a duct of conveyance forthe abstraction of it, is, in the many witnesses oftime and place and complicated arrangement,pregnant with the evidence of a designer's contrivanceand a designer's care. And in likemanner, though it should be established, thatthe affection of a mother for her young fromthe moment of their birth, instead of an independentprinciple in her nature, was the dependentproduct of remembrances and feelingswhich had accumulated during the period ofgestation, and were at length fixed, amidst the220 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOagonies of parturition, into the strongest of allher earthly regards — the argument for designis just as entire, though, instead of connectingit with the peculiarity of an original law, weconnect it with the peculiarity of those circumstanceswhich favour the development of thismaternal feeling, in the form of a secondarylaw. There is an infinity of conceivable methods,by which the successive generations ofmen might have risen into being ; and our argumentis entire, if, out of these, that method hasbeen selected, whereof the result is an intenseaffection on the part of mothers for their offspring.It matters not whether this universalpropensity of theirs be a primary instinct ofnature, or but a resulting habit which can betraced to the process which they have beenactually made to undergo, or the circumstancesin which they have actually been placed. Theordination of this process, the mandate for theassemblage and collocation of these circumstances,gives as distinct and decisive indicationof an ordaining mind, as would the establishmentof any peculiar law. Let it suffice oncefor all to have said this — for if in the prosecutionof our inquiry, we stopped at every turn toentertain the question, whether each beneficialtendency on which we reasoned, Averse an originalor only a secondary principle in naturewe should be constantly rushing uncalledTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 221into the mists of obscurity ; and fastening uponour cause an element of doubt and weakness,which in no wise belongs to it.2. The other affections which enter into thecomposition, or rather, form the cement of afamily, are more obviously of a derivative,and less obviously of an instinctive character,than is that strong maternal affinity whichmeets so opportunely with the extreme helplessnessof its objects, that but for the succourand sympathy of those whose delight it is tocherish and sustain them, would perish in theinfancy of their being. However questionablethe analysis might be, which would resolvethe universal fondness of mothers for theiryoung into something anterior — the paternaland brotherly and filial affections seem, onsurer grounds, and which are accessible to observation,not to be original but originatedfeelings. Inquirers, according to their respectivetastes and tendencies, have deviated onboth sides of the evidence— that is, either toan excessive and hypothetic simplification ofnature, or to an undue multiplication of herfirst principles. And certain it is, that whentold of the mystic ties which bind togetherinto a domestic community, as if by a sort ofcertain peculiar attraction, all of the samekindred and the same blood — we are remindedof those occult qualities, which, in the physics222 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOboth of matter and of mind, afforded so muchof entertainment, to the scholastics of a formerage. But with the adjustment of this philosophywe properly have no concern. It mattersnot to our argument whether the result inquestion be due to the force of instincts or tothe force of circumstances, — any more thanwhether, in the physical system, a certainbeneficial result may be ascribed to apt andpeculiar laws, or to apt and peculiar collocations.In virtue of one or other or both ofthese causes, we behold the individuals of thespecies grouped together — or, as it may beotherwise expressed, the aggregate mass of thespecies, broken asunder into distinct families,and generally living by themselves, each familyunder one common roof, but apart from allthe rest in distinct habitations ; while the membersof every little commonwealth are so linkedby certain affections, or by certain feelings ofreciprocal obligation, that each member feelsalmost as intensely for the wants and sufferingsof the rest as he would for his own, or laboursas strenuously for the sustenance of all as hewould for his own individual sustenance. Thereis very generally a union of hearts, and stilloftener a union of hands, for the commoninterest and provision of the household.3. The benefits of such an arrangement aretoo obvious to be enumerated. Even though theTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 223law of self-preservation had sufficed in thosecases where the individual has adequate wisdomto devise, and adequate strength to provide forhis own maintenance — of itself, it could nothave availed, when this strength and this wisdomare wanting. It is in the bosom offamilies, and under the touch and impulseof family affections, that helpless infancy isnurtured into manhood, and helpless diseaseor age have the kindest and most effectivesuccour afforded to them. Even Avhen thestrength for labour, instead of being confinedto one, is shared among several of the household,there is often an incalculable benefit, inthe very concert of their forces and communityof their gains — so long, for example,as a brotherhood, yet advancing towards maturity,continue to live under the same roof, andto live under the direction of one authority,or by the movement of one will. We shall notexpatiate, either on the enjoyment that mightbe had under such an economy, while it lasts,in the sweets of mutual affection ; or minutelyexplain how, after the economy is dissolved,and the separate members betake themselveseach to his own way in the world — the dutiesand the friendships of domestic life are notannihilated by this dispersion; but, under thepowerful influence of a felt and acknowledgedrelationship, the affinities of kindred spread224 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOand multiply beyond their original precincts,to the vast increase of mutual sympathy andaid and good offices in general society. Itwill not, we suppose, be questioned — that avastly greater amount of good is done by theinstrumentality of others, and that the instrumentalityitself is greatly more available, underthe family system, to which we are promptedby the strong affections of nature, than if thatsystem were dissolved. But the remarkablething is, that these affections had to be provided,as so many impelled forces — guidingmen onward to an arrangement the most prolificof advantage for the whole, but which nocare or consideration of the general good wouldhave led them to form. This provision 'for thewants of the social economy, is analogous tothat, which we have already observed, for thewants of the animal economy. Neither of theseinterests was confided to any cold generality,whether of principle or prudence. In the one,the strong appetite of hunger supplements thedeficiency of the rational principle of self-preservation.In the other, the strong familyaffections supplement the deficiency of themoral principle of general benevolence. Withoutthe first, the requisite measures would nothave been taken for the regular sustenanceof the individual. Without the other, the requisitemeasures would not have been takenTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 225for the diffused sustenance of the communityat large.4. Such is the mechanism of human society,as it comes direct, from the hand of nature or ofnature's God. But many have been the attemptsof human wisdom to mend and to meddle Withit. Cosmopolitism, in particular, has endeavouredto substitute a sort of universal citizenship,in place of the family affections — regardingthese as so many disturbing forces ; because,operating only as incentives to a partial orparticular benevolence, they divert the aim fromthat which should, it is contended, be the objectof every enlightened philanthropist, the generaland greatest good of the whole. It is thus thatcertain transcendental speculations would cutasunder all the special affinities of our nature,in order that men, set at large from the ties andthe duties of the domestic relationship, might beatliberty to prosecute a more magnificent andgod-like career of virtue ; and, in every singleaction, have respect, not to the well-being of theIndividual, but to the well-being of the species.And thus also, friendship and patriotism havebeen stigmatized, along with the family affections,as so many narrow-minded virtues, which,by their distracting influence, seduce men fromthat all-comprehensive virtue, whose constantstudy being the good of the world — a happyand regenerated world, it is the fond imaginationc. Q226 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOof some, would be the result of its universalprevalence among men.5. Fortunately, nature is too strong for thisspeculation, which, therefore, has only its fullbeing, in the reveries or the pages of those who,in authorship, may well be termed the philosophicalnovelists of our race. But, beside theactual strength of those special propensities inthe heart of man, which no generalization canoverrule, there is an utter impotency in humanmeans or human expedients, for carrying thishollow, this heartless generalization into effect.It is easy to erect into a moral axiom, theprinciple of greatest happiness ; and then, onthe strength of it, to denounce all the specialaffections, and propose the substitution of auniversal affection in their place. But, in prosecutingthe object of this last affection, whatspecific and intelligible thing are they to do?How shall they go about it ? What conventionalscheme shall men fall upon next for obtainingthe maximum of utility, after they have brokenloose, each from his own little home, and havebeen emancipated from those intense regards,which w worked so effectively and with such forceof concentration there ? It has never been clearlyshown, how the glorious significations of thesecosmopolites admit of being practically realizedwhether by a combination, of which thechance is that all men might not agree upon it ;THE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 227or by each, issuing quixotically forth of his ownhabitation, and labouring the best he may torealize the splendid conception by w^hicli he isfired and actuated. And it does not occur tothose who would thus labour to extirpate thespecial affections from our nature, that it is inthe indulgence of them that all conceivablehappiness lies ; and that, in being; bereft of them,we should be in truth bereft of all the means andmaterials of enjoyment. And there is the utmostdifference in point of effect, as well as in pointof feeling, between the strong love wherewithnature hath endued us for a few particular men,and the general love wherewith philosopherswould inspire us for men in the abstract — theformer philanthropy leading to a devoted andsustained habit of well-directed exertion, forsupplying the wants and multiplying the enjoymentsof every separate household ; the latterphilanthropy, at once indefinite in its aim andintangible in its objects, overlooking every manjust because charging itself with the oversight ofall men. It is by a summation of particularutilities which each man, under the impulse ofhis own particular affections, contributes to thegeneral good, that nature provides for the happinessof the world. But ambitious and aspiringman would take the charge of this happinessupon himself; and his first step would be to ridthe heart of all its special affections — or, in other228 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOwords, to unsettle the moral dynamics whichnature hath established there, without any othermoral dynamics, either of precise direction or ofoperative force, to establish in their room. Afterhaving paralyzed all the ordinary principles ofaction, he would, in his newly modelled systemof humanity, be able to set up no principle ofaction whatever. His wisdom, when thus opposedto the wisdom of nature, is utterly powerlessto direct, however much, in those seasons ofdelusion when the merest nonentities and namesfind a temporary sway, it may be powerful todestroy.6. Now there is nothing which so sets off thesuperior skill of one artist, as the utter failureof every other artist in his attempts to improveupon it. And so the failure of every philanthropicor political experiment which proceedson the distrust of nature's strong and urgentand general affections, may be regarded as animpressive while experimental demonstrationfor the matchless wisdom of nature's God.The abortive enterprises of wild yet benevolentUtopianism ; the impotent and hurtful schemesof artificial charity which so teem throughoutthe cities and parishes of our land ; the perniciouslegislation, which mars instead of meditates,whenever it intermeddle with the operationsof a previous and better mechanism thanits own— have all of them misgiven only because,THE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 2*29instead of conforming to nature, they have triedto divert her from her courses, or have thwartedand traversed the strongest of her implantedtendencies. It is thus that every attempt fortaking to pieces, whether totally or partially, theactual frame work of society, and reconstructingit in a new way or on new principles — is altogetherfruitless of good ; and often fruitful of sorestevil both to the happiness and virtue of thecommonwealth. That economy by which thefamily system would have been entirely brokenup ; and associated men, living together inplanned and regulated villages, would havelaboured for the common good, and given uptheir children wholly domesticated to a commoneducation — could not have been carriedinto effect, without overbearing the parentalaffection, and other strong propensities of naturebesides ; and so, it was stifled in embryo, by theinstant revolt of nature against it. That legislation,which, instead of overbearing, would butseduce nature from her principles, may subsistfor generations — yet not without such distemperto society, as may at length amount to utter disorganization.And this is precisely the mischiefwhich the pauperism of England hath inflictedon the habits of English families. It hath, bythe most pernicious of all bribery, relaxed theties and obligations of mutual relationship — exoneratingparents on the one hand from the230 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOcare and maintenance of their own offspring ;and tempting children on the other to cast offthe parents who gave them birth, and, insteadof an asylum gladdened by the associations andsympathies of home, consigning them for thelast closing years of weakness and decrepitudeto the dreary imprisonment of a poor-house.Had the beautiful arrangements of nature notbeen disturbed, the relative affections whichshe herself has implanted would have beenfound strong enough, as in other countries, tohave secured, through the means of a domesticeconomy alone, a provision both for young andold, in far greater unison with both the comfortand the virtue of families. The corrupt anddemoralizing system of England might wellserve as a lesson to philanthropists and statesmen,of the hazard, nay of the positive andundoubted mischief, to which the best interestsof humanity are exposed — when they traverse theprocesses of a better mechanism instituted bythe wisdom of God, through the operation ofanother mechanism devised by a wisdom oftheir own.7. And those family relations in which allmen necessarily find themselves at the outset oflife, serve to strengthen, if they do not originatecertain other subsequent affections of wider operation,and which bear with most important effecton the state and security of a commonwealth.THE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 231Each man's house may be regarded as a preparatoryschool, where he acquires in boyhood,those habits of subordination and dependenceand reverence for superiors, by w which he all themore readily conforms in after-life, to the usefulgradations of rank and authority and wealthwhich obtain in the order of general society.We are aware of a cosmopolitism that wouldunsettle those principles which bind together thelarger commonwealth of a state ; and that toowith still greater force and frequency, than itwould unsettle those affections which bind togetherthe little commonwealth of a family. It iseasier to undermine in the hearts of subjects,their reverence for rank and station ; than it isto dissolve the ties of parentage and brotherhood,or to denaturalize the hearts of children. Accordinglywe may remember those seasons, when,in the form of what may be termed a moralepidemic, a certain spirit of lawlessness wentabroad upon the land ; and the minds of menwere set at large from the habit of that homageand respect, which in more pacific times, they,without pusillanimity and in spite of themselves,do render to family or fortune or officein society. We know that in specific instances,an adequate cause is too often given, why menshould cast off that veneration for rank bywhich they are naturally and habitually actuated— as, individually, when the prince or the232 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOnoble, however elevated, may have disgracedhimself by his tyranny or his vices ; or, generally,when the patrician orders of the state mayhave entered into some guilty combination offorce and fraud against the liberties of mankind,and outraged nature is called forth to a generousand wholesome re- action against the oppressorsof their species. This is the revolt of onenatural principle against the abuse of another.But the case is very different — when, instead ofan hostility resting on practical grounds andjustified by the abuses of a principle, there is asort of theoretical yet withal virulent andinflamed hostility abroad in the land againstthe principle itself — when wealth and rankwithout having abused their privileges, are madeper se the objects of a jealous and resentfulmalignity — when the people all reckless andagog, because the dupes of designing and industriousagitators, have been led to regard everyman of affluence or station as their naturalenemy — and when, with the bulk of the communityin this attitude of stout and sullen defiance,authority is weakened and all the naturalinfluences of rank and wealth are suspended.Now nature never gives more effectual demonstrationof her wisdom, than by the mischiefwhich ensues on the abjuration of her ownprinciples ; and never is the lesson thus heldforth more palpable and convincing, than AvhenTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 233respect for station and respect for office ceaseto be operating principles in society. We areabundantly sensible that both mighty possessionsand the honours of an industrious ancestrymay be disjoined from individual talent andcharacter — nay, that they may meet in the personof one so utterly weak or worthless, as that ourreverence because of the adventitious circumstancesin which he is placed, may be completelyoverborne by our contempt either for the imbecilityor the moral turpitude by which he isdeformed. But this is only the example of acontest between two principles, and of a victoryby the superior over the inferior one. We arenot, however, because of the inferiority of a principleto lose sight of its existence ; or to betraysuch an imperfect discernment and analysis ofthe human mind, as to deny the reality of anyoneprinciple, because liable to be modified, orkept in check, or even for the time renderedaltogether powerless, by the interposition andthe conflict of another principle. If, on theone hand, rank may be so disjoined from righteousnessas to forfeit all its claims to respect —on the other hand, to be convinced that theseclaims are the objects of a natural and universalacknowledgment, and have therefore a foundationin the actual constitution of human nature,let us only consider the effect, when pre-eminentrank and pre-eminent or even but fair and234 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOordinary righteousness, meet together in theperson of the same individual. The effect ofsuch a composition upon human feelings maywell persuade us that, while a respect for righteousnessadmitted by all enters as one ingredient,a respect for rank has its distinct andsubstantive being also as another ingredient.We have the former ingredient by itself in astate of separation, and are therefore mostsensible of its presence, when the object ofcontemplation is a virtuous man. But we aredistinctly sensible to the superaddition of thelatter ingredient, when, instead of a virtuousman, the object of contemplation is a virtuousmonarch — though it becomes more palpable still,when it too is made to exist in a state of separation,which it does, when the monarch is neitherhateful for his vices nor very estimable for hisvirtues ; but stands forth in the average possessionof those moralities and of that intellect whichbelong to common and every day humanity.Even such a monarch has only to appear amonghis subjects ; and, in all ordinary times, he willbe received with the greetings of an honest andheartfelt loyalty, while any unwonted progressthrough his dominions is sure to be met all overthe land, by the acclamations of a generousenthusiasm. Even the sturdiest demagogue, ifhe come within the sphere of the royal presence,cannot resist the infection of that common senti-theWELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 235ment by which all are actuated ; but, as if struckwith a moral impotency, he also, carried awayby the fascination, is constrained to feel andto acknowledge its influence. Some there are,who might affect to despise human nature forsuch an exhibition, and indignantly exclaimthat men are born to be slaves. But the truthis, that there is nothing prostrate, nothingpusillanimous in the emotion at all. Insteadof this, it is a lofty chivalrous emotion, ofwhich the most exalted spirits are the mostsusceptible, and which all might indulge withoutany forfeiture of their native or becomingdignity. AVe do not affirm of this respecteither for the sovereignty of an empire, orfor the chieftainship of a province — that itforms an original or constituent part of ournature. It is enough for our argument, if itbe a universal result of the circumstances inevery land, where such gradations of powderand property are established. In a word, itis the doing of nature, and not of man ; and ifman, in the proud and presumptuous exerciseof his own wisdom, shall lift his rebel handagainst the wisdom of nature, and try to uprootthis principle from human hearts — he willfind that it cannot be accomplished, withouttearing asunder one of the strongest of thoseligaments, which bind together the component236 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOparts of human society into a harmonious andwell-adjusted mechanism. And it is then thatthe wisdom which made nature, will demonstrateits vast superiority over the wisdomwhich would mend it — when the desperate experimentof the latter has been tried and foundwanting. There are certain restraining forces(and reverence for rank and station is one ofthem) which never so convincingly announcetheir own importance to the peace and stabilityof the commonwealth, as in those seasons ofpopular frenzy, when, for a time, they areslackened or suspended. For it is then thatthe vessel of the state, as if slipped from hermoorings, drifts headlong among the surgesof insurrectionary violence, till, as the effectof this great national effervescence, the landmourns over its ravaged fields and desolatedfamilies ; when, after the sweeping anarchyhas blown over it, and the sore chastisementhas been undergone, the now schooled andhumbled people seek refuge anew in those veryprinciples, which they had before traduced anddiscarded : And it will be fortunate if, whenagain settled down in the quietude of theirmuch needed and much longed-for repose, therebe not too vigorous a reaction of those conservativeinfluences, which, in the moment oftheir wantonness, they had flung so recklesslyTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 237away — in virtue of which the whips may becomescorpions, and the mild and well-balancedmonarchy may become a grinding despotism.8. Next to the wisdom which nature discoversin her implantation or development ofthose affections, by which society is parcelleddown into separate families ; is the wisdomwhich she discovers in those other affections,by which the territory of a nation, and all uponit that admits of such a distribution, is likewiseparcelled and broken off into separate properties.Both among the analysts of the humanmind, and among metaphysical jurists andpoliticians, there is to be found much obscureand unsatisfactory speculation respecting thoseprinciples, whether elementary or complex, bywhich property is originated and by whichproperty is upholden. We are not called toenter upon any subtle analysis for the purposeof ascertaining either what that is which givesbirth to the possessory feeling on the part ofan owner, or what that is which leads to sucha universal recognition and respect for his rightsin general society. It will be enough if wecan evince that neither of these is a factitiousproduct, devised by the wisdom or engenderedby the authority of patriots and legislators, deliberatingon what was best for the good andorder of a community ; but that both of themare the results of a prior wisdom, employed,238 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOnot ill framing a constitution for a state, butinframing a constitution for human nature. Itwill suffice to demonstrate this, if we can show,that, in very early childhood, there are germinatedboth a sense of property and a respectfor the property of others ; and that, long beforethe children have been made the subjects ofany artificial training on the thing in question,or are at all capable of any anticipation, oreven wish, respecting the public and collectivewell-being of the country at large. Just as theaffection of a mother is altogether special, andterminates upon the infant, without any calculationas to the superiority of the family systemover the speculative systems of the cosmopolites; and just as the appetite of hunger impelsto the use of food, without the least regard, forthe time being, to the support or preservationof the animal economy — so, most assuredly, dothe desires or notions of property, and eventhe principles by which it is limited, springup in the breasts of children, without theslightest apprehension, on their part, of itsvast importance to the social economy of theworld. It is the provision, not of man, but ofGod.9. That is my property, to the use and enjoymentof which I, without the permission ofothers, am free, in a manner that no other is ;and it is mine and mine only, in as far as thisTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 239use and enjoyment are limited to myself — andothers, apart from any grant or permission byme, are restrained from the like use and the likeenjoyment. Now the first tendency of a child,instead of regarding only certain things, as thoseto the use and enjoyment of which it alone isfree, is to regard itself as alike free to the useand enjoyment of all things. We should say thatit regards the whole of external nature as a vastcommon, but for this difference — that, instead ofregarding nature as free to all, it rather regardsit as free to itself alone. When others intermeddlewith any one thing, in a way that suitsnot its fancy or pleasure, it resents and stormsand exclaims like one bereft of its rights — sothat, instead of regarding the universe as acommon, it were more accurate to say, that itregarded the whole as its own property, or itselfas the universal proprietor of all on which it mayhave cast a pleased or a wishful eye. Whateverit grasps, it feels to be as much its own as itdocs the fingers which grasp it. And not onlydo its claims extend to all within its reach, butto all within the field of its vision-insomuch,that it will even stretch forth its hands to themoon in the firmament ; and wreak its displeasureon the nurse, for not bringing thesplendid bauble within its grasp. Instead thenof saying, that, at this particular stage, it knowsnot how to appropriate any thing, it were more240 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOaccurate to say, that a universal tyrant andmonopolist, it would claim and appropriate allthings — exacting from the whole of nature asubserviency to its caprices ; and, the littledespot of its establishment, giving forth itsintimations and its mandates, with the expectation,and often with the real power and authorityof instant obedience. We before said that itsanger was coextensive with the capacity of sensation; and we now say that, whatever itsrectified notion of property may be, it has theoriginal notion of an unlimited range over whichitself at least may expatiate, without let or contradiction— the self-constituted proprietor of adomain, wide as its desires, and on which nonemay interfere against its will, without awakeningin its bosom, somewhat like the sense andfeeling of an injurious molestation.*10. And it is instructive to observe the pro-fromwhat has been already said of resentment, it wouldappear, that the instinctive feeing of property, and instinctivehang-er are in a state of co-relation with each other. It is byoffence being rendered to the former, that the latter is calledforth. Anterior to a sense of justice, our disposition is to arrogateevery thing — and it is then that we are vulnerable to anger fromall points of the compass. Let another meddle, to our annoyance,with any thing whatever, at this early stage, and we shall feel thevery emotion of anger, which in a higher stage of moral andmental cultivation, is only called forth by his meddling with thatwhich really and rightfully belongs to us. The sense of justice,instead of originating either the emotion of anger, or a sense ofproperty, has the effect to limit and restrain both.THE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 241cess, by which this original notion of property isat length rectified into the subsequent notion,which obtains in general society. For thispurpose we must enquire what the circumstancesare which limit and determine that sense ofproperty, which was quite general and unrestrictedbefore, to certain special things, of whichthe child learns to feel that they are peculiarlyits own — and that too, in a manner which distinguishesthem from all other things, which arenot so felt to be its o\mi. The child was blind toany such distinction before — its first habit beingto arrogate and monopolize all things ; and thequestion is, what those circumstances are, whichserve to signalize some things, to which, itsfeelings of property, now withdrawn from wideand boundless generality, are exclusively andspecifically directed. It will make conclusivelyfor our argument, if it shall appear, that thissense of property, even in its posterior andrectified form, is the work of nature, operatingon the hearts of children ; and not the work ofman, devising, in the maturity of his politicalwisdom, such a regulated system of things, asmight be best for the order and well being ofsociety.11. This matter then might be illustrated bythe contests of very young children, and b}^ themanner in which these are adjusted to the acquiescenceand satisfaction of them all. Wec. K242 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOmight gather a lesson even from the quarrelwhich sometimes arises among them, about amatter so small as their right to the particularchairs of a room. If one for example, have justsat on a chair, though only for a few minutes,and then left it for a moment — it will feel itselfinjured, if, on returning, it shall find the chairin the possession of another occupier. The briefoccupation w hicli it has already had, gives it thefeeling of a right to the continued occupation ofit — insomuch, that, when kept out by an intruder,it has the sense of having been wrongfullydispossessed. The particular chair ofwhich it was for some time the occupier, isthe object of a special possessory affection orfeeling, which it attaches to no other chair ; andby which it stands invested in its own imagination,as being, for the time, the only rightfuloccupier. This then may be regarded as a veryearly indication of that possessory feeling, whichis afterwards of such extensive influence in theeconomy of social life — a feeling so strong, asoften of itself to constitute a plea, not only sufficientin the apprehension of the claimant, butsufficient in the general sense of the community,for substantiating the right of many a proprietor.12. But there is still another primitive ingredientwhich enters into this feeling of property ;and we call it primitive, because anterior to thesanctions or the application of law. Let the childTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 243in addition to the plea that it had been the recentoccupier of the chair in question, be ablefurther to advance in argument for its right —that, with its own hands, it had just placed itbeside the fire, and thereby given additionalvalue to the occupation of it. This reason isboth felt by the child itself, and will be admittedby other children even of a very tender age, asastrengthener of its claim. It exemplifies thesecond great principle on which the natural rightof property rests — even that every man is proprietorof the smit of his own labor* ; and thatto whatever extent he may have impressed additionalvalue on any given thing by the workof his own hands, to that extent, at least, heshould be held the owner of it.13. This then seems the way, in which thesense of his right to any given thing arises inthe heart of the claimant ; but something moremust be said to account for the manner in whichthis right is deferred to by his companions. Itaccounts for the manner, in which the possessorfeeling arises in the hearts of one and all ofthem, when similarly circumstanced ; but itdoes not account for the manner in which thispossessory feeling, in the heart of each, is respectedby all his fellows — so that he is sufferedto remain, in the secure and unmolested possessionof that which he rightfully claims. Thecircumstances which originate the sense of AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOparty, serve to explain this one fact, the existenceof a possessory feeling, in the heart ofevery individual who is actuated thereby. Butthe deference rendered to this feeling by anyother individuals, is another and a distinct fact ;and we must refer to a distinct principle fromthat of the mere sense of property, for the explanationof it. This new or distinct principleis a sense of equity — or that which prompts tolikeness or equality, between the treatmentwhich I should claim of others and my treatmentof them ; and in virtue of which, I shouldhold it unrighteous and unfair, if I disregardedor inflicted violence on the claim of another,which, in the same circumstances with him, Iam conscious that I should have felt, and wouldhave advanced for myself. Had I been the occupierof that chair, in like manner with the littleclaimant who is now insisting on the possessionof it, I should have felt and claimed precisely asheis doing. Still more, had I like him placedit beside the fire, I should have felt what he isnow expressing — a still more distinct and decidedright to it. If conscious of an identity offeeling between me and another in the samecircumstances — then let my moral nature beso far evolved as to feel the force of this consideration; and, under the operation of a senseof equity, I shall defer to the very claim, whichI should myself have urged, had I been similarlyTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 245placed. And it is marvellous, how soon thehearts of children discover a sensibility to thisconsideration, and how soon they are capable ofbecoming obedient to the powder of it. It is, infact, the principle on which a thousand contestsof the nursery are settled, and many thousandmore are prevented ; what else would be anincessant scramble of rival and ravenous cupidity,being mitigated and reduced to a verygreat, though unknown and undefinable extent,by the sense of justice coming into play. It isaltogether worthy of remark, however, that thesense of property is anterior to the sense ofjustice, and comes from an anterior and distinctsource in our nature. It is not justice Whichoriginates the proprietary feeling in the heart ofany individual. It only arbitrates between theproprietary claims and feelings of different individuals— after these had previously arisen by theoperation of other principles in the human constitution.Those writers on jurisprudence aresadly and inextricably puzzled, who imaginethat justice presided over the first ordinations ofproperty — utterly at a loss as they must be, tofind out the principle that could guide her initialmovements. Justice did not create property ;but found it already created — her only officebeing to decide between the antecedent claimsof one man and another : And, in the dischargeof this office, she but compares the rights which246 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOeach of them can allege, as founded either onthe length of undisputed and undisposed of possession,or on the value they had impressed onthe thing at issue by labour of their own. Inother words, she bears respect to those tw o greatprimitive ingredients by which property is constituted,before that she had ever bestowed anyattention, or given any award whatever regardingit. The matter may be illustrated by the peculiarrelation in w liicli each man stands to his ownbody, as being, in a certain view, the same withthe peculiar relation in which each man standsto his own property. His sensitive feelings arehurt, by the infliction of a neighbour's violenceupon the one ; and his proprietary feelings arehurt, by the encroachment of a neighbour'sviolence upon the other. But justice no moreoriginated the proprietary, than it did the sensitivefeelings — no more gave me the peculiaraffection which I feel for the property I nowoccupy as my own, than it gave me my peculiaraffection for the person which I now occupy asmy own. Justice pronounces on the iniquity ofany hurtful infliction by us on the person ofanother— seeing that such an infliction upon ourown person, to which we stand similarly related,would be resented by ourselves. And Justice,in like manner, pronounces on the inequality oriniquity of any hurtful encroachment by us onthe property of another — also seeing, that suchTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 247an encroachment upon our own property, towhich we stand similarly related, would be feltand resented by ourselves. Man feels one kindof pain, when the hand which belongs to him isstruck by another ; and he feels another kind ofpain, when some article which it holds, andw Inch he conceives to belong to him, is wrestedby another from its grasp. But it was not Justicewhich instituted either the animal economyin the one case, or the proprietary economy inthe other. Justice found them both alreadyinstituted. Property is not the creation ofjustice ; but is in truth a prior creation. Justicedid not form this material, or command it intobeing ; but in the course of misunderstanding orcontroversy between man and man, property,a material pre-existent or already made, formsthe subject of many of those questions which areput into her hands.14. But, recurring to the juvenile controversywhich we have already imagined for the purposeof illustration, there is still a third way in whichwe may conceive it to be conclusively and definitivelysettled. The parents may interpose theirauthority, and assign his own particular chair toeach member of the household. The instanteffect of such a decree, in fixing and distinguishingthe respective properties in all time coming,has led, we believe, to a misconception regardingthe real origin of property — in consequence of a248 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOcertain obscure analogy between this act ofparents or legislators over the family of a household,and a supposed act of rulers or legislatorsover the great family of a nation. Now, not onlyhave the parents this advantage over the magistrates— that the property which they thus distributeis previously their own ; but there i<^ bothapower of enforcement and a disposition toacquiescence within the limits of a home, whichexist in an immeasurably weaker degree withinthe limits of a kingdom. Still, with all thissuperiority on the part of the lio-'':<^^oirl legislators,it would even be their wisdom, to conformtheir decree as much as possible to those naturalprinciples and feelings of property, which hadbeen in previous exercise among their children —to have respect, in fact, when making distributionof the chairs, both to their habits of previousoccupation, and to the additional value whichany of them may have impressed upon theirfavourite seats, by such little arts of upholsteryor mechanics, as they are competent to practise.A wise domestic legislator would not thwart,but rather defer to the claims and expectationswhich nature had previously founded. And stillmore a national legislator or statesman, wouldevince his best wisdom, by, instead of traversingthe constitution of property which nature hadpreviously established, greatly deferring to thatsense of a possessory right, which long and un-theAVELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 249questioned occupation so universally gives ; andgreatly deferring to the principle, that, whateverthe fruit of each man's labour may be, it rightfully,and therefore should legitimately belong tohim. A government could, and at the terminationof a revolutionary storm, often does, traverse theseprinciples ; but not without the excitement of athousand heart-burnings, and so the establishmentof a strong counteraction to its own authorityin the heart of its dominions. It is thedictate of sound policy — that the natural, on theone hand, and the legal or political on the other,should quadrate as much as possible. And thus,instead of saying' with Dr. Paley that propertyderived its constitution and being from the lawof the land-ewe should say that law never exhibitsa better understanding of her own placeand functions, than when, founding on materialsalready provided, she feels that her wisest partisbut to act as an auxiliary, and to ratify thatprior constitution which nature had put into herhands.15. In this exposition which we have nowattempted of the origin and rights of property,we are not insensible to the mighty useof law. By its power of enforcement, it perpetuatesor defends from violation that existentorder of things which itself had established,or, rather, which itself had ratified. Eventhough at its first ordinations it had contrastAFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOvexed those natural principles which enter intothe foundation of property, these very principleswill, in time, re- appear in favour of the newsystem, and yield to it a firmer and a strongersupport with every day of its continuance.Whatever fraud or force may have been concernedat the historical commencement of thepresent and actual distribution of property — thethen new possessors have at length become old ;and, under the canopy and protection of law,the natural rights have been superadded to thefactitious or the political. Law has guaranteedto each proprietor a long continued occupation,till a strong and inveterate possessoryfeeling has taken root and arisen in every heart.And secure of this occupation, each may, inthe course of years, have mixed up to an indefiniteamount, the improvements of his ownskill and labour with those estates — which, asthe fruit whether of anarchy or of victoriousinvasion, had fallen into his hands. So thatthese first and second principles of naturaljurisprudence, whatever violence may have beendone to them at the overthrow of a formerregime, are again fostered into all their originalefficacy and strength during the continuanceof a present one. Insomuch, that if,at the end of half a century, those outcastsof a great revolutionary hurricane, the descendantsof a confiscated noblesse, were to rallyTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 251and combine for the recovery of their ancientdomains — they would be met in the encounter,not by the force of the existing government only,but by the outraged and resentful feelings of theexisting proprietors, whose possessory and prescriptiverights, now nurtured into full and firmestablishment, would, in addition to the senseof interest, enlist even the sense of justice upontheir side. Apart from the physical, did webut compute the moral forces which enter intosuch a conflict, it will often be found that thesuperiority is in favour of the actual occupiers.Those feelings, on the one hand, which are associatedwith the recollection of a now departedancestry and their violated rights, are foundto be inoperative and feeble, when broughtinto comparison or collision with that strengthwhich nature has annexed to the feelings ofactual possession. Regarded as but a contestof sentiment alone, the disposition to recoveris not so strong as the disposition to retain.The recollection that these were once my parentalacres, though wrested from the hand ofremote ancestors by anarchists and marauders,would not enlist so great or so practical a moralforce on the aggressive side of a new warfare,as the reflection that these are now my possessedacres, which, though left but by immediateancestors, I have been accustomed from infancyto call my own, would enlist on the side of252 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOthe defensive. In the course of generations,those sedative influences, which tend to thepresentation of the existing order wax strongerand stronger ; and those disturbing influences,which tend to the restoration of the ancientorder, wax weaker and weaker — till man atlast ceases to charge himself with a task soinfinitely above his strength, as the adjustmentof the quarrels and the accumulated wrongsof the centuries which have gone by. Inother words, the constitution of law in regardto property, which is the work of man, maybeso framed as to sanction, and, therefore,to encourage the enormities which have beenperpetrated by the force of arms — while theconstitution of the mind in regard to property,which is the work of nature, is so framed, as,with conservative virtue, to be altogether onthe side of perpetuity and peace.16. Had a legislator of supreme wisdom andarmed with despotic power been free to establishthe best scheme for augmenting the wealthand the comforts of human society — he couldhave devised nothing more effectual than thatexisting constitution of property, which obtainsso generally throughout the world ; and by which,each man, secure within the limits of his ownspecial and recognized possession, might claimas being rightly and originally his, the fruitof all the labour which he may choose to expendTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 253upon it. But this was not left to the discoveryof man, or to any ordinations of his consequentupon that discovery. He was not led to thisarrangement by the experience of its consequences; but prompted to it by certain feelings,as much prior to that experience, as the appetiteof hunger is prior to our experience of the useof food. In this matter, too, the wisdom ofnature has anticipated the wisdom of man,by providing him with original principles ofher own. Man was not left to hind out thedirection in mIhcIi his benevolence might bemost productive of enjoyment to others; buthe has been irresistibly, and, as far as he isconcerned, blindly impelled thereto by meansof a family affection — which, concentrating hisefforts on a certain few, has made them ahundred times more prolific of benefit to mankindthan if all had been left to provide thebest they may for the whole, without a preciseor determinate impulse to any. And in likemanner, man was not left to find out the directionin which his industry might be made mostproductive of the materials of enjoyment ; but,with the efforts of each concentrated by meansof a special possessory affection on a certainportion of the territory the universal produceis incalculably greater than under a medleysystem of indifference, with every field alike254 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOopen to all, and, therefore, alike unreclaimedfrom the wilderness — unless one man shall consentto labour it in seed time, although anothershould reap the fruit of his labour in harvest.It is good that man was not trusted with thewhole disengagement of this chaos — but that anatural jurisprudence, founded on the constitutionof the human mind, so far advances andfacilitates the task of that artificial jurisprudence,which frames the various codes or constitutionsof human law. It is well that naturehas connected with the past and actual possessionof any thing, so strong a sense of right to itscontinued possession ; and that she has so powerfullybacked this principle, by means of anotheras strongly and universally felt as the former,even that each man has a right to possess thefruit of his own industry. The human legislatorhas little more to do than to confirm, or ratherto promulgate and make known his determinationto abide by principles already felt andrecognized by all men. Wanting these, he couldhave fixed nothing, he could have perpetuatednothing. The legal constitution of every state,in its last and finished form, comes from thehand of man. But the great and natural principles,which secure for these constitutions theacceptance of w hole communities — implanted inmanfrom his birth, or at least evincing theirTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 255presence and power in very early childhood —these are what bespeak the immediate hand ofGod.17. But these principles, strongly conservativethough they be, on the side of existing propertydo not at all times prevent a revolution — whichis much more frequently, however, a revolutionof power than of property. But when suchis the degree of violence abroad in society, thateven the latter is effected — this most assuredly,does not arise from any decay or intermissionof the possessory feelings, that we have justbeen expounding ; but from the force andfermentation of other causes which prevail inopposition to these, and in spite of them. And,after that such revolution has done its workand ejected the old dynasty of proprietors,the mischief to them may be as irrecoverable,as if their estates had been wrested from them,by an irruption from the waters of the ocean,by earthquake, or the sweeping resistless visitationof any other great physical calamity.The moral world has its epochs and its transitionsas \^e\\ as the natural, during which theordinary laws are not suspended but only forthe time overborne ; but this does not hinder therecurrence and full reinstatement of these lawsduring the long eras of intermediate repose. Andit is marvellous, with what certainty and speed,the conservative influences, of which we have256 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOtreated, gather around a new system of things,with whatever violence, and even injustice, itmay have been ushered into the world — insomuchthat, under the guardianship of the powerswhich be, those links of a natural jurisprudence,now irretrievably torn from the former, are atlength transferred in all their wonted tenacityto the existing proprietors ; rivetting each ofthem to his own several property, and altogetherestablishing a present order of as great firmnessand strength as ever belonged to the order whichwent before it, but which is now supersededand forgotten. It is well that nature hathannexed so potent a charm to actual possession ;and a charm which strengthens with every yearand day of its continuance. This may notefface the historical infamy of many ancientusurpations. But the world cannot be kept inastate of perpetual effervescence ; and nowthat the many thousand wrongs of years goneby, as well as the dead on whom they havebeen inflicted, are fading into deep oblivion —it is well for the repose of its living generations,that, in virtue of the strong possessory feelingswhich nature causes to arise in the hearts ofexisting proprietors and to be sympathized Withby all other men, the possessors de facto haveat length the homage done to them of possessorsde jure ; strong in their own consciousness ofright, and strong in the recognition thereof byall their contemporaries.THE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 25718. But ere we have completed our viewsupon this subject, we must shortly dwell ona principle of very extensive application inmorals ; and which itself forms a strikingexample of a most beauteous and beneficentadaptation in the constitution of the humanmind to the needs and the well-being of humansociety. It may be thus announced, brieflyand generally : — however strong the specialaffections of our nature may be, yet, if alongwith them there be but a principle of equity inthe mind, then, these affections, so far fromconcentrating our selfish regards upon theirseveral objects to the disregard and injury ofothers, will but enhance our respect and oursympathy for the like affections in other men.19. This may be illustrated, in the firstinstance, by the equity observed between manand man, in respect to the bodies which theywear — endowed, as we may suppose them to be,with ecpial, at least with like capacities of painand suffering from external violence. To inflictthat very pain upon another which I shouldresent or shrink from in agony, if inflictedupon myself — this to all sense of justice appearsa very palpable iniquity. Let us nowconceive then, that the sentient frame-work ofeach of the parties was made twice more sensitive,or twice more alive to pain and pungencyof feeling than it actually is. In one view itc. s258 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOmay be said that each would become twice moreselfish than before. Each would feel a doubleinterest in warding off external violence fromhimself; and so be doubly more anxious forhis own protection and safety. But, with thevery same moral nature as ever, each, nowaware of the increased sensibility, not merely inhimself but in his fellows, would feel doublyrestrained from putting forth upon him a hand ofviolence. So, grant him to have but a sense ofequity — and, exactly in proportion as he becametender of himself, would he become tender ofanother also. If the now superior exquisitenessof his own frame afforded him a topic, on which,what may be called his selfishness would feelmore intensely than before — the now superiorexquisiteness of another's frame would, in likemanner, afford a topic, on which his sense ofjustice would feel more intensely than before.It is even as when men of very acute sensibilitiescompany together — each has, on that veryaccount, a more delicate and refined considerationfor the feelings of all the rest ; and it isonly among men of tougher pellicle and rigidfibre, where coarseness and freedom prevail,because there coarseness and freedom are notfelt to be offensive. Grant me but a sense ofequity — and the very fineness of my sensationswhich weds me so much more to the care andthe defence of my own person, would also, onTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 259the imagination of a similar fineness in a fellowman,restrain me so much more from theputting forth of any violence upon his person.If I had any compassion at all, or any horror atthe injustice of inflicting upon another, thatwhich I should feel to be a cruelty, if inflictedupon myself— I would experience a greaterrecoil of sympathy from the blow that wasdirected to the surface of a recent wound uponanother, precisely as I would feel a severer agonyin a similar infliction upon myself. So, thereis nothing in the quickness of my physicalsensibilities, and by which I am rendered morealive to the care and the guardianship of myown person — there is nothing in this to blunt,far less to extinguish my sensibilities for othermen. Nay, it may give a quicker moral delicacyto all the sympathies which I beforefelt for them. And especially, the more sensitiveI am to the hurts and the annoyanceswhich others bring upon my own person, themore scrupulous may I be of being in any wayinstrumental to the hurt or the annoyance ofothers.20. The same holds true between man andman, not merely of the bodies which they wear,but of the families which belong to them. Eachman, by nature, hath a strong affection for hisown offspring — the young whom he hath reared,and with whom the daily habit of converse260 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOunder the same roof, hath strengthened all theoriginal affinities that subsisted between them.But one man a parent knows that another man,also a parent, is actuated by the very sameappropriate sensibilities towards his offspring ;and nought remains but to graft on these separateand special affections in each, a sympathybetween one neighbour and another ; that theremight be a mutual respect for each other'sfamily affections. After the matter is advancedthus far, we can be at no loss to perceive, that,in proportion to the strength of the parentalaffection with each, will be the strength of thefellow-feeling that each has with the affection ofthe other — insomuch that he who bears in hisheart the greatest tenderness for his own offspring,would feel the greatest revolt against anact of severity towards the offspring of his friend.Now it is altogether so with the separate and originalsense of property in each of two neighbours,and a sense of justice grafted thereupon —even as a mutual neighbouring sympathy may begrafted on the separate family affections. Oneman a proprietor, linked by many ties with thatwhich he hath possessed and been in thehabitual use and management of for years, isperfectly conscious of the very same kind ofaffinity, between another man a proprietor andthat which belongs to him. It is not the justicewhich so links him to his own property, anyTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 201more than it is the sympathy with his neighbourwhich has linked him to his own children. Butthe justice hath given him a respectful feelingfor his neighbour's rights, even as the sympathywould give him a tenderness for his neighbour'soffspring. And so far from there being aught inthe strength of the appropriating principle thatrelaxes this deference to the rights of his neighbour,the second principle may in fact grow withthe growth, and strengthen with the strength ofthe first one.21. For the purpose of maintaining an equitableregard, or an equitable conduct to others — it isno more necessary that we should reduce orextirpate the special affections of our nature,than that, in order to make room for the loveof another, we should discharge from the bosomall love of ourselves. So far from this, theaffection we have for ourselves, or for thosevarious objects which by the constitution of ournature we are formed to seek after and to delightin — is the measure of that duteous regard whichwe owe to others, and of that duteous respectwhich we owe to all their rights and all theirinterests. The very highest behest of socialmorality, while at the same time the most comprehensiveof its rules, is that we should loveour neighbour as we do ourselves. Love to ourneighbour is the thing which this rule measuresoff — and love to ourselves is the thing which262 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE Toitmeasures by. These two then, the social andthe selfish affections, instead of being as theytoo often are inversely, might under a virtuousregimen be directly proportional to eachother. At all events the way to advance ormagnify the one, is not surely to weaken orabridge the other. The strength of certainprior affections which by nature we do have,is the standard of certain posterior affectionswhich morality tells that we ought to have.Morality neither planted these prior affections,nor does she enjoin us to extirpate them. Theywere inserted by the hand of nature for themost useful purposes; and morality, instead ofdemolishing her work, applies the rule and compassto it for the construction of her own.22. It was not justice which presided over theoriginal distribution of property. It was notshe who assigned to each man his separatefield, any more than it was she who assignedto each man his separate family. It was naturethat did both, by investing with such powerthose anterior circumstances of habit and possession,which gave rise — first, to the special lovethat each man bears to his own children, andsecondly, to the special love that each manbears to his own acres. Had there been nosuch processes beforehand, for thus isolating theparental regards of each on that certain householdgroup which nature placed under his roof,THE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 263and the proprietary regards of each on thatcertain local territory which history casts intohis possession : or, had each man been so constituted,that, instead of certain children whomhe felt to be his own, he was alike loose tothem or susceptible of a like random and indiscriminateaffection for any children ; or,instead of certain lands which he felt to behis own, he was alike loose to them or susceptibleof a like tenacious adherence to anylands — had such been the rudimental chaoswhich nature put into the hands of man forthe exercise of his matured faculties, neitherhis morality nor his w wisdom would have enabledhim to unravel it. But nature prepared forman an easier task ; and when justice arose to herwork, she found a territory so far already partitioned,and each proprietor linked by a strongand separate tie of peculiar force to that partwhich he himself did occupy. She found thisto be the land which one man wont to possessand cultivate, and that to be the land whichanother man wont to possess and cultivate —the destination, not originally, of justice, but ofaccident, which her office nevertheless is notto reverse, but to confirm. We hold it a beautifulpart of our constitution, that, the firmerthe tenacity wherewith the first man adheresto his own, once that justice takes her placeamong the other principles of his nature, the^()4 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOprompter will be his recognition of the secondman's right to his own. If each man sat moreloosely to his own portion, each would haveviewed more loosely the right of his neighbourto the other portion. The sense of property,anterior to justice, exists in the hearts of all;and the principle of justice, subsequent to property,does not extirpate these special affections,but only arbitrates between them. In proportionto the felt strength of the proprietaryaffection in the hearts of each ; will be thestrength of that deference which each, in sofaras justice has the mastery over him, rendersto the rights and the property of his neighbour.These are the principles of the Histoire raisonnee,that has been more or less exemplified in allthe countries of the world ; and which mightstill be exemplified in the appropriation of adesert island. If we had not had the priorand special determinations of nature, justicewould have felt the work of appropriation tobe an inextricable problem. If we had not hadjustice, with each man obeying only the impulseof his own affections and unobservant of thelike affection of others, we should have beenkept in a state of constant and interminablewar. Under the guidance of nature and justicetogether, the whole earth might have been parcelledout, without conflict and without interference.THE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 26523. If a strong self-interest in one's personmay not only be consistent with, but, by theaid of the moral sense, may be conducive to aproportionally strong principle of forbearancefrom all injury to the persons of other men —why may not the Avery same law be at workin regard to property as to person ? The fondnesswherewith one nourishes and cherisheshis own flesh, might, we have seen, enhancehis sympathy and his sense of justice for thatof other men ; and so, we affirm, might it beof the fondness wherewith one nourishes andcherishes his own field. The relation in whicheach man stands to his own body, was anteriorto the first dawning of his moral nature ; andhis instinctive sensibilities of pain and suffering,when any violence is inflicted, were also anterior.But as his moral perceptions expand,and he considers others beside himself who aresimilarly related to their bodies — these verysusceptibilities not only lead him to recoil fromthe violence that is offered to himself; but theylead him to refrain from the offering of violenceto other men. They may have an air of selfishnessat the first ; yet so far from being obstaclesin the way of justice, they are indispensablehelps to it. And so may each man stand relatedto a property as well as to a person ; and byties that bind him to it, ere he thought of hisneighbour's property at all — by instinctive affectAFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOtons, which operated previously to a senseof justice in his bosom ; and yet which, sofarfrom acting as a thwart upon his justiceto others, give additional impulse to all hisobservations of it. He feels what has passedwithin his own bosom, in reference to thefield that he has possessed, and has laboured, andthat has for a time been respected by society ashis ; and he is aware of the very same feelingin the breast of a neighbour in relation toanother field ; and in very proportion to thestrength of his own feeling, does he defer tothat of his fellow-men. It is at this pointthat the sense of justice begins to operate— notfor the purpose of leading him to appropriate hisown, for this he has already done ; but for thepurpose of leading him to respect the propertyof others. It was not justice which gave toeither of them at the first that feeling of property,which each has in his own separate domain ;any more than it was justice which gave toeither of them that feeling of affection whicheach has for his own children. It is after, andnot before these feelings are formed, that justicesteps in with her golden rule, of not doing toothers as we would not others to do unto us ;and, all conscious as we are of the dislike andresentment we should feel on the invasion of ourproperty, it teaches to defer to a similar dislikeand a similar resentment in other men. And, soTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 267far from this original and instinctive regard forthis property which is my own serving at allto impair, when once the moral sense comesinto play, it enhances my equitable regard forthe property of others. It is just with me theproprietor, as it is with me the parent. My affectionfor my own family does not prompt meto appropriate the family of another ; hut itstrengthens my sympathetic consideration forthe tenderness and feeling of their own parenttowards them. My affection for my own fielddoes not incline me to seize upon that of anotherman ; but it strengthens my equitable considerationfor all the attachments and the claims whichits proprietor has upon it. In proportion to thestrength of that instinct which binds me to myown offspring, is the sympathy I feel with thetenderness of other parents. In proportion tothe strength of that instinct which binds me tomy own property, is the sense of equity I feeltowards the rights of all other proprietors. Itwas not justice which gave either the one instinctor the other ; but justice teaches eachman to bear respect to that instinct in another,which he feels to be of powerful operation in hisown bosom.24. It is in virtue of my sentient nature thatI am so painfully alive to the violence done uponmy own body, as to recoil from the infliction ofit upon myself. And it is in virtue of my moral268 AFFECTIONS WHICH COxXDUCE TOnature, that, alive to the pain of other bodies thanmy own, I refrain from the infliction of it uponthem. It is not justice which gives the sensations; but justice pronounces on the equal respectthat is due to the sensations of all. Neitherdoes justice give the sensations of property,but it finds them ; and pronounces on the respectwhich each owes to the sensations of all the rest.It was not justice which gave the personal feeling;neither is it justice which gives the possessoryfeeling. Justice has nothing to do with theprocess by which this body came to be my own ;and although now, perhaps, there is not a property,at least in the civilized world, which maynot have passed into the hand of their actualpossessors, by a series of purchases, over whichjustice had the direction — yet there was a timewhen it might have been said, that justice hashad nothing: to do with the process by Whichthis garden came to be my own ; and yet, thenas well as now, it would have been the utteranceof a true feeling, that he w ho touches this garden,touches the apple of mine eye. And it isas much the dictate of justice, that we shallrespect the one sensation as the other. He,indeed, who has the greatest sensitiveness, whetherabout his own person or his own property,will, with an equal principle of justice in hisconstitution, have the greatest sympathy, bothfor the personal and the proprietary rights ofTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 269others. This view of it saves all the impracticablemysticism that has gathered around thespeculations of those, who conceive of justice,as presiding over the first distributions of property; and so have fallen into the very commonmistake, of trying to account for that which hadbeen provided for by the wisdom of nature, as ifit had been provided by the wisdom and theprinciple of man. At the first allocations ofproperty, justice may have had no hand inthem. They were altogether fortuitous. Oneman set himself down, perhaps on a better soilthan his neighbour, and chalked out for himselfa larger territory, at a time when there was nonewho interfered or who offered to share it withhim ; and so he came to as firm a possessoryfeeling in reference to his wider domain, as theother has in reference to his smaller. Our metaphysicaljurists are sadly puzzled to accountfor the original inequalities of property, and forthe practical acquiescence of all men in theactual and very unequal distribution of it — havingrecourse to an original social compact, andto other fictions alike visionary But if therebe truth in our theory, it is just as easy to explain,why the humble proprietor, would nomore think of laying claim to certain acres ofhis rich neighbour's estate because it was largerthan his own, than he would think of layingclaim to certain children of his neighbour's270 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOfamily because it was larger — or even of layingclaim to certain parts of his neighbour's personbecause it was larger. He is sufficiently acquaintedwith his own nature to be aware, that,were the circumstances changed, he should feelprecisely as his affluent neighbour does ; and herespects the feeling accordingly. He knowsthat, if himself at the head of a larger property,he would have the same affection for all itsfields that the actual proprietor has ; and that,if at the head of a larger family, he would havethe same affection with the actual parent for allits children. It is by making justice come inat the right place, that is, not prior to thesestrong affections of nature but posterior to them,that the perplexities of this inquiry are doneaway. The principle on which it arbitrates, is,not the comparative magnitude of the properties,but the relative feelings of each actual possessortowards each actual property ; and if it findthese in every instance, to be the very feelingswhich all men would have in the circumstancesbelonging to that instance — it attempts no newdistribution, but gives its full sanction to thedistribution which is already before it. This isthe real origin and upholder of that conservativeinfluence which binds together the rich and thepoor in society ; and thus it is that property isrespected throughout all its gradations.25. It is from the treatment of an original asTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 271if it were a derived affection, that the wholeobscurity on this topic has arisen. It is quite asimpossible to educe the possessory feeling froman anterior sense of justice, or from a respectfor law — as it is to educe the parental feelingfrom a previous and comprehensive regard forthe interests of humanity. There is no doubtthat the general good is best promoted by theplay of special family affections ; but this is thework of nature, and not the work of man. Andthere is no doubt that the wealth and comfort ofsociety are inconceivably augmented by thoseinfluences, which bind each individual nearlyas much to his own property, as he is bound tohis own offspring. But in the one case as wellas the other, there were certain instinctive regardsthat came first, and the office of justice isaltogether a subsequent one ; not to put theseregards into the breast of any, but to award theequal deference that is due to the regards of allinsomuch that the vast domain of one individual,perhaps transmitted to him from generationto generation, throughout the lengthened seriesof an ancestry, whose feet are now upon theearth, but whose top reaches the clouds and isthere lost in distant and obscure antiquity — is,to the last inch of its margin, under a guardianshipof justice as inviolable, as that which assuresprotection and ownership to the humble possessorof one solitary acre. The right of property272 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOis not the less deferred to, either because itsdivisions are unequal, or because its origin isunknown. And, even when history tells us thatit is founded on some deed of iniquitous usurpation,there is a charm in the continued occupation,that prevails and has the mastery over ourmost indignant remembrance of the villany ofother days. It says much for the strength of thepossessory feeling, that, even in less than half acentury, it will, if legal claims are meanwhileforborne, cast into obliteration, all the deeds,and even all the delinquencies, which attach tothe commencement of a property. At lengththe prescriptive right bears every thing beforeit, as by the consuetude of English, by the useand wont of Scottish law. And therefore, oncemore, instead of saying with Dr. Paley that itis the law of the land which constitutes the basisof property — the law exhibits her best wisdom,when she founds on the materials of that basis,which nature and the common sense of mankindhave laid before her.26. Dr. Thomas Brown, we hold to have beenpartly right and partly wrong upon this subject.He evinces a true discernment of what may betermed the pedigree of our feelings in regard toproperty, when he says and says admirably wellthat,* "Justice is not what constitutes property; it is a virtue which presupposes propertyLecture Lxxxiii.THE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 273and respects it however constituted." And further,that — "justice as a moral virtue is not thecreation of property, but the conformity of ouractions to those views of property, which vary inthe various states of society." But it is not ashewould affirm, it is not because obedience to asystem of law, of which the evident tendency isto the public good, is the object of our moralregard — it is not this, which moralizes, if wemay be allowed such an application of the termorrather, which constitutes the virtuousness ofour respect to another man's property. This isthe common mistake of those moralists, whowould ascribe every useful direction or habitudeof man to some previous and comprehensiveview taken by himself of w^liat is best for thegood of the individual or the good of society ;instead of regarding such habitude as the fruitof a special tendency, impressed direct by thehand of nature, on a previous and comprehensiveview taken by its author, and therefore bearingon it a palpable indication both of the goodnessand the wisdom of nature's God — even as hungeris the involuntary result of man's physicalconstitution, and not of any care or considerationby man on the uses of food. The truth is —when, deferring to another's right of property,we do not think of the public good in the matterat all. But we are glad, in the first instance,each to possess and to use and to improve allc. T274 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOthat we are able to do without molestation, whetherthat freedom from molestation has beensecured to us by law or by the mere circumstancesof our state ; and, in virtue of principles,not resulting from any anticipations of wisdomor any views of general philanthropy, (becausedeveloped in early childhood and long before wearecapable of being either philanthropists orlegislators) we feel a strong link of ownershipwith that which we have thus possessed andused, and on which we have bestowed our improvements; and we are aware that another man,in similar relation with another property, willfeel towards it in like manner ; and a sense ofjustice, or its still more significant and instructivename, of equity, suggests this equality betweenme and him — that, in the same manner asI would regard his encroachment on myself asinjurious, so it were alike injurious in me tomake a similar encroachment upon my neighbour.27. We have expatiated thus long on theorigin and rights of property — because of allsubjects; it is the one, regarding which ourwriters on jurisprudence have sent forth thegreatest amount of doubtful and unsatisfactorymetaphysics. They labour and are in greatperplexity to explain even the rise of the feelingor desire that is in the mind regarding it. Theyreason, as if the very conception of propertyTHE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 275was that, which could not have entered into theheart of man without a previous sense of justice.In this we hold them to have antedated matterswrong. The conception of property is aboriginal; and the office of justice is not to put it intoany man's head ; but to arbitrate among therival feelings of cupidity, or the arrogant andeverlasting claims that are apt to get into allmen's heads — not to initiate man into the notionof property ; but, in fact, to limit and restrainhis notion of it — not to teach the creatures whoat first conceive themselves to have nothing,what that is which they might call their own ;but to teach the creatures whose first and earliesttendency is to call every thing their own,what that is which they must refrain from andconcede to others. When justice rises to authorityamong men, her office is, not to wedeach individual by the link of property to thatwhich he formerly thought it was not competentfor him to use or to possess ; but it is to divorceeach individual from that, which it is not rightlycompetent for him to use or to possess — and thusrestrict each to his own rightful portion. Itsoffice in fact is restrictive, not dispensatory.The use of it is, not to give the first notion of propertyto those who were destitute of it, but to limitand restrain the notion with those among whomit is apt to exist in a state of overflow. The useof law, in short, the great expounder and enforcer276 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOof property, is not to instruct the men, who butfor her lessons would appropriate none; but itis to restrain the men who, but for her checksand prohibitions, would monopolize all.28. Such then seems to have been thepurpose of nature in so framing our mentalconstitution, that we not only appropriate fromthe first ; but feel, each, such a power in thosecircumstances, which serve to limit the appropriationof every one man and to distinguishthem from those of others — that all, as if withcommon and practical consent, sit side byside together, without conflict and without interference,on their own respective portions,however unequal, of the territory in which theyare placed. On the uses, the indispensableuses of such an arrangement, we need not expatiate.*The hundred-fold superiority, in theamount of produce for the subsistence of human" The effect (of the abolition of property) would be as instantas inevitable. The cultivation of the fields would be abandoned.The population would be broken up into straggling bands — eachprowling in quest of a share in the remaining subsistence forthemselves ; and in the mutual contests of rapacity, they wouldanticipate, by deaths of violence, those still crueller deaths thatwould ensue, in the fearful destitution which awaited them. Yetmany would be left whom the sword had spared, but whom faminewould not spare — that overwhelming calamity under which awhole nation might ultimately disappear. But a few miserablesurvivors would dispute the spontaneous fruits of the earth withthe beasts of the field, who now multiplied and overran that landwhich had been desolated of its people. And so by a series,every step of which was marked with increasing wretchedness,THE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 277beings, which an appropriated country has overan equal extent of a like fertile but unappropriated,and, therefore, unreclaimed wilderness,is too obvious to be explained. It may bestated however ; and when an economy so beneficial,without which even a few stragglers ofour race could not be supported in comfort;and a large human family, though many timesinferior to that Which now peoples our globe,could not be supported at all — when the effectof this economy, in multiplying to a degreeinconceivable the aliment of human bodies, isviewed in connexion with those prior tendenciesof the human mind which gave it birth, wecannot but regard the whole as an instance,and one of the strongest which it is possibleto allege, of the adaptation of external natureto that mental constitution, wherewith the Authorof nature hath endowed us.29. In connexion with this part of our sub-thetransition Avould at length be made to a thinly scattered tribeof hunters, on what before had been a peopled territory of industriousand cultivated men. Thus, on the abolition of thissingle law, the fairest and most civilized region of the globe,which at present sustains its millions of families, out of a fertilitythat now waves over its cultivated, because its appropriatedacres, would, on the simple tie of appropriation being broken,lapse in a very few years into a frightful solitude, or, if notbereft of humanity altogether, would at last become as desolateand dreary as a North American wilderness." — Political Economyin connexion with the Moral State and Moral Prospects ofSociety.278 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOsect, there is one especial adaptation, the statementof which we more willingly bring forward,that, beside being highly important in itself,it forms an instance of adaptation in the pureand limited sense of the term* — even the influenceof a circumstance strictly material onthe state of the moral world, in all the civilized,and indeed in all the appropriated countries onthe face of the earth. We advert to the actualfertility of the land, and to the circumstancespurely physical by which the degree or measureof that fertility is determined. It has beenwell stated by some of the expounders of geologicalscience, that, while the vegetable mouldon the earth's surface is subject to perpetualwaste, from the action both of the winds andof the waters, either blowing it away in dust,or washing it down in rivers to the ocean — theloss thus sustained, is nevertheless perpetuallyrepaired by the operation of the same materialagents on the uplands of the territory — whencethe dust and the debris, produced by a disintegrationthat is constantly going on evenin the hardest rocks, is either strewed by theatmosphere, or carried down in an enrichingsediment by mountain streams to the landswhich are beneath them. It has been rightlyargued, as the evidence and example of abenevolent design, that the opposite causesSee the first paragraphs of the introductory chapter.THE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 279of consumption and of supply are so adjustedto each other, as to have ensured the perpetuityof our soils.* But even though thesecounteracting forces had been somewhat differentlybalanced ; though the wasting operationhad remained as active and as powerful,while a more difficult pulverization of therocks had made the restorative operation slowerand feebler than before — still we might havehad our permanent or stationary soils, but onlyall of less fertility than that in which we nowfind them. A somewhat different constitution ofthe rocks ; or a somewhat altered proportion inthe forces of that machinery which is broughtto bear upon them-in the cohesion that withstands,or in the impulse and the atmospherical" It is highly interesting to trace up, in this manner, theaction of causes with which we are familiar, to the production ofeffects, which at first seem to require the introduction of unknownand extraordinary' powers ; and it is no less interesting to observe,how skilfully nature has balanced the action of all the minutecauses of waste, and rendered them conducive to the general good.Of this we have a most remarkable instance, in the provision madefor preserving the soil, or the coat of vegetable mould, spread outover the surface of the earth. This coat, as it consists of loosematerials, is easily washed away by the rains, and is continuallycarried down by the rivers into the sea. This effect is visibleto every one ; the earth is removed not only in the form of sandand gravel, but its finer particles suspended in the waters, tingethose of some rivers continually, and those of all occasionally,that is, when they are flooded or swollen with rains. The quantityof earth thus carried down, varies according to circumstances ; ithas been computed in some instances, that the water of a river in a280 AFFECTIONS Which CONDUCE TOdepositions and the grinding frosts and theundermining torrents that separate and carry offthe materials— a slight change in one or all ofthese causes, might have let down each of thevarious soils on the face of the world to a lowerpoint in the scale of productiveness than atpresent belongs to them. And when we think ofthe mighty bearing which the determination ofthis single element has on the state and interestsof human society, we cannot resist the conclusionthat, depending as it does on so manyinfluences, there has, in the assortment of these,been a studied adaptation of the material andthe mental worlds to each other. For only letus consider the effect, had the fertility beenbrought so low, as that on the best of soils, theflood, contains earthy matter suspended in it, amounting to morethan the two hundred and fiftieth part of its own bulk. The soiltherefore, is continually diminished, its parts being delivered fromhigher to lower levels, and finally delivered into the sea. But it isa fact, that the soil, notwithstanding, remains the same in quantity,or at least nearly the same, and must have done so, eversince the earth was the receptacle of animal or vegetable life.The soil therefore is augmented from other causes, just as much,at an average, as it is diminished by those now mentioned ; andthis augmentation evidently can proceed from nothing but theconstant and slow disintegration of the rocks. In the permanencetherefore, of a coat of vegetable mould on the surface of theearth, we have a demonstrative proof of the continual destructionof the rocks ; and cannot but admire the skill, with which thepowers of the many chemical and mechanical agents employed inthis complicated work, are so adjusted, as to make the supply andthe waste of the soil exactly equal to one another." — Mayfair'sIllustrations of the Huttonian Theory. Section iii. Art. 13.THE WELL-BEING OF SOCIETY. 281produce extracted by the most strenuous effortsof human toil, could no more than repay thecultivation bestowed on them— or that the food,thus laboriously raised, would barely suffice forthe maintenance of the labourers. It is obviousthat a fertility beneath this point would have keptthe whole earth in a state of perpetual barrennessand desolation— when, though performingas now its astronomical circuit in the heavens, itwould have been a planet bereft of life, or atleast unfit for the abode and sustenance of therational generations by whom it is at presentoccupied. But even with a fertility at this point,although a race of men might have been up-holden,the tenure by which each man held hisexistence behoved to have been a life of unremittingdrudgery ; and we should have beheldthe whole species engaged in a constant struggleof penury and pain for the supply of their animalnecessities. And it is because of a fertilityabove this point, the actual fertility of vast portionsof land in most countries of the earth— thatmany and extensive are the soils which yield alarge surplus produce, over and above the maintenanceof all, who are engaged, wh ether directlyor indirectly, in the work of their cultivation.The strength of the possessory feelings on theone hand, giving rise to possessory rightsrecognized and acquiesced in by all men ;these rights investing a single individual with282 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TOthe ownership of lands, that yield on the otherhand a surplus produce, over which he hasthe uncontrolled disposal — make up together,such a constitution of the moral, combinedwith such a constitution of the material system,as demonstrates that the gradation of wealthin human society has its deep and its lastingfoundation in the nature of things. And thatthe construction of such an economy, with allthe conservative influences by which it isupholden,* attests both the wisdom and thebenevolence of Him who is the Author of nature,may best be evinced by the momentous purposes,to which this surplus produce of land,(the great originator of all that can be termedaffluence in the world) is subservient. — " Hadno ground yielded more in return for the labourexpended on it, than the food of the cultivatorsand their secondaries, the existence of one andall of the human race would have been spent inmere labour. Every man would have beendoomed to a life of unremitting toil for hisbodily subsistence ; and none could have beensupported in a state of leisure, either for idleness,or for other employments than those ofhusbandry, and such coarser manufactures asserve to provide society with the second necessariesof existence. The species would haverisen but a few degrees, whether physical orSee Art. 7 of this Chapter.THE WELL-BEING OF gOCIETY. 283moral, above the condition of mere savages.It is just because of a fertility in the earth, bywhich it yields a surplus over and above thefood of the direct and secondary labourers, thatwe can command the services of a disposablepopulation, who, in return for their maintenance,minister to the proprietors of this surplus, allthe higher comforts and elegancies of life. It isprecisely to this surplus we owe it, that society isprovided with more than a coarse and a bare supplyfor the necessities of animal nature. It is theoriginal fund out of which are paid the expensesof art, and science, and civilization, and luxury,and law, and defence, and all, in short, thatcontributes either to strengthen or to adorn thecommonwealth. Without this surplus, Ave shouldhave had but an agrarian population — consistingof husbandmen, and those few homelyand nistic artificers, Who, scattered in hamletsover the land, would have given their secondaryservices to the whole population. It marks aninteresting connection between the capabilitiesof the soil, and the condition of social life, thatto this surplus we stand indispensably indebted,for our crowded cities, our thousand manufactoriesfor the supply of comforts and refinementsto society, our wide and diversified commerce,our armies of protection, our schools and collegesof education, our halls of legislation and justice,even our altars of piety and temple services.284 AFFECTIONS WHICH CONDUCE TO, ETC.It has been remarked by geologists, as theevidence of a presiding design in nature, thatthe waste of the soil is so nicely balanced bythe supply from the disintegration of the uplandrocks, which are worn and pulverized at sucha rate, as to keep up a good vegetable mouldon the surface of the earth. But each scienceteems with the like evidences of a devising andintelligent God ; and when we view aright themany beneficent functions, to which, throughthe instrumentality of its surplus produce, theactual degree of the earth's fertility is subservient,we cannot imagine a more wondrousand beautiful adaptation between the state ofexternal nature and the mechanism of humansociety." *Political Economy in connection with the Moral State andMoral Prospects of Society. C. ii, Art. 10. In the appendixto this work on the subject of rent, there are further observationstending to prove that " there is an optimism in the actual constitutionof the land, as in every thing else that has proceeded fromthe hand of the Almighty."END OF VOL. I.C. WHITTINCH/JW, lOOKS COl'RT, CHANCERY LANE.