THEGEORGIAN ERA:MEMOIRSOF THE MOST EMINENT PERSONS, WHO HAVEFLOURISHED IN GREAT BRITAIN,FROM THE ACCESSION OF GEORGE THE FIRST TO THEDEMISE OF GEORGE THE FOURTH.IN FOUR VOLUMES.VOLUME III.VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS;PHILOSOPHERS AND MEN OF SCIENCE;AUTHORS.LONDON :VIZETELLY, Cranston AND CO. FLEET STREET,MDCCCXXXIV.CONTENTS.VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.A son, Lord GeorgeBarrow, JohnBeechey, Frederick WilliamBell, John4C9Belzoni, John Baptist 62Bowdich, Thomas Edward 86Browne, William George 51Bruce, James 35Brydoue, Patrick 464Buchan, David 471Buckingham, James Silk 70Burckhardt, John Lewis 72Byron, the Honourable John 26Campbell, The Reverend John 472Carteret, Philip 460Carver, Jonathan 461Chandler, Richard 463Clapperton, Hugh 82Clarke, Edward Daniel 52Clerke, Charles 463Cochrane, John Duncan 474Cook, Captain James 33Denham, Lieutenant-colonel 75Drury, Robert 457Ellis, Henry 4f>9Falconbridge, Alexander 468Flinders, Matthew 59Forster, George 48Franklin, Sir John 78Hall, Captain Basil 473Han way, Jonas 18PagHearne, Samuel 45Henniker, Sir Frederick, Bart 473Hollis, Thomas 23Houghton, Major 42Howard, John 28Huddart, Joseph 464Irwin, Eyes 465I ives, Edward 460Keppel, Hon. George Thomas 474Laing, Alexander Gordon 91Lander, Richard Lemon 95Ledyard, John 47Lucas, 467Lyon, Francis 85Macartney, Earl 40Mackenzie, Sir Alexander 468Middleton, Christopher 458Montagu, Edward Worsley 458Montagu, Lady Mary Worsley 11Margrave, Lord 44Park, Mungo 55Parry, Sir William Edward 87Pearce, Nathaniel 57Pococke, Richard 16Raffles, Sir Thomas Stamford 67Ritchie, Joseph 472Rogers, Woods 457Sail, Henry 61Shaw, Thomas 13Smith, William Henry 81Smith, William 463C O N T E N T b ,PageStaunton, SirGeo. Leonard, Bart. . 462Stewart, John 466Swinburne, Henry 468Sims, Lieutenant-colonel 469Turkey, James Kingston 471Tweddell, John 459Twiss, Richard 4(55Valentia, Viscount 470Vancouver, George 49Wallis, Captain Samuel 461SCIENCE.Aston, Charles 479Arkwright, Sir Richard 188At wood, George 493Banks, Sir Joseph 217iierkenhout, John 488fievis, JoinUirkbeck, George 501Basset, Charles 484Black, Joseph 181Blair, Patrick 482Boulton, Matthew 182Bradley, James 126Branch, Joseph 494Brande, William Thomas 504Brakhwaite, John 495Brewster, David 239Brindled, James 167Brownrigg, William 163Brown, Thomas 603Canton, John 172Catesbyby, Mark 478Cavalry, Tiberius 495Cavendish, Henry 186Collinsonon, Peter ,, 479Cotes, Roger 478Coventry, John 491Coward, William 475Crawford, Adair 494Curtis, William 492Dale, Samuel 475Davy, Sir Humphrey 233Peering, Charles 480Dodd, George 504Dodd, Ralph 503Dolloiid, John . 150Dryander, Jonas 4U3Edwards, George 128Ellis, John 482Emerson, William 138Ferguson, James 159Flamsteed, John 107Folkes, Martin 125Franklin, Benjamin 142Garnett, Thomas 498Graham, George 476Handley, John 478Hales, Stephen 477H alley, Edmund 110Harris, James 481Harris, John 476Harrison, John 139Hartley, David. 140Henry, Thomas 200Herschel, Sir William 211Hope, John 176Hornby, Thomas 490Hudson, William 486Hutcheson, Francis 130Hutchinson, John 118Button, Charles . 209Mutton, James 178Ingenious, John 486Jones, William 120Keill, John 117Landen, John 173Leslie, John 499Lewis, William 484Long, Roger 477Maclaurin, Colin 134Market, Alexander 500Martin, Benjamin , . 481Martyn, John 137CONTENTS.PageMarty n, Thomas 207Measures, Francis, Baron 488Masklelyne, Nevil 187M inner, Dean of Carlisle 495Judge, John 485Needham, John Turberville 483Newton, Sir Isaac 101Nicholson, William 496Parker, Samuel 4%Pennant, Thomas 180Playfair, John 219Price, J Ames 491Priestley, Joseph 1 89Pringle, Sir John 151Pulteney, Richard 183Ramsden, Jesse 202Reid, Thomas 154Reynell, John 492Robins, Benjamin 152Robison, John . 213Roebuck, John 484Roxburgh, William 229Russell, Patrick 485Sadler, William Windham 504Saunderson, Nicholas 121Sharp, Abraham 109Shaw, George 223Sherard, William 114Short, James 482Sibthorp, John 227Simpson, ThomasSimson, RobertSloane, Sir HansSeaton, JohnJ24Smith, Sir James Edward 230Solander, Daniel Charles 204Stanhope, Charles, Earl of 496Stanhope, Phillip, Earl of 483Stark, William 491Stewart, Dngald 224Stewart, Matthew 170Stillingfleet, Benjamin 480Stone, Edmund 131Taylor, Brook 123Tennant, Smithson 231Thornton, John Robert 497Tbrelkeld, Caleb 476Vince, Samuel 502Wales, William 489Walker, Adam 489Walker, George 490Wellesley, Charles 485Waring, Edward 198Watson, Sir William 166Watt, James 205Wedgewood, Josiah 487Whitehurst, William 165Mitchell, George 486Withering, William 491Wollaston, William Hyde 498LITERATURE.Adam, Alexander 559Addison, Joseph 271Aikin, John 303Akenside, Mark 342Amherst, Nicholas 5 0Arbuthnot, John 45Armstrong, John 306Arnold, Samuel James 679Asgill, John 508Askew, Anthony 544Astell, Mary 512Hancock, Samuel 566Baillie, Joanna 575Ballard, George 546Baibauld, Anne Letitia 381Barrington, Viscount 516Baxter, Andrew 523Bentt'e, James 866Bentley, Richard 2. r 2Birch, Thomas 530Blacklock, Thomas 540Blackmore, Sir Richard 242CONTENTS.Blair, Hugh 335Bloomfield, Robert 420Bos well, James 558Brady, Nicholas 510Bridgewater, Earl of 572Brooke, Henry 531Broome, William 519Brown, John 328Browne, Isaac Hawkins 532Bryant, Jacob 539Buckingham, Duke of 507Budgell, Eustace 281Bulwer, Edward Lytton . t 5e8Burns, Robert 411Butler, Charles 568Byron, Lord 440Campbell, John '. 304Campbell, Thomas 435Carr, Sir John 5/8Carte, Thomas 522Carter, Elizabeth 537Cave. Edward 525Centlivre, Susanna 512Chalmers, George 560Charon, Hester 547Charnock, John 572Chatterton, Thomas 3!)8Churchill, Charles 354Gibber, Colley 267Cockburn, Catherine 517Coleridge, Samuel Taylor 424Collins, Anthony 277Collins, William 344Colman, George, the elder 362Colton, Caleb 582Congreve, William 275Cowley, Hannah 561Cowper, William 357Coxe, William 394Crabbe, George 404Croxall, Samuel 521Cumberland, Richard 550Cunningham, Allan 585Dalzell, Andrew 5fi7Darwin, Erasmus 360PaseDay, Thomas 566Defoe, Daniel 247Dennis, John 509Dodsley, Robert 529Douglas, John 541Drummond, Sir William 578Duncombe, William 524D'Urfey, Thomas 507Dyer, John 527Edgeworth, Richard Lovell 561Elmsley, Peter 578Enfield, William 559Eusden, Lawrence 519Falconer, William 549Farmer, Richard 553Fenton, Elijah 520Fielding, Henry 302Francis, Philip 536Fronde, Philip t 520Gait, John 581Garth, Sir Samuel 256Gay, John 290Gentes, Alexander 555Gibbon, Edward 369Gifford, William-105Milton, Charles 511Glover, Richard 535Godwin, William 409Godwin, Mary Woolstonecraft 416Goldsmith, Oliver 351Gough, Richard 553Granger, James 536Grainger, James 544Gray, Thomas ' 331Gregory, John 544Grierson, Constantia 531Hammond, James 533Hawkesworth, John 330Hawkins, Sir John 538Hayley, William 563Hazlitt, William 396Hearne, Thomas 517Hemans, Felicia 586Henry, Robert 538Hervey, James 325CONTENTS.Hickes, George 505Hill, Aaron .". 283Hill, Sir John 536Hoadley, Benjamin 530Hogg, James 432Holcroft, Thomas 385Home, John 545Hooke, Nathaniel 529Hook, James 576Hoole, John 547Huddesford, George 567Hughes, John 516Hume, David 320Hunt, Leigh 584Inchbald, Elizabeth 410Ebb, John 654Jenyns, Some 30Johnson, Samuel 308Johnstonee, Charles 550Jones, Sir William 387Keats, John 586Kelly, Hugh 557Kenney, James 580Enrich, William 546King, William 508Kippis, Andrew 545Knowles, James Sheridan 584Knox, Vicesimus 569Lamb, Charles 580Langhorne, John 552Lansdown, Lord 511Lee, Samuel 585Lee, Sophia 568Leland, Thomas 543Lempriere, John 573Lewis, Matthew Gregory 578Lillo, George 526Lloyd, Robert 551Lofft, Capell '. 5G9Macdiarmid, John 581Mackenzie, Henry 562Macpherson, James 556Mf.Het. David 528Alone, Edmund 559Manley, Mrs. De la Vivere 513Mason, William 347Maurice, Thomas 571Melmoth, William 533Merry, Robert 571Montague, Elizabeth 539Montgomery, James 430Moore, Edward 535Moore, Thomas 436Moore, John 549More, Hannah 564Morgan, Lady ft;, 1 }Morton, Thomas 576Murphy, Arthur 548Murray, Alexander . 5/9Murray, Lindsey 564Musgrave, William 510Nares, Archdeacon of Carlisle 5/0Neele, Henry 587Nichols, John 50 1Norton, Caroline Elizabeth Sarah . . 588Not, John 569O'Hara, Kane 534O'Keefe, John 5 i5Oldmixon, John 514Opie, Amelia '. 5/7Paine, Thomas 373Parnell, Thomas 518Parr, Samuel ggjjPeake, Richard Brinsley 5;'6Peggy, Samuel 529Percy, Bishop of Dromore 547Perry, James 571Phillips, Ambrose 514Pilkington, Laetitia '. 534Pinkerton, John 572Piozzi, Hester Lynch 557Pitt, Christopher 526Pope, Alexander 285Person, Richard 418Porter, Jane 5S3Porter, Anna Maria 583Prideaux, Humphrey 506Prior, Matthew 254Pye, Henry James 562Radcliffe, Ann . 574- C O N T E Ants.ImageSwift JonathanPace. . 524Tanner, Bishop of St. AsaphTheobald, LewisRobertson WilliamThickness, Philip57SHowe, Elizabeth515Roscoe, William402515Sale GeorgeS34Scott Sir Walter Baronet .Vandyke Harry StoneSettle Elkanah . .Vincent William565Wakefield Gilbert519Wakefield, PriscillaWalker John452Walpole Horace. 833Shenstone William326Wanton Joseph542West, GilbertSmart, Christopher346Wharton, Duke of .Smith, Charlotte567White Henry KirkSmith, HoratioWhite JosephSmollett, Tobias George338Whitehead, PaulSomerville, William525Whitehead, WilliamSouthern, Thomas511Williams Helen MariaSouthey, Robert433Wilson John526Wolcot JohnSteele, Sir RichardWordsworth WilliamSteevens, George554Wycherley WilliamWalden, ThomasHiStuart, Gilbert882Stukeley, William624IVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.JOHN BELL.JOHN BELL was born at Entersin Scotland, some time in theyear 1690. At an early age he developeda strong inclination for travelling;and, after having studied medicine andsurgery, he, in July, 1714, left Londonfor St. Petersburghh. On his arrival,he was kindly received by the czar'schief physician, Dr, Erskine, who procuredhim the appointment of surgeonto an embassy just about to set out toPersia. He left St. Petersburghh onthe 15th of July, 1715, and proceededalong the western bank of the Neva,to a small village called Ishora; theinhabitants of which, he remarks, speaka language and wear a dress differentfrom the Russian, though they professthe same Greek religion. Embarkingthe next day on the river Volchova, hesailed to Novgorod Velikoi and thelake Ilmen, and, on the 2nd of August,entered Moscow ; whence, after a stayof three weeks, he embarked at Nishna,on the Volga, where he was driven, bythe floating ice, on a sand-bank, andlay aground a day and a night. Onthe 3rd of November, he came toZabackzar, " near which," says Bell,are caught the best and largest falconsin the world ;" and, a few days afterwards,landed at Cazan, where he remainedtill the return of spring, andemployed himself in minutely investigatingthe character and religion ofthe various tribes, in that part of thecountry.On the 13th of July, 1716, he arrivedat Astrachan ; embarked on the CaspianSea on the 7th of August; and, on the30th of the same month, reached Niez-abate, whence he proceeded overland toShamachy, the capital of Sherman, whichhe entered in great state on the 27thof September. After quitting this city,he crossed the territory of Kurdistan,by the same track through whichXenophon had retreated from Babylonia; and in which country he wascompelled to pass several nights in theopen air, in consequence of the inhabitantsof some small villages he approached,forcibly opposing his entryinto them. " However," says Mr. Bell,I could scarce blame these people fortheir behaviour ; because, had we beenadmitted, the inhabitants must all haveleft their own houses." After passingover a ridge of very high mountains,from which, he was informed, on aclear day, might be seen the summitof Mount Ararat, our traveller arrivedat Taurus, or Febris, where he passeda few weeks, during which time thecold was so intense, that many of thepoor people perished in the streets.Near Taurus he visited some petrifyingsprings of water, and left that city onthe 23rd of January, 1717, and proceededthrough deep snows for the nexttwenty days, in the course of whichtwo of his party died of cold.After passing through Room, one ofthe chief towns of Persia, he travelledonly morning and evening, in consequenceof the intense heat, to Bashan,a place infested by the most venomouskind of scorpions. On the 5th ofMarch, he reached Buzzabatt, wherehe observed a singular custom ofmaking a person sick, after being poisonedby the tarantula : the patientis put in a kind of tray, suspended byfour ropes, which, after having beenVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.twisted hard together, are let go atonce, when the rapid motion of theuntwining of the cords compels him tovomit.On the 14th of March he arrived,with the embassy, at Ispahan, wherehe resided till the 1st of September,and was much astonished and gratifiedat the splendour of the shah's court,and the singularity and magnificenceof the entertainments given, both bythe shah and his ministers, to the Russianembassy. Instead of pursuing thesame route to, as he had taken from, St.Petersburg), he, on arriving at a villagecalled Arrogant, turned off to Cabin,formerly the seat of the Persian government,where one of his party diedof the plague, and most of them, includinghimself, were attacked by itbefore reaching Reshd, the capital ofGuilan. In December, 1718, he reenteredSt. Petersburghh, " after," accordingto his own account, " a long,tedious, and dangerous journey, whichlasted for three years, attended withmany difficulties, "not easily conceivedby those who have not travelled thesame road."On his arrival at St. Petersburghh, hesolicited to be allowed to join an embassyabout to proceed to China, withwhich he set out on the 14th of July,1719; and, on the 20th of October,reached Cazan, where he remainedabout five weeks, waiting for the fallingof the snow to smooth the roads forthe reception of the sledges, in whichthe embassy was to travel to Siberia.Leaving Cazan on the 28th of November,he passed through a countryabounding with bees, from which, withoutdestroying them, the inhabitantshave a mode of extracting the honey ;and, on the 9th of December, arrivedat Solekamsky, a place containing pitssufficient to serve all Russia with salt,and near which he found the fossilasbestos, " of which," he says, " ismade a cloth like linen, that may beput into the fire, and taken out againunconsumed." On the 16th of December,he entered Tobolski ; remainedthere a month, during which time hepurchased some scrolls of glazed paper,said to have been written on by Timour,and then proceeded through severalTartar villages, the inhabitants of whichused ice, instead of glass, for windows,to Tara, whence he travelled, over amarshy and dangerous plain called theBarba, to Tomsky, situated on theriver Tonun. Here he passed somedays; and then proceeding along thebanks of a river called Tzalimm, hearrived at a Russian village namedMeletsky Ostrogue, in the neighbourhoodof which he observed several ofthe natives " with white spots on theirskins from head to foot;" and on arrivingat Yeniseysky, an abundanceof black foxes, the skins of which areso valuable, that many of them fetchfive hundred crowns each. Aboutthe beginning of March, while sailingalong the river Tongusta, he perceivedseveral hundred hares, " white,"he says, " as the snow on which hewalked," and was astonished to findsome of the inhabitants, in that part ofthe country, tattooed like the Indians,and all worshippers of the sun andmoon. " From all," he observes, " Ihave heard and read of the natives ofCanada, there is no nation in the worldwhich they so much resemble as theConfusions."On the 18th of March, he arrived atIrkutsk ; whence, on the melting ofthe ice, he proceeded up the riverAngara to the lake Baikal, which hedescribes as " bursting out between twohigh rocks," and having a most sublimeand magnificent appearance.The waters," he continues, "dashingupon the stones, make a noise like theroaring of the sea, so that people nearthem can scarcely hear one anotherspeak. I cannot express the awfulnesswith which one is struck, at the sightof such astonishing scenes of natureas appear round this place ; and which,I believe, are not to be equalled in theknown world." After a tedious anddangerous passage through the ice, tothe mouth of the Seeing, he ascendedthat river, and arrived at Selinguiskyon the 29th of May, where he employedhimself in taking an account ofthe manners and amusements of thevarious people he met with. Amongother anecdotes, he relates one of anIndian brahman, whom he observedbuying up a quantity of fish just asthey were caught, for the purposeof setting them free again ; and onbeing asked the reason, replied, thatperhaps the souls of some of hisLADY WORT LEY MONTAGU.deceased friends or relations had takenpossession of these fishes ; and, uponthat supposition, (not as Mr. St. Johnsays, in his life of Mr. Bell, ' for thepleasure of setting them swimmingagain') it was his duty to relievethem''In the middle of September, Mr. Bellcrossed at Saratzyn, the rivulet whichdivides the Russian and Chinese territories,the women who attended the embassynot being permitted to enter thelatter; the Chinese conductor observingthat " they had women enough in Pekinalready; and, as there never had beena European woman in China, he couldnot be answerable for introducing thefirst, without the special consent of theemperor." On the 2nd of November,our traveller beheld, at the distance offorty miles, the great wall of China;entered it on the 5th, through a gateguarded by a thousand soldiers; and,on the 18th, arrived at the city ofPekin, having experienced in his waythither the shock of an earthquake.At Pekin he remained till the beginningof the following March, when heset out with the Russian embassy onits return home ; and arrived, on the5th of January, 1722, at Moscow. Onthe 5th of May, he was engaged, bythe czar's chief physician, to join anexpedition headed by the emperor, toassist the Sophy of Persia in dispersingthe Afghans, who had rebelled againsthim ; after his return from which, noaccount is recorded of him for the nextfifteen years, excepting that he passedhis time in Russia.In 1737, the war, which had brokenout in 1734, between that country andthe Turks, being still raging, he went,at the earnest desires of Count Waterman,the Russian chancellor, and ofMr. Rondeau, the British ambassador,"on a mission to Constantinople, withproposals of accommodation for peace.He arrived at the Turkish capital onthe 28th of January, 1738, where heremained about three months, and returnedto St. Petersburghh on the 17thof May. A few years afterwards, herevisited Scotland, and fixed his residenceat his native place of Antimony,where he wrote an account of histravels, published in 1762, and remainedtill the period of his death,which took place some time in theyear 1780, when he was nearly ninetyyears of age.The account of his travels reachedtwo editions, and was translated, thoughwith great inaccuracy, by Eidous, intoFrench. It is written with great easeand spirit, and with a candour andsimplicity that inspire confidence inits truth. Mr. Bell was as religiousand amiable as he was learned andenterprising ; and Gibbon, in speakingof him, calls him " our honest and intelligenttraveller."MARY PIERREPONT, LADY Worsley MONTAGU.MARY PIERREPONT, the eldestdaughter of the Duke of Kingston,was born at Thereby, in Nottinghamshire,in 1690. At the age of fouryears she lost her mother, and wasleft to pursue her education under thesame masters as those who attendedher brother. At a very early period,she became acquainted with the Latin,Greek, and French languages, and herclassical acquirements, which were latterlysuperintended by Bishop Burnet,soon gave to her mind a bold but coarseand unfeminine turn. At twelve yearsof age, she wrote an indelicate poem, inimitation of Ovid ; and, at nineteen,made the following avowal, in a letterto Mrs. Worsley : " I have never hadany great esteem for the generality ofthe fair sex ; and my only consolationfor being of that gender, has been theassurance it gave me of never beingmarried to any one among them." Ashort while after this, she completed atranslation of the Enchiridion of Epictetus,which Bishop Burnet revised,and greatly commended.In August, 1712, after some quarrelsand much negotiation, she privatelybecame the wife of Mr. Edward Wort-leyMontagu ; and on his being appointed,in 1714, one of the lords ofVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.the treasury, she was presented at court,in the circles of which she, by her witand beauty, soon procured herself notorietyand admiration. About this time,too, she became acquainted with Addisonand Pope ; the latter of whom,though he subsequently treated herwith aversion and contempt, was forsome time her devoted and declaredadmirer. In 1716, her husband, beingappointed consul-general of the Levantand ambassador to the Ottoman Porte,she left England with him ; and, afterpassing through Holland, Germany,Bulgaria, and Amelia, arrived atAdrianople, where the Turkish courtwas then residing. Here she amusedherself with visiting all places worthyobservation, and in learning the mannersand habits of the people, of whom,in her letters, she gives a very minutedescription, accompanied with observationsindicative of her wit andshrewdness, but with no very greatregard to modesty or decorum. Onher introduction to the sultan, PrinceAchmet the Third, he is said to havefallen in love with her ; but of this,notwithstanding her characteristic vanityand contempt of feminine notions,she mentions nothing ; and it has beendoubted by more than one of her biographers.While at Adrianople, shekept up a correspondence with Pope,who sent her, in one of his letters, thethird volume of his translation of theIliad, with a flattering observation thather residence abroad would, doubtless,enable her to elucidate several passagesof Homer. Accordingly, in her answer,she informs him, that what shehad remarked in her travels, particularlyamong the Romeliotes, " hasexplained several little passages inHomer, which she did not before comprehendthe beauty of."Before proceeding to Constantinople,she made an experiment on her ownchildren of inoculation for the smallpox,a practice which she was the firstwho introduced into London, and withsuch success, that it was adopted bygovernment in 1721, and was the meansof that inquiry and consideration whichultimately fed to the discovery of vaccination.On the 6th of June, 1718,she left Constantinople ; and, sailingdown the Dardanelles, visited the tombof Achilles, and the plains of Troy ;whence, after passing Sicily and Malta,she was driven by a storm on the coastof Africa, where she landed, and visitedthe ruins of Carthage. At Tunis, sheembarked for Genoa ; and havingarrived there, travelled across the Alps,and through France to England, whichshe reached the latter end of October,and shortly afterwards went to resideat Twickenham, at the earnest desireof Pope. For him, however, in consequenceof political differences, shehad now lost much of her esteem ; andthough she obliged him by sitting forher portrait to Sir Godfrey Kneller,transferred the principal part of hertime and regard to Lord Hervey, whosepoetry and politics were more agreeableto her. Pope, though somewhatchagrined at the preference, receivedher picture with much delight, andcharacterised it in the following lines :The playful smiles around the dimpled mouth,That happy air of majesty and truth,So would I draw (but oh ! 'tis vain to try;My narrow genius does the power deny,)The equal lustre of the heavenly mind,Where every grace with every virtue's joined ;Learning not vain, and wisdom not severe,With greatness easy, and with wit sincere,With just description slew the soul divine,And the whole princess in my work should shine."About this time, she hazarded a considerablesum of money in the SouthSea scheme ; and shortly afterwards,her disagreement with Pope beingheightened, by his claiming the authorshipof some portion of her TownEclogues, she altogether renounced hissociety. In 1739, her health declining,and having separated from her husband,she retired to Italy, passing the principalpart of her time on the shores ofLake Isis, near Venice; whence, onthe death of Mr. Montagu, in 1761,she, at the request of her daughter,again came to England, and died inthe August of the following year.The celebrity acquired during herlife, by Lady Montagu, resulted morefrom the singularity of her character,the boldness of her sentiments, and thepeculiar naivete of her writings, thanfrom the interest they excited, or theeffect they produced. The eulogy, too,of such men as Pope and Addison, andthe satirical verses she wrote, in attackingand defending herself against theformer, contributed to give her an eclat,THOMAS SHAW.which the names of such men, whetherher admirers or opponents, will longcontinue to preserve. It cannot bedenied, however, that her memorymerits perpetuation, if only for theintroduction of inoculation into thiscountry. As an authoress, she is chieflydistinguished by her Letters, writtenat various times, but principally whenshe was in Constantinople and on thecontinent ; which, after showing, inmanuscript, to some of her privatefriends, she presented to a Mr. Snow-den,of Amsterdam, from whom theywere purchased by the Earl of Bute,and published, in six volumes, in 1803.A surreptitious copy of them, however,having been obtained, they had previouslyappeared about two years afterher death ; at which time, Dr. Smollettsaid of them that they were " an immortalmonument to the memory ofLady Mary Worsley Montagu ; andwould shew, as long as the Englishlanguage endured, the sprightliness ofher wit, the solidity of her judgment,the elegance of her taste, and the excellenceof her real character." Theyare certainly spirited and entertaining,though treating of the most triflingmatters, and accompanied, sometimes,with a levity of sentiment, such as thefollowing, ill befitting a character putforth as one of excellence. " Considering,"she says, in one of her lettersfrom Constantinople, " what short-lived,weak animals, men are, is thereany study so beneficial as the study ofpresent pleasure ?" and she afterwardsadds, " I allow you to laugh at me formy sensual declaration in saying, thatI had rather be a rich effendi, with allhis ignorance, than Sir Isaac Newton,with all his knowledge."Various causes have been assignedfor her quarrel with Pope; who, out ofpique or envy, lampooned her andLord Hervey with a bitterness and personality,which, in a letter to the latter,he afterwards affected to disclaim. Inthis, he adds, alluding to Lady Montagu," I was the author of my ownmisfortune in discontinuing her acquaintance.I may venture to own atruth, which cannot be unpleasing toeither of you ; I assure you, my reasonfor so doing was merely that you hadboth too much wit for me, and that Icould not do with mine, many thingswhich you could with yours." Shewas the author of several ballads, satiricalodes, and Vivian epistles ; andbesides her knowledge of the principalmodern and ancient languages, hadmade great proficiency in the Turkish,specimens of her translations fromwhich are to be found in many of herletters.Towards the close of her life, shelost much of that buoyancy and animationwhich distinguished her in heryouth, and her letters began to assumea tone of misanthropy. Mrs. Montagu,her mother-in-law, used to describe heras one who " neither thought, spoke,nor acted like any one else."THOMAS SHAW.THOMAS SHAW was born atKendal, in Westmorland, in the year1692; and completed his education atQueen's College, Oxford, where, in 1716,he proceeded to the degree of B. A. ;and, in 1719, to that of M. A. In thelatter year, he took orders, and wasalmost immediately afterwards appointedchaplain to the English factoryat Algiers, which city he reached aboutthe beginning of 1720. In the followingyear, he set out on a voyage to Egypt,and stopping at Cairo, employed himselffor about three months in collectinginformation respecting the early conditionof the country ; inspected thepyramids, and discovered, according tohis own idea, the site of ancientMemphis. Leaving Cairo, where heinforms us that about forty thousand ofthe inhabitants live entirely on lizardsand serpents, he proceeded to Suez ;and continuing his course along thedesert, towards the gulf of Akaba, helost sight of the caravan, and was immediatelyattacked by three robbers,who stripped him naked, and began tofight for the possession of his clothes.1-1VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.During their combat, he escaped ; and,after having joined his party, he proceededto Lady Gharendel, Eli, andMount Sinai ; at the foot of which, hevisited the convent of St. Catherine,said to be built on the spot whereMoses, while watching the flocks ofJethro, beheld the angel of the Lord.In his way through the desert, ourtraveller was often deceived by themirage ; and in that part of the wildernesscalled Sin, he discovered the wellsand palm trees related in the Scripturesto have been found there by theIsraelites.After reaching the summit of MountSinai, now so difficult of ascent, thatit is often imposed by the monks asapenance, he entered the desertof Rephidim ; inspected the rock ofMarital, where Moses made the watergush forth ; and, shortly afterwards,returned to Cairo, and embarked onthe Nile with the intention of sailingto Syria ; in which country, aftertouching at the island of Cyprus, helanded, in December, 1721. Passingthrough Phoenicia, he joined a party ofsix thousand pilgrims proceeding toJerusalem, when he was attacked bybanditti, and seized upon as a hostageto secure the payment of a ransom forhis delivery. The robbers, however,being dispersed by the Aga of Jerusalem,Mr. Shaw reached that city in safety ;and, after visiting Bethlehem, Jericho,and the river Jordan, proceeded throughthe country, near Mount Ephraim, tothe sea, and embarked at Acra for thecoast of Barbary. Previously to settingsail, while his vessel was under MountCarmel, he relates his observation ofthree flights of storks, each of whichoccupied three hours in passing overthe breadth of only half a mile.Landing at Bona, some time in 1722,he immediately proceeded to Algiers,where he amused himself by makingseveral excursions into the interior ofBarbary; on his return from one ofwhich, he married Mrs. Holden, widowof a former British consul. In 1727, inwhich year he was made a fellow of hiscollege, he visited Tunis, and the ruinsof Carthage, where he spent much timein endeavouring to fix the boundariesof the ancient city ; a point in the explanationof which he displays immenselearning and research. Sailing eastward,he passed by Rhodes ; and afterlanding among the ruins of ancientNina, and visiting the sanctuary of SidiDaoud, proceeded to Lowhaneah, formerlyAquiline, where he inspected theimmense quarries described by Straboas containing the materials with whichCarthage and Utica were built. Pursuingfrom Cape Bon the circumcisionof the shore, he proceeded as faras the eastern boundary of the LesserSyrtis, visiting, in his way, Hamletand Saloon, and making such inspectionsand examinations among theruins he met with as would enable himto determine the sites of ancient cities,and otherwise assist him in his geographicalresearches. From the islandof Derby, he turned his course towardsthe lake of Mark, beyond which hehad to pass a dreary and sterile waste,infested by banditti.Pursuing his course westward, hearrived in safety at Algiers, where hecontinued making several excursionsinto the interior of the country, till1733, when he returned to England,and commenced the preparation of hismanuscripts for the press, which he publishedin 1738. His work receivedgeneral and merited approbation, butwas attacked by Dr. Pococke, who accusedShaw of incorrectness in hisdescription of the east. These charges,however, he very ably rebutted, in awork he published in 1746, entitled,Supplement to a Work entitled Voyagesand Observations ; and in a Letter toClayton, Archbishop of Clothier, printedin 1747. In 1733, our traveller becameD. D. and a fellow of the RoyalSociety ; and, in 1740, was nominatedby his college, principal of St. EdmundHall, the ruinous state of which he soonrepaired by his munificence. Aboutthe same time, he was also made regiusprofessor of Greek at Oxford, and presentedto the vicarage of Bramley,where he resided till his death, whichtook place some time in 1751.The work of Dr. Shaw, which hasbeen translated into the French, Dutch,and German languages, is the best thathas been written containing an accountof the Algerine and Tunisian states.Of the manners of the country, and itsnatural history, his details are mostminute and interesting ; and his geographicalresearches throw a light uponLORD GEORGE ANSON.the ancient and modern state of Numidia,which before was but imperfectlyknown. In the course of his travels,he collected nearly six hundred plants,of which one hundred and forty werenewly discovered, besides an immensenumber of minerals and medals, manyof which he presented to public institutions.In the course of conversation,happening to assert that a certain tribeof the Arabs were lion-eaters, he wasmuch ridiculed and disbelieved ; butBruce has since confirmed the truth ofhis statement, as well as of all the accountshe gives, in his travels, of Africa.For the services he rendered to botany,the plant Shawia was so named byForster, in honour of him.LORD GEORGE ANSON.LORD GEORGE ANSON, Baron ofRobertson, son of William Anson, Esq.,was born in 1697, at his father's seatin Staffordshire. He evinced an earlypredilection for a naval life, and havingpassed through the necessary gradesof his profession, became, in 1722, commanderof the Teazle sloop, from which,in 1724, he went as post-captain onboardthe Scarborough. Between 1724and 1735, he made three voyages toSouth Carolina, where he built a townto which he gave his own name, andacquired considerable property. Duringthe years 1738 and 1739, he was employedin protecting the trade of Guineafrom the annoyance of the French ;and, in 1740, he was appointed to leada squadron against the Spanish settlementsin the Pacific. After considerabledelay, he sailed with five ships of theline, and a few smaller vessels, but thelittle fleet was dispersed by tempestuousweather, in the passage round CapeHorn, and afterwards re-assembled atthe island of Juan Fernandez. Anson'sown ship, the Centurion, had lost halfher crew by the scurvy, while the menthat remained were nearly all disabledby disease ; and, though some wererestored by the vegetables found in theisland, others were every day addedto the lists of mortality. The Britishsquadron sojourned for three months atJuan Fernandez, during which time,Anson, by his personal attendance onthe invalids, set an example which washonourably followed by his officers.On the 19th of September, the ships,whose united crews were now reducedin number from one thousand fourhundred to three hundred and thirty-fivemen, set sail for the town of Paita,which they attacked, set fire to, andabandoned, having possessed themselvesof a booty worth ,30,000. Theyquitted Paita on the 16th of November,bringing with them a ship called theSolid, having previously sank or destroyedmost of the other vessels whichthey found in the harbour.Commodore Anson next directed hispassage towards the coast of Mexico, inthe hope of intercepting a rich Spanishgalleon, on her passage from Acapulcoto Manilla. Abandoning the Gloucester,which accompanied him, in consequenceof its leaky state, he concentratedthe whole of his force in his ownship, the Centurion, from which he disembarkedat the island of Titian, one oftheLadrones,with the greater part of hismen. Whilst on shore, he beheld theCenturion carried out to a great distanceat sea, and no hope being entertained ofher return, the greatest activity was usedto render sea-worthy a Spanish bark thathad been found on the island, in whichthe commodore intended to set out insearch of his vessel. Fortunately, theship came to anchor a few days after,in front of the island, and the little forcesoon proceeded to intercept the galleon.Its capture was effected after two hours'sharp fighting, in which two were killedand seventeen wounded on board theCenturion, while among the Spaniardssixty-seven were killed and eighty-fourwounded. After the action, the Centurionwas discovered to be on fire nearthe powder-room, but the flames beingpromptly extinguished, it reached Canton,in safety, with its prize, worth313,000. Commodore Anson arrived,after an absence of three years and ninemonths, on the 15th of June, 1744, at1CVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.Spithead, having, by the aid of a fog,passed unobserved through the Frenchfleet, which was waiting for his returnin the channel.In addition to the immense wealthwhich Anson had gained from thisexpedition, he was made rear-admiralof the blue, and became a memberof parliament for Peyton, in Yorkshire.He soon after was promoted tothe rank of vice-admiral of the white,and was honoured with a seat at theboard of admiralty. In 1747, he encounteredand subdued, off Cape Finisterre,the French fleet under M. de laJonquierre, who, on giving his sword toAnson, said, pointing to L'Invincibileand La Gloire, two of the ships whichhad surrendered, " Sir, you have vanquishedthe Invincible, and Glory followsyou." For this victory, whichwas owing to the enemy's inferiorityof number, and not to their want ofbravery, the English admiral was raisedto the peerage by the title of LordAnson, Baron of Robertson, and hewas soon after made vice-admiral ofEngland. He was made first lordof the admiralty, in 1751; and fromthat year till 1755, acted as one of thelords justices during the absence of theking from England. He quitted hispost at the admiralty in November,1756, owing to some strictures thathad been made on his conduct relativeto the loss of Minorca. He was,however honourably acquitted; and, in1758, had the command of a powerfulfleet to protect the descents that theEnglish were about to make on Cherbourgand St. Malo. In 1761, he wasmade commander-in-chief of the fleets,and by this elevation, attained the summitof professional honour. The lastservice which he performed was in theSeptember of the same year, when heconveyed Charlotte, the intended consortof George the Third, to Englandfrom Germany.He died suddenly on the 6th of June,1762, at his seat, Moor Park, having justbefore been walking in his garden. Athis death, the barony became extinct,he having had no issue by his wife,Elizabeth Yorke, eldest daughter ofLord-chancellor Hardwicke. His nephewwas, however, created ViscountAnson.Lord Anson had all the qualitiesrequisite to form a naval officer. Hewas persevering in enterprise, intrepidin danger, calm and sagacious in perplexity.The motto of " Nil desperado,"that was attached to his arms,seemed always present to his thoughtsin the hour of difficulty or peril. Inprivate life, he was ingenuous and unsuspecting; so that he often became thedupe of those of an opposite disposition.He knew so little of men and of society,that he was said " to have been roundthe world, but never in it;" and hisunfortunate attachment to play, madehim a victim at home to the knaveryof pretended friends, though abroad hehad little difficulty in vanquishing hisavowed enemies.His voyage round the world, compiledunder his own direction, but printedwith the name of his chaplain, is anamusing and well-written work, andcontains an interesting account of anexpedition, which Mr. Aikin justlyranks " among the most memorable ofthe naval transactions of England."Among the merits of this eminent person,says the same authority, was thatof having bred up several excellentofficers, who afterwards performed greatservices to their country. Till latervoyages had multiplied the navigationof the globe, " to have been round theworld with Commodore Anson" wasa great distinction to a seaman.RICHARD POCOCKE.RICHARD POCOCKE was born atSouthampton, some time in the year1704. After having received a classicaleducation, and acquired a knowledge ofseveral oriental languages, he, in August,1733-4, about which time he tookthe degree of LL. D., visited France andItaly; and, in 1736, he set out on anexpedition to the east. He reachedAlexandria in September, 1737, andRICHARD POCOCKE.proceeded thence to Rosetta, where hevisited Cosmos, the Greek patriarch, andobserved the veneration of the people fortwo of those naked saints, who arecommonly natural fools, and are heldin great esteem in Egypt." On thellth of November, he reached Cairo,where he took great pains in ascertainingthe modern condition of thecountry, and the customs of the people,with every description of whom he associatedand conversed. After descendingthe well of Joseph, visiting and examiningthe pyramids near Cairo andSacra, and endeavouring to discoverthe site of ancient Memphis, which, inaccordance with Bruce and others, heplaces at Metrahenny, he made anexcursion to Faiume, the Lake Mccris,and ancient Arsinoe ; in which provincehe discovered, at Baiamont, the ruins oftwo pyramids ; where, he observes, " Isaw the people sifting the sand in orderto find seals and medals, there being nopart in all the east where the formerare found in such great abundance."About two miles distant from LakeMceris, he explored the remains of theTemple of the Labyrinth, a buildingwhich once contained three thousandrooms, " contrived in such a mannerthat no stranger could find his way out ;"and he relates a tradition, prevalentamong the inhabitants near the lake, ofKing Carbon, " who had keys to histreasures that loaded two hundredcamels." " One would imagine fromthis," he observes, " that the fable ofCharon might have its rise here, andthat this name might be the title of thechief person who had the care of thelabyrinth and of the sepulchres in andabout it."Mr. Pococke embarked, in the beginningof December, for Upper Egypt ;and, on the 9th of January, 1738,reached Dendera, where he discoveredthe remains of all the ancient buildingschoked with ashes, and the habitationsof the Arabs fixed on the Temple ofAuthor-Aphrodite, or the Egyptian Venus.He then visited the ruins ofThebes, Elephantine, Philos, and thecataracts; and returning to Cairo, thelatter end of February, prepared for anexcursion to Mount Sinai ; but a warjust breaking out between the monksand Arabs in that part, he changedhis course, and, sailing down the Nileto Damietta, arrived at Jaffa on the 14thof March. Proceeding immediately toJerusalem, he explored every spotworthy of notice in that city ; and histopographical observations have removedmuch obscurity respecting severalparts of it. After making an excursionto Jericho and Jordan, he proceededalong the brook of Kedron tothe Dead Sea, where he bathed, in orderto ascertain the truth of Pliny's assertionthat no living bodies would sink init. " I stayed in it," says Mr. Pococke,near a quarter of an hour, and foundI could lay on it in any posture withoutmotion and without sinking; it bore meup in such a manner, that when I struckin swimming, my legs were above thewater, and I found it difficult to recovermy feet." His face was covered witha crust of salt on coming out of the lake,and he describes the water as havingthe effect of constringing his mouth, inthe same manner as strong alum juice.In May, he returned to Jaffa, whence hesailed to Acra, and visited the northernparts of Palestine and Galilee, particularlyMounts Carmel and Tabor, Cana,Nazareth, the lake of Tiberias, andMount Hermon; whence he proceededtowards the sea, and sailed to Tyre,Sidon, and Mount Lebanon. He nextexplored Balbec and its magnificenttemple ; proceeded to Damascus, Horus,and Aleppo ; and after crossing the Euphratesto Orfah, continued his routethrough Antioch and Sanderson toTripoli, where, on the 24th of October,he embarked for Cyprus. After passingsome time in this island, he returned toEgypt ; visited Mount Sinai ; followedthe track of the Israelites through thewilderness ; embarked at Alexandriafor Crete; ascended Mount Ida, andcontinued his course to Smyrna andConstantinople. He then visited theprincipal cities of Greece, and returnedto England in 1741; two years afterwhich, he published, in one folio volume,an account of his travels, withmaps and plates, under the title ofA Description of the East, and someother Countries, which was succeededby two other volumes of the same size.Mr. Pococke, on his return to England,was spoken of with great reputationthroughout Europe ; and havingtaken orders, was made, in 1756, Archdeaconof Ossory; in 1765, Bishop o;'Voyages AND TRAVELLERS.Elphin; in the July of the same year,Bishop of Meath; and died of apoplexyin the following month of September.Few authors have given so minuteand curious an account of the pyramidsand temples of Egypt and Palestine ; ormore accurately described and determinedthe ancient and modern topographyof the famous cities and ruinshe visited, than Dr. Pococke. Theaccount of his travels contains a massof most valuable and interesting information; which, however, notwithstandingthe education of the author, iswritten in a style, dry, crude, and occasionallyungrammatical. It has beendoubted whether he really discoveredthe Temple of the Labyrinth; whichis said to have been since found, inanother direction, by two Frenchmen,named Bertie and Jomard. A shortwhile after the publication of his travels,he added a collection of Greek and Latininscriptions, which M. St. Martin, awriter in the Biographic Universelle,declares incorrect and unintelligible ;and, in a memoir of Pococke, speaksof him as an obscure and insignificantindividual. Dr. Pococke wrote, inaddition to his travels, several articlesin the Philosophical Transactions, andArchaeologia ; and there are many ofhis manuscripts yet unpublished, remainingin the British Museum.JONAS HANWAY.TlIIS distinguished merchant, traveller,and philanthropist, was born atPortsmouth, in Hampshire, on the 12thof August, 1712. At the age of seventeen,he was bound apprentice to amerchant at Lisbon, and, at the expirationof his apprenticeship, returnedto London, and pursued his commercialprofession, without any remarkableevent occurring in his life, until 1743.In the February of this year, he enteredinto partnership with Mr. Dingle,a Russian merchant, and arrived, inthe following June, at St. Petersburg!.Here he first became acquainted withthe Caspian trade, then in its infancy,and having an ardent desire to visitPersia, he made an offer to the Russianfactors to proceed to that country inthe capacity of their agent, which hewas accordingly appointed, and set outin September.With his suite, consisting of an interpreter,a clerk, a Russian servant, aTartar boy, and a guard, and havingunder his care twenty carriage loads ofEnglish cloth, he arrived at Moscow inten days; whence, on the 24th he proceededto Zaritzen, on the banks of theVolga, and, along that river, continuedhis journey to Astrachan and Yerkie.Having now arrived at the Caspian, heembarked, on the 22nd of November,and traversing the whole length of thesea from north to south, made a shortstay at Langarood, and then made forAstrabad, which he reached on the 18thof December. After the inhabitantshad shown some apprehension at holdingcommunication with a vessel whichthey at first supposed to be that of apirate, Mr. Han way was allowed toland;and whilst on shore, witnessedthe woods of the neighbouring mountainson fire ; the heat of which wasso excessive, that it is described byMr. Pugh, the biographer of Hanway,as " causing the butter on board theship to run like oil." On his arrival atAstrabad, he was presented to the governor,who received him in great state,and told him, in the eastern style ofcompliment, " that the city of Astrabadwas now his to do what he pleasedwith." Having obtained the promiseof an escort to Meshed, he had alreadysent part of his goods forward, and waspreparing to set out himself for thatcity, when, to his great mortification,the governor told him he could sparebut one soldier to accompany him.This reply was succeeded by the arrivalof intelligence still more distressing,and rendering the situation ofHanway extremely perilous. The townof Astrabad had been suddenly besiegedby a party of rebels, and their leaderdeclaring that he intended to seize theshah's treasures and the Europeangoods, the terrified inhabitants " cursedJONAS HAN WAY.Mr. Hanway as the cause of their misfortune,by bringing so valuable a caravaninto the city to attract the avariceof the rebels." In this dilemma, heprudently declined following the adviceof his attendants, to escape in a disguisefrom the city, but retired to his apartment,and entered in his journal aprayer, which proves at once the elevatedand resigned state of his mindamidst the dangers which threatenedhim. "If, my God," runs one of thepassages, " it is Thy will I now renderback this vital heat which sprang fromThee; if Thy gracious providence hasordained that my life be now broughtto an end by these unthinking men,Thy will be done. Avert, O Lord, thedestruction that menaces them, and laynot my blood to their charge!"On the following morning he wasawoke by the noise of musketry, andwas informed that the city had beentaken. He was, shortly afterwards,visited by the captors, "who declaredthey did not mean to hurt his person ;but, on the contrary, as soon as evertheir government was established, theywould pay for the goods which theythen seized; and informed him that theforty bales he had sent out laden onthe camels, were already in their possession.His money was now demanded;when, he observes, " as goldcan purchase every thing except virtueand health, understanding and beauty,I reserved a purse of a hundred andsixty crowns, thinking it might administerto my safety." After experiencingmuch insult and crueltyfrom the rebels, he resolved to leaveAstrabad, and proceed to Ghilan, to seekprotection of the shah, who was reportedto be encamped near that city.He had travelled on his way somedistance beyond the ruins of the palaceof Faraday, once famous for the residenceof the Persian kings, when thecarriers, who had engaged to accompanyhim to Balfrush, the capital ofMeanders, refused to continue theirjourney, alleging that he was near thecoast, and might go by sea. " Accordingly,"says Mr. Pun, "they conductedhim and his attendants to afisherman's hut, on the sea-coast. Thepoor man had only an open boat, likea canoe, very leaky, and too small forsix persons; besides, it could be navigatedonly with oars or paddles nearthe shore, where the surf then ran veryhigh ; and the sand-banks, formingbreakers, made the sea still moredangerous. He, therefore, again imploredthe carriers to furnish horsesaccording to their engagement; butthey treated his request with contempt.He threatened to use force, whereupontwo of them, being armed with matchlocks,lighted their matches; two othershad bows and arrows, and all of them,being six in number, had sabres. Mr.Hanway collected his company, amongwhom were four muskets, a 'blunderbuss,and a pair of pistols; but as hecould not depend upon more than twoof his servants, after a short parley, hesubmitted to run the risk of beingdrowned, rather than engage in a fray."Embarking, therefore, in the canoe,he arrived safe at Teschidezar, wherehe was furnished with a horse andmules ; and, on reaching Balfrush, wasassured, by the Persian merchants,that the shah would make good hisloss. " It was this escape," says Mr.Pugh, " which gave Mr. Hanway theidea of the motto he subsequentlyadopted, ' Never despair.' " The approachof the rebels to Balfrush was anew source of danger to him; andsooner than again fall into their hands,he determined to make his way out ofthe city alone ; from which he escapedjust in time, as the Tartars were enteringat one gate whilst he was departingthrough another. After proceedingsome distance, he fell in with a partywho were conducting the baggage of aPersian chief; but the miserable horseon which he was mounted now sank tothe ground, with himself and his faithfulTartar boy, who had refused to beleft behind at Balfrush. In this situation,without guide, and understandingbut little of the language of the country,he made his way to the coast, passing,in his way, several rivers, over whichhe was carried gratis, on his plea ofpoverty, not daring to show the moneyhe had concealed at Astiabad. He, atlength, came up with the party of thePersian chief before mentioned, whomhe calls " the admiral," and in whosetrain he found his clerk and servant. Inthe night, however, the admiral secretlydeparted, leaving Mr. Hanway withoutprotection or provision ; a basenessVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.which so exasperated him, that, thoughthe night was dark and tempestuous,he immediately followed him ; and,overtaking him, seized the bridle ofthe horse on which the admiral wasmounted, and pronounced the wordShah," with the utmost emphasis.This had the desired effect ; the admiralcommanded his vizier to take upMr. Hanway behind him; and in thisway he continued to travel to the shoreof "the Caspian, the surge of whichthrew down several of the horses of theparty, and endangered the lives oftheir riders. He, at length, arrived atLangarood, where he was most hospitablyreceived by Captain Elton, aftera journey of twenty-three days; duringwhich, he had once been without foodfor forty hours, and had not enjoyedone hour of security or unbroken sleep.Having rested a few days, and recruitedhis strength and spirits, heproceeded, through Rested, to Cabin,where he arrived on the 2nd of March,1744, and remained until the melting ofthe snow, by the reflection of which hehad been almost blinded during hisjourney. He, at length, reached thecamp of the shah, from whom heobtained a decree, " that the particularsof his loss should be delivered to BehbudKhan, the shah's general, now atAstrabad, who was to return such partsof the goods as could be recovered, andmake up the deficiency out of the sequesteredestates of the rebels." Onhis way back to Astrabad, Hanwaypassed a month with Captain Elton, atLangarood, and set out for the formerplacemen the 1st of May. In his waythither, he encountered many dangers,being frequently deserted by his guidesand guards; and, on one occasion,having lost his path at night, in a forest,he, on the refusal of the owner of alonely house to admit him, broke openthe door, and tying a rope round hisarms, compelled the man to conducthimself and his companions into theirproper track. On his arrival at Astrabad,he presented the shah's order to thegovernor, who promised that it shouldbe complied with to the letter. He was,however, unable to procure the wholeof the money due for his lost merchandize;and, after refusing to acceptanumber of female captives in partpayment, he set out on his return toRussia, and arrived at Moscow on the22nd of December. He did not reachthis city without having experiencedmany dangers and delays ; among thelatter was his detention at Yerkie,where he had to undergo a quarantineof six weeks ; at the end of which hewas not permitted to depart until hehad been stripped naked in the openair, and received on his body the contentsof a pail of warm water. Lettersreached him at Moscow, informing himof his accession to a large sum of money,in consequence of the death of a relation; an event upon which he observed," Providence was thus indulgentto me, as if it meant to rewardthe sincerity of my endeavours." Onthe 1st of January, 1745, he arrived atPetersburg!, where he engaged incommerce for about five years ; at theexpiration of which, he returned toEngland, and. abandoning mercantilepursuits, employed himself in compilingthe history of his travels, and in a seriesof the most liberal and benevolent acts.In January, 1753, he published histravels, in four quarto volumes, underthe title of An Historical Account ofthe Caspian Trade over the CaspianSea; with a Journal of Travels fromLondon, through Russia, into Persia,&c. ; to which' are added the Revolutionsof Persia during the presentCentury, with the particular History ofthe Great Usurper, Nadir Kouli. Thework was most favourably received ;but, shortly after its publication, thelabour he had bestowed on it madesuch an inroad upon his health, as torender it necessary for him to seek itsrenewal on the continent. On his returnhome, towards the latter end ofthe last-mentioned year, the questionrespecting the expediency of naturalizingthe Jews was a subject of muchdiscussion ; when " Hanway," says Mr.St. John, " on most other occasionsjust and philanthropic, yielded, in thisinstance, to the force of narrow andinhuman prejudices, and argued in apamphlet, now very properly condemnedto oblivion, in favour of theabsurd laws by which this portion ofour fellow creatures have been in somany countries excluded from the enjoymentof the rights of man." Mr.Pugh, however, says that it was thespirited opposition of Mr. Hanway toJONAS HAN WAY.the naturalization of the Jews that laidthe foundation of his celebrity, as apublic man, and goes so far as to assertthat his writings on the subject wereprobably the principal means of causingthe repeal of the act. In 1754, he endeavouredto call the attention ofgovernment to the bad state of thestreets in London and Westminster, bya letter which he published on the subjectto Mr. Stranger, on his excellentProposals for Paving, Cleansing, andLighting the Streets of Westminster,&c. In the spring of the followingyear appeared his Thoughts on Invasion; a publication which, in somemeasure, tended to quiet the minds ofthe people as to the probability of thatevent taking place on the part of theFrench.In 1756, he commenced those measureswhich finally led to the establishmentof the Marine Society ; " an institution,"says Mr. Pugh, " not to beequalled for substantial utility and realnational advantage by any undertakingin any age or country." The object ofthe establishment was to fit out landsmenvolunteers and boys to serve onboardthe king's ships ; which men andboys consisted, for the most part, ofsuch wanderers, beggars, or prisonersfor petty offences, as chose to put themselvesunder the instructions of thesociety. " We found," says Mr. Han-way,in his address to the public infavour of the design, " a great numberof young fellows in danger of becominga prey to vice through idleness, who,as soon as the garb of seamen was presentedto them gratis, gladly enteredinto its service ; and a number of boys,loitering in filth and rags, and, as theforlorn hope of human nature, ready forany enterprise ; and we considered thatthe preservation of such persons, andrendering them useful, promoted thegreat end of government and truepolicy in a double view." The societymet with general encouragement ; theking's donation was 1,000; and, in1757, a silver anchor was voted to Mr.Hanway, for proposing, methodizing,and carrying the design into execution;but it was not until 1772, thatan act passed to make the governors ofthe Marine Society a body corporate.In the former year he published hisJourney from Portsmouth to Kingston;in which, says Mr. St. John, " he benevolently,but ridiculously, endeavouredto discourage the habit of tea-drinking;"an attempt that called fortha virulent and anonymous reply fromDr. Johnson, in The Literary Magazine.In 1758, and the following year,Mr. Hanway made strenuous exertionsto improve the Foundling, and to establishthe Magdalen Hospital, for thereception of penitent prostitutes, ofwhich he is considered the founder.The women who had reaped the benefitof this institution, he took great delightin entertaining at his own house, wherehe gave them his best advice, generallyaccompanied, says Mr. Pugh, with asmall present. The small works whichhe wrote in support of the above institutionswere succeeded by one entitled,Reasons for an AdditionalNumber of Twelve Thousand Seamento be employed in time of Peace inthe Merchants' Service ; and another,advocating the cause of the orphanpoor, called, Serious Considerations onthe Salutary Designs of the Act for aRegular Uniform Register of the ParishPoor.In 1762, Mr. Hanway publishedEight Letters to the Duke of , supposedto be the Duke of Newcastle";in which he ridicules the practice ofgiving wails, or visiting-fees, to servants ;a custom which, at that time, had arrivedat a very extravagant pitch. Hewas recommended to take up the subjectby Sir Thomas Waldo, who, at thesame time, communicated to Mr. Han-wayan anecdote, illustrative of theexcess to which the practice was carried.On leaving the house of the dukealluded to, Sir Thomas, after havingfeed a train of other servants, put acrown into the hands of the cook, whoreturned it, saying, " Sir, I do nottake silver." " Don't you, indeed?"said the baronet, putting it in hispocket ; " then I do not give gold."Mr. Hanway also himself relates asomewhat similar circumstance : hewas paying the servants of a friend foradinner, which their master had invitedhim to, one by one, as they appeared: " Sir, your great coat." " Ashilling." " Your hat." " A shilling.""Stick." "A shilling." "Umbrella."" A shilling"" Sir yourgloves." " Why, friend, you may keepVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.the gloves ; they are not worth ashilling."Such was the universal esteem Mr.Hanway had acquired by his benevolentexertions, that, in the last-mentionedyear, a deputation of five citizens ofLondon waited on the minister, LordBute, requesting that he would confersome appointment on the subject of ourmemoir, who was accordingly, on the17th of July, made one of the commissionersfor victualling the navy. Heshortly afterwards took a large house inRed Lion Square, which he decoratedin a style peculiar to himself, withpaintings and emblematical devices, inorder, as he said, to furnish topics of discourseto his countrymen and countrywomen,who, he used to observe, wereby no means au fait in the art of conversation.In 1773, he pleaded the causeof another class of unfortunate humanbeings, in a publication called The Stateof the Chimney Sweeper's Apprentices;for whose relief he promoted a subscription,under the direction of a committee.He continued to pursue anuninterrupted course of benevolenceuntil his death, which took place on the5th of September, 1786 ; three yearsprevious to which, ill health had compelledhim to resign his office at thevictualling board. His last momentswere marked by singular calmness andChristian resignation ; and, anxious tothe last for the welfare of his fellow-creatures,he said to the surgeon, on theday of his death, " If you think it willbe of service in your practice, or to anyonewho may come after me, I begyou will have my body opened; I amwilling to do as much good as is possible."No better estimate, perhaps, of thecharacter of Mr. Hanway can be formed,than by comparing it with that of thetruly illustrious Howard. Like thelatter, exhausted in striking out resourcesof beneficence, and indefatigablein carrying them into execution, theformer dedicated his long life to publicworks of mercy. Numerous and successful,however, as are those we havealready recorded, they afford but animperfect idea of his liberality and philanthropy.He was too unostentatiousto suffer his private acts of charity to beknown ; but the necessity for his acceptinga retiring pension in his seventy-firstyear, furnishes an honourableclue to an estimate of the probableextent of them ; and his publicationsin the cause of religion and humanity,to the number of nearly seventy,render any attempt at enlargementupon his public zeal and devotion unnecessary.In addition to the share hehad in the formation of the institutionsalready mentioned, the foundation ofSunday schools is chiefly attributable tohis writings.In person," says Mr. Pugh, " Mr.Hanway was of the middle size ; of athin, spare habit, but well shaped ; hislimbs were fashioned with the nicestsymmetry. In the latter years of hislife he stooped very much, and whenhe walked, found it conduce to his easeto let his head incline towards one side;but when he first went to Russia, hisface was full and comely, and his personaltogether such as obtained for him theappellation of the Handsome Englishman."He was never married, havingbeen captivated, whilst at Lisbon, bythe charms of a lady, whom, to put asecond-hand idea of Mr. Moore's intoRose, he thought it far more sweet tove in the remembrance of, than todwell with others. Mr. Pugh relatesmany peculiarities in Mr. Hanway'scharacter ; he was fond of a joke himself,and of the conviviality of others,to a certain extent; but " if the mirthdegenerated into a boisterous laughter,he took his leave, saying afterwards,My companions were* too merry to behappy, or to let me be happy, so I leftthem.' " He adhered to truth with analmost ascetic strictness, and no brilliancyof thought could induce him tovary from the fact. Though frank andopen in his dealings with all, he wasnot easily deceived by others, andseldom placed a confidence that wasbetrayed. He did not, however, thinkthe world so degenerate as is commonlyimagined ; " And if I did," heused to say, " I would not let it appear:for nothing can tend so effectuallyto make a man wicked, or to keep himso, as a marked suspicion." He nevertook any of his servants from the recommendationof his friends; but commonlyadvertised for them, appointingtheir applications to be left at sometavern. One that he was about tohire having expressed some surprise atTHOMAS HOLL1S.his being desired to attend familyprayers every evening, Mr. Han wayasked him if he had any objection tosay his prayers. " No, sir," repliedthe man, " I've no objection ; but Ihope you'll consider it in my wages."At another time, having given a littlechimney-sweeper a shilling, and promisedto buy him a fine tie-wig towear on May-day, " Ah, bless yourhonour!" replied the sweep; "mymaster won't let me go out on May-day.""No! why not?" "He saysit's low lite." Mr. Hanway possessedsome eccentricity of dress as well as ofmanner, and is said to have been thefirst who appeared in the streets of themetropolis with an umbrella. Abouttwo years after his death, a monumentwas erected to his memory, bypublic subscription, in WestminsterAbbey.THOMAS Hollies.THOMAS Hollies was born inLondon, on the 14th of April, 1720.After receiving the rudiments of hiseducation at the free school at Newport,in Shropshire, and an academy at St.Albans, he was sent to Amsterdam,where he remained fifteen months, occupiedin acquiring a knowledge of theDutch and French languages, and ofgeography and arithmetic. In 1735,on the death of his father, by whom alarge fortune was left to him, he wasplaced, by his guardian, under the careof Dr. Ward, professor of rhetoric inGresham College, where he wentthrough a complete course of classicaleducation. In 1740, he took up hisresidence in Lincoln's Inn, with someintention of studying for the bar, a profession,however, he did riot feel muchinclined to follow ; and, in 1748, he leftEngland, and occupied a year and ahalf in visiting Holland, France, Switzerland,and Italy; a tour which heagain commenced in 1750, and terminatedin June, 1753. On his return, heis supposed to have written the followingremarks on foreigners, on the windowof an inn, at Falmouth : " I haveseen the specious, vain Frenchman ; thetrucking scrub Dutchman ; the tame,lost Dane ; the sturdy, self-rightingSwede ; the barbarous Russ ; the turbulentPole; the honest, dull German;the pay-fighting Swiss ; the subtle,splendid Italian ; the salacious Turk ;the ever-warring, lounging Maltese ;the piratical Moor; the proud, cruelSpaniard; the bigotted, base Portuguese,their countries ; and hail again oldEngland, my native land ! Reader, (ifEnglishman, Scotchman, or Irishman,)rejoice in the freedom, that is, thefelicity of thine own country, and maintainit sacred to posterity." This wassigned "Cosmo. ;" and, though bearinga date anterior to the time whenhe arrived in England, was universallyascribed to his pen ; a fact which heseems to have unintentionally confirmed,in 1772, by sending, under thesame signature, to the London Chronicle,an article equally laconic andcharacteristic.During his travels, he kept a regularjournal of his proceedings, which areto be found in the memoirs of his life,printed in two volumes, folio, in 1780,and containing some very curious andinteresting information, with plates ofcelebrated pictures and statues, fromdrawings painted by himself. On hisreturn to England, being unable to getinto parliament in the independentmanner he wished, he commenced acollection of books and medals, "for thepurpose of illustrating and upholdingliberty, and preserving the memory ofits champions, to render tyranny andits abettors odious, to extend scienceand art, to keep alive the honour andestimation of their patrons and protectors,and to make the whole as usefulas possible ; abhorring all monopoly ;and, if such should be the fitness "ofthings, te propagate the same benevolentspirit to posterity."In 1755, he discovered the secondedition of Milton's Iconoclastes, whichhe republished in the following year ;and, about the same time, assisted inediting the prose works of that poet,VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.together with Ludlow's Memoirs, andSydney's Discourse on Government.In 1758, he employed much of his timein collecting books'for the public libraryat Berne, to which he presented a greatnumber of very valuable works, whichwere acknowledged by a Latin addressof thanks to him, and his name wasinserted in the records of the senators,beneath the plate of a medal typical ofhis gift.About this time, he correspondedvery frequently with an American clergyman,Dr. Mayhew, for whom he hadconceived so great a regard, on readingone of his sermons, that he sent him,anonymously, a large box of books ;which, being lost, he supplied by asecond chest, and shortly afterwardsforwarded him a third, with his namesubscribed; upon which, an epistolarycommunication took place betweenthem, and continued till the time ofDr. Mayhew's death. Mr. Hollis alsocorresponded, at different times, withalmost all the literati of France, Italy,and Germany, and presented several ofthe letters he' had received to the Antiquarian,and other societies. He alsomade several valuable donations, ofmedals and manuscripts, to both universities; to the library of St. Mark,at Venice; and to several individuals,public as well as private ; particularly,among the former, to the Duke ofDevonshire, whose death he notes inhis diary, with much regret, having, ashesaid " just before he died, obtainedhis confidence to so absolute a degree,as to be able to employ it to manynoble purposes."Up to the year 1770, he kept a diaryof all his transactions, which consistedin a continued distribution of gifts, bothin money and books, to an immenseamount, as unostentatiously recorded,as they were charitably and liberallybestowed. In the August of the last-mentionedyear, he retired to his seatat Corscombe, in Devonshire, still continuingto employ himself in whateverhe conceived might be beneficial to hiscountry ; and occasionally sending out,to the libraries of foreign countries,such books as he thought rare or valuableto them. Among others, was thePolyglot Bible of Walton, two volumesof Castes Lexicon, and the works ofLightfoot, which are thus alluded toin a letter of thanks from the Princeof Torremuzza, to whom he had sentthem as a present : " I am astonishedat your excessive goodness. Theseworks are hardly ever seen in the bestpublic libraries. I am at a loss to findwords to express the obligations withwhich your goodness is continuallyloading me."A few years before his death, hebecame alarmed at what he consideredthe decline of the public hostilitytowards popery, and was muchannoyed, in 1764, at the conduct ofministers, then opposed to Mr. Pitt,whom he greatly admired, and whosepromotion to the secretaryship of state,he thus prophecies, to a friend : " Notfor the sake of any noble pursuit inwhich the ministry wish to employ Mr.Pitt, but solely in'hopes thereby to stillall popular clamour ; and they may,till the next general war, when wo toBritain ! which, by its leaders in theclose of the last, has seemed to renouncethe very providence of theAlmighty :" and, in one of his subsequentletters, he speaks of his exertionsagainst " popery, intolerant popery,"with a virulence that, notwithstandinghis universal benevolence, argues alittle against the spirit of toleration inhimself. On the 1st of January, 1774,whilst walking out in his grounds atCorscombe, in the morning of whichday he had thus concluded a letter toone of his servants, " I have to thankGod for continuing me in health," hesuddenly dropped down in a fit, andexpired.A more charitable and eccentric characterhas seldom existed than Mr.Hollis ; all the public journals of theday accompanied the mention of hisdecease with laudatory remarks, rarelyapplied to the memory of a privateindividual. His diary, in addition toits interest for the singularity of itsrecords, contains an account of booksand persons, both ancient and modern,from which a biographical and biblio-graphical work might almost be compiled.His independence was equal tohis munificence ; "though," said he, inanswer to an application to become acandidate for a borough, " I wouldalmost give my right hand to be choseninto parliament, yet I would not givea single crown for it by way of bribe ;THOMAS Willis.no ! let me pass the remainder of mylife only in innocence and in decorum,if it be possible, and in quietness andretirement." His collection of medals,besides those he himself designed andstruck, was immense ; and their beneficialtendency, and the judgment withwhich they we're chosen were as remark -able as their quantity, which he found,on calculation, sufficient to make forty-fouroctavo volumes. The value he setonthem, particularly those bearing thelikenesses of the heads of antiquity, isforcibly shown by the following observation,on his refusing a present of one,by way of remuneration : " Pettyfavours and obligations," said he, " Iaccept great ones, never ; and I wouldsooner myself have stricken flat thesacred effigies of Brutus, than haveacquired it by donation, or in any degreeby finesse and bounty."Towards the latter part of his life,his aversion to popery continued to increase; and his fears of the catholicswere expressed and shown in such amanner, as to subject him to the chargeof mental imbecility. He went so far asto fancy that the pope had despatchedemissaries from Rome, to watch for anopportunity of taking his life ; and thathis bookbinder, who was of the Romishpersuasion, intended to set fire to hishouse, for the purpose of burning hisbooks in favour of protestantism. But,however sincere he might have beenin these apprehensions, it is doubtfulwhether many of his eccentricities werenot affected ; and this supposition isjustified by a passage in one of hisletters to a friend, about three yearspreviously to his death : " That ofwhich I am most chary is my time ;and people are cautious enough in generalnot to break in upon, and consumeit. The idea of singularity, bywayof shield, I try, by all means, tohold out." He kept, till the day of hisdeath, a resolution he had made, toavoid all public distinctive characters ;accordingly, though member of severalliterary and scientific societies, he refusedall solicitation to become chairmanor president of one of them. Hescarcely passed a single year, after hiscoming of age, in which he distributed,in public and private charity, less than400. " To sum up his characterin a few words," says the St. James'sChronicle, " in his death, Liberty losther champion, Humanity her treasurer,and Charity her steward."His person combined an excellentshape, with a strength and appearancealmost Herculean ; and the simple,honest straight-forwardness of his mindwas on a par with the extreme affabilityand amenity of his manners. He roseearly ; was very abstemious in his diet,never drinking wine or beer, nor usingsalt, spices, butter, milk, or sugar; hewalked many miles daily ; was passionatelyfond of fencing, and played well onthe flute, with which, when tired withreading, he amused himself in the evening.Averse to the formal complimentsof society, he entertained very littlecompany at his house, and refused toallow himself any of those luxurieswhich his ample fortune would haveenabled him to procure ; and on beingtold that people wondered he keptso few servants and no carriage, andthat a certain person had said somehard things of him, relative to hissecluded and unsociable way of life,he replied : " These speeches mortifyme sensibly ; though, on strictexamination of my conduct, I cannotthink that person hath any reason totalk in such a kind of manner of me.But I will endeavour to act up steadilyto what shall appear to me to be rightand decent ; and, for the rest, be disturbedas little as may be by what theworld shall think or say of me." Hehad ordered, that whenever his deathtook place, his corpse should be depositedin a grave ten feet deep, in themiddle of one of his fields, and thatthe spot should be immediately ploughedover, that no trace of his burial-placemight be visible. In addition to theworks before mentioned, he published,or procured the publication of, the following: Wallis s Grammar of theEnglish Language; Locke on Toleration; Government, a work by the sameauthor ; Sidney on Government ; Needham'sExcellence of a Free State ;Neville's Plato Redivivus; and severaltracts and pamphlets, particularly thoseby Dr. Mayhew respecting America.VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.THE HONOURABLE JOHN BYRON.JOHN BYRON, second son of William,fourth Lord Byron, was born onthe 8th of November, 1723; and, in1740, proceeded, on board the Wager,to the South Seas, under CommodoreAnson. The vessel being shipwreckedin its passage, Byron, with a few of hiscompanions who survived, endured innumerablehardships ; and were conducted,by a party of Indians, to Chloe,where they were received by the nativeswith the greatest hospitality. Theywere afterwards removed to the conventof the Jesuits, at Castro ; and,while there, proposals were made toByron of a marriage with the niece ofan old priest, the richest man in theisland, who endeavoured to persuadehim into the match, by a promise tomake him the heir to his property.Byron, however, declined the offer, andwas, soon after, conveyed, with hiscompanions, to Chaco, where they wereall immediately consigned to a dungeon,by the Spanish governor. Here he remained,for some time, in confinement,treated with the utmost severity; whichwas, however, mitigated by the kindnessof a common soldier, with sixchildren ; whom he, two years afterwards,was able to reward. He was,in a short time, ordered, with Mr.Campbell, to St. Ago, whither he wasconveyed, under the direction of an oldmuleteer, who kindly advised Byronto continue with him, and not to remainin the city, where, he said, therewas nothing but vice, folly, and extravagance.He was, however, as wellas Mr. Campbell, treated, on his arrival,with every respect : they wereinvited to meet Admiral Pizarro at thetable of the president ; and, having noclothes in which they could appear,accepted a loan of six hundred dollarsfrom a Spanish lieutenant, who hadgenerously offered them two thousand,though there appeared no prospect ofthe debt ever being liquidated. Afterremaining two years at St. Jasro, theyembarked, in December, 1744, forEurope ; and arrived, at the close of thefollowing year, at Dover. Byron travelledto London, on a borrowed horse,having no money for refreshments, andbeing compelled, by hard riding, to defraudthe turnpikes. He proceeded tothe house of his sister, Lady Carlisle,in John Square, and from the shabbinessof his appearance, was, at first,refused admittance.Soon after his arrival, he was madecommander of a sloop-of-war ; and, onthe 30th of December, 1746, was appointedcaptain of the Syren frigate.He afterwards went, in the St. Albans,under Commodore Buckle, to the coastof Guinea ; and, in 1753, was promotedto the Augusta, a guard-ship, at Plymouth.In 1757, his ship, the America,of sixty guns, formed one of the fleetengaged under Sir Edward Hawke, atthe successful expedition against Roche-fort;and, in 1758, he commanded threevessels of the line, one of which, theBrilliant, sank the Intrepid, a Frenchprivateer, by her first broadside. Earlyin 1763, Captain Byron proceeded, inthe Fame, to destroy the fortificationsat Louisburg ; and, in Chaleur Bay, withhis own and two other vessels, destroyeda large force, consisting of three frigates,twenty schooners, and a number ofprivateers, belonging to the enemy.On the accession of George the Third,Captain Byron was appointed to thecommand of the Dolphin, and, in companywith the Tamar, sailed from Plymouth,on the 3rd of July, 1764, for theSouth Seas, on a voyage of discovery.On the 13th of September, he anchoredin the great road of Rio de Janeiro,where he lost five of his men by theartifices of the Portuguese, who, he saysin his journal, " make it their businessto attend every time a boat comes onshore, and use every art in their powerto entice away the crew." On the 22ndof October, he again put to sea, andmade for Port Desire, and, about threeweeks afterwards, experienced a tremendousstorm ; on the subsiding ofwhich, he says, " the sea became redas blood, being covered with a smallshell-fish of that colour." He landedat Port Desire on the 21st of November,JOHN BYRON,and, after passing some days in examiningthe country, where he shot severalhares of the size of a fawn,and in taking soundings of the bay, heweighed anchor, and steered out E.N.E.with a fresh gale at N. N. W. Whilstat anchor near Cape Virgin Mary,perceiving several hundred people onfoot and horseback waving him toland,he approached the shore inaboat, where he was met by a chiefwhom he describes as " of a giganticstature, and painted so as to make themost hideous appearance he ever beheld,"After making a few presents tothe inhabitants, of whom he speaks as arace of giants, he passed up the Straitsof Magellan to Port Famine, when heturned his course back to some land towhich he gave the name of Falkland'sIslands. Whilst staying here, he lostseveral of his crew on shore, from theattack of sea-lions, a ferocious speciesof animal, of the size of a mastiff, andone of whom, he says, "it afforded adozen of us an hour's work to despatch."Leaving these islands in January, 1765,he proceeded through the Straits ofMagellan, as far as Cape Monday, wherehe arrived on the 9th of February, andwas detained by contrary winds untilthe 23rd, when " soon after he made sail,opened the South Sea." He quittedthe Straits of Magellan on the 9th ofApril, and notwithstanding the manydifficulties and dangers he encounteredin his passage, recommends it in preferenceto going round Cape Horn, in awestern course from Europe, into theSouth Seas. " I think," he says, " thatat a proper season of the year, not onlya single vessel, but a large squadron,might pass the straits in less than threeweeks ; and I think, to take the properseason, they should be at the easternentrance some time in the month ofDecember."He now pursued his course to thewestward, till the 26th of April, whenhe bore away for the island of Masa-fuero, and, on the 7th of June, hecame in sight of a small island, towhich he gave the name of Disappointment,in consequence of his beingunable to land, or to procure from thehostile natives any of the cocoa-nutsvisible on several trees; the milk of thatnut being the best cure for the scurvy,with which most of his men wereafflicted. About three days afterwards,he discovered, and, after a skirmish withthe natives, landed at, two islands, whichhe named after King George ; and hesubsequently discovered, and named,Prince of Wales's, Duke of York's, andByron's Islands ; the latter of which liesin latitude 1 deg. 18 min. S., longitude173 deg. 46 min. E.; and where hestates the variation of the compass tohave been " one point E." After passingsome time in the island of Titian,in describing which, as the most unhealthy,and hottest place in the world,he somewhat differs from the accountgiven by Lord Anson, he proceeded toPull Timon, and thence to Batavia,where he arrived on the 29th of November.In December, he sailed by way ofthe Cape of Good Hope, for England,and landed at Deal, on the 9th of May,1766. In 1769, his lordship was madegovernor of Newfoundland; and, afterhaving commanded in the West Indiesduring the American war, was ultimatelypromoted to be vice-admiral ofthe white. He died on the 16th ofApril, 1786, leaving two sons and sevendaughters by his wife, who was a daughterof John trevainon, Esq., of Carcass,in the county of Cornwall.The unparalleled trials and hardshipsthat befel Admiral Byron when heentered the service, and at a periodwhen he was not more than seventeenyears of age, had the effect of producinga patient fortitude, which he exhibited,in after life, on a variety of occasions.The series of stormy adventures whichattended him in the discharge of hisprofessional duties, procured for himthe title of " Foul-weather Jack ;" anepithet applied to Sir John Norris forsimilar reasons. An account of theadmiral's voyage to the South Sea is tobe found in Hawkesworth's collection,but will be read with little interest afterthe journals of Cook, Franklin, andParry.VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.JOHN HOWARD.JOHN HOWARD, one of the mosttruly illustrious characters that everadorned the human race, was the sonof an upholsterer, in Long Lane, Smithfield,who had retired on his fortune toClapton, near Hackney, where the subjectof our memoir was born, on the2nd of September, 1726. He receivedhis education among the protestantdissenters, and his mind was early imbuedwith religious impressions, whichhis instructors took more care to graftupon his mind than the rudiments ofliterature, of which, to his sorrow, heever remained imperfectly acquainted.Indeed, it is asserted by his biographer,Dr. Aikin, that he was never able tospeak or write his native language withgrammatical correctness. On leavingschool, he was apprenticed to a grocer,in Watling Street, but shortly after thedeath of his father, in 1742, by whichevent he became entitled to a considerableproperty, he bought up theremainder of his time, and set out upona tour to France and Italy. On hisreturn, the state of his health inducedhim to take lodgings at Stoke Newington,where he devoted a considerableportion of his leisure to. the improvementof his mind; and, among otherpursuits, made some progress in thestudy of medicine and natural philosophy.Having removed from his formerapartments to others in the house of Mrs.Sarah Loidoire, he was there attackedby a severe fit of illness, during whichhe experienced such kind treatmentfrom his landlady, that, on his recovery,he insisted, out of gratitude, on makingher his wife. The expostulations ofhis friends and of the lady herself, whowas sickly and in her fifty-secondyear, against this extraordinary determination,were in vain, and the unionaccordingly took place in 1752. Onthis occasion, he showed that liberalityin pecuniary concerns which he displayedthrough life, by settling thewhole of his wife's little independenceupon her sister. He is said to havelived very happily with Mrs. Howarduntil her death, in 1755, when, " witha view," says his latest biographer, Mr.Brown, " to divert his mind from themelancholy reflections which that eventhad occasioned," he resolved uponleaving England on another tour. Accordingly,in 1756, having been previouslyelected a fellow of the RoyalSociety, he set put in a packet forLisbon, with the intention of witnessingthe effects of the recent earthquake.In his way out, however, he was capturedby a French privateer, and withthe rest of the crew carried into Brest,under circumstances of great cruelty.Before we reached Brest," says heinhis Treatise on Prisons, " I sufferedthe extremity of thirst ; not having, forabove forty hours, one drop of water, norhardly a morsel of bread. In the castleof Brest I lay six nights upon straw;and observing how cruelly my countrymenwere used there and at Morlaix,whither I was carried next, during thetwo months I was at Carfax uponparole, I corresponded with the Englishprisoners at Brest, Morlaix, and Dinah;at the last were several of our ship'screw and my servant. I had sufficientevidence of their being treated withsuch barbarity, that many hundredshad perished, and that thirty-six wereburied in a hole at Dinah in one day.When I came to England, still onparole, I made known to the commissionersof sick and wounded seamenthe sundry particulars, which gainedtheir attention and thanks. Remonstranceswere made to the Frenchcourt ; our sailors had redress ; andthose that were in the three prisonsmentioned above were brought homein the first cartel ships." The sufferingswhich he endured on this occasionwere the first excitements of our philanthropist'sattention to the sick and captive,and were the cause of his makingthat " circumnavigation of charity," asMr. Burke has expressed it, which occupiedthe greater part of his subsequentlife.Mr. Howard now took up his residenceon his estate at Warrington, inJOHN HOWARD,Bedfordshire; and on the 25th of April,1758, he contracted a second marriagewith Henrietta, daughter of EdwardLeeds, Esq., king's serjeant, a masterin Chancery, and member of parliamentfor Relate. " With this lady," saysDr. Aikin, " who possessed, in aneminent degree, all the mild and amiablevirtues proper to her sex, he passed,as I have often heard him declare, theonly years of true enjoyment which hehad known in life." Soon after hismarriage, he removed to Watcombe, inthe New Forest, Hampshire ; but findingthe situation prejudicial to the healthof his wife, he returned to Warrington,where he employed himself in formingand executing various schemes of benevolencefor ameliorating the conditionof his tenantry, and administeringto the wants of the poor in hisneighbourhood. He began by buildinga number of neat cottages on his estate,annexing to each a little land for agarden, and other conveniences ; and hischief delight was in peopling them withindustrious tenants, and in exercisingover them the combined superintendenceof master and father. In1765, he had the misfortune to losehis wife in child-bed ; and his care andaffection for the son she had left him,served but little to allay the severeanguish which he always felt at herloss. Shortly after her death he paida visit to Bath; and in the spring of1767, made a tour on the continent,which he repeated in 1769, and returnedto England in the autumn ofthe following year.In 1773, being appointed high sheriffof the county of Bedford, he choserather to risk the penalties of the testact, which he incurred as a dissenterby accepting this situation, than refusean office in which he saw great opportunitiesof doing good. One of hisduties being to visit the county prisons,he examined them in person ;and no sooner discovered the enormitiesand grievances that prevailed,than he determined to attempt theremedy of them, and the introductionof a humane and equitable system.The first thing by which he was struck,was the injustice of the payment offees on a prisoner's discharge, bywhich many were confined for monthsafter they had been otherwise entitledto their liberation. " In order to redressthis hardship," says our philanthropist,in his prefatory remarks tohis State of Prisons, " I applied tothe justices of the county for a salaryto the gaoler in lieu of fees. Thebench were properly affected with thegrievance, and willing to grant the reliefdesired ; but they wanted a precedentfor charging the county withthe expense. I therefore rode intoseveral neighbouring counties, in searchof a precedent; but I soon learned thatthe same injustice was practised inthem; and looking into the prisons, Ibeheld scenes of calamity which I grewdaily more and more anxious to alleviate."In consequence of what hehad beheld in this benevolent search,he went on and paid visits to most ofthe county gaols in England, and somedeplorable objects coming under hisview who had been brought from theBridewell, he travelled again into thesame counties for the purpose of alsoinspecting these places of confinement.His exertions having attracted theattention of parliament, he was requestedto lay the result of his inquiriesbefore the house of commons,which he accordingly did in March,1774, when he received a vote of thanks,and was encouraged to persevere in hisresearches. On his appearing beforethe members, one of them asked himat whose expense he travelled ; aquestion which, it is said, the noblephilanthropist did not answer withoutmanifesting emotions of indignation.Not long afterwards, he had the satisfactionof seeing a bill passed " for therelief of prisoners who should be acquitted,respecting their fees," andanother for preserving the health ofprisoners, and preventing the gaol-distemper; which he caused to be printedin a different letter, and sent them tothe keeper of every county gaol inEngland. In December, he, in conjunctionwith Mr. Whitbread, stood acontested election for Bedford, whencorrupt influence prevented their return; but on a petition being presentedagainst that of their adversaries,one of them was, in consequence,ejected from his seat : Mr. Whitbreadwas declared to have been duly elected,and Mr. Howard's minority was reducedto four.VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.In 1775 and 1776, he visited theprisons of France, Flanders, Holland,Germany, and Switzerland ; and on hisreturn, those of Scotland and Ireland;in all of which he found the same needof reformation. Having now completedhis inspection of English gaols,he, in 1777, published an account of hislabours, in a work entitled, The State ofthe Prisons in England and Wales, withPreliminary Observations, and an Accountof some Foreign Prisons, quarto,and dedicated to the house of commons.Nothing could exceed the careand attention with which he got upthis publication, which was printed atWarrington, under the superintendenceof Dr. Aikin, having been previouslywritten out in correct language by afriend, and then revised by Dr. Price.Although the printing of the work tookplace in winter, Mr. Howard rose everymorning at three o'clock, for the purposeof collating every word and figureof his daily proof sheet with the original; and when it was finished, he insisted,says Dr. Aikin, in fixing theprice so low that, had every copy beensold, he would still have presented thepublic with all the plates and greatpart of the printing. In this work, theonly one of the kind that ever appeared,we are introduced to scenes ofthe most shocking misery, injustice,and depravity, into which Mr. Howardreadily entered, as also into the mostloathsome dungeons, where none whowere not obliged, besides himself, wouldventure. Alluding to the inquiries ofhis friends as to the manner of his preservationfrom infection, he says, " Ihere answer, next to the free goodnessand mercy of the author of my being,temperance and cleanliness are my preservatives.Trusting in Divine Providence,and believing myself in the wayof my duty, I visit the most noxiouscells, and fear no evil. I never enteran hospital or prison before breakfast ;and in an offensive room I seldom drawmy breath deeply."In 1778, he made a third journey tothe continent, and, on his return, he renewedhis survey of the British prisons,and made an examination of the publichospitals. The further informationwhich he thus obtained, he published,in 1780, as an appendix to his formerwork; and, in the same year, he wasappointed one of the three supervisorsunder the act of parliament, which hadbeen passed in the previous year, forthe establishment of penitentiary houseson a plan of his own recommendation.This office, for which he had refused asalary, he accepted on condition of theappointment of Dr. Fothergill as one ofhis colleagues; but the doctor soonafterwards dying, and some differenceshaving arisen between the other supervisorand Mr. Howard, he resigned itin January, 1781. Shunning repose ascriminal, when further benefit to hisfellow-creatures seemed possible to beeffected, he again quitted England, andmade a tour through Denmark, Sweden,Russia, and Poland. On his arrival atSt. Petersburghh, the empress sent toinvite him to court; but his sublimeanswer to the messenger was, " I cometo visit the prisons of the captive, andnot the courts or palaces of kings."From this tour he returned in about ayear ; and, in 1782, he made anothercomplete survey of the prisons in England,and another journey into Scotlandand Ireland. In 1783, he visited theprisons of Spain and Portugal ; and, onhis return, having again surveyed theprisons of this country, he published, in1784, an appendix of the additional informationhe had obtained during thelast three years, together with a completeedition of his State of the Prisons,with all the supplementary matter.Our philanthropist now turned hisattention to those countries most afflictedby the plague, and resolved tovisit the principal lazarettos of Europe,with a view of obtaining informationas to the means of preventing its contagion.His intent, therefore, as hisbiographer observes, was nothing lessthan to plunge into the midst of thosedangers, which, by other men, are soanxiously avoided; to search out andconfront the great foe of human life,for the sake of recognising his features,and discovering the most efficaciousbarriers against his assaults. In theprosecution of this scheme, he, towardsthe end of 1785, set out through France,to Smyrna and Constantinople, whencehe returned to the former place, for thepurpose, as he says, of going to Venicewith a foul bill, that would necessarilysubject him to the utmost rigour of thequarantine. In his voyage, he wasJOHN HOWARD.attacked by a Tunisian corsair, whichwas defeated after a smart skirmish, inwhich Mr. Howard pointed one of thecannons with considerable effect.From Venice, where his health andspirits suffered considerably from hisresidence in the lazaretto, he proceededto Vienna, where he had a privateaudience with the Emperor Josephthe Second, who treated him with greatcondescension, and promised to adoptmany of his plans for the improvementof prison discipline. Whilst abroad, hereceived intelligence of his son's insanity,and of the intention of hisfriends to erect a statue in honour ofhim by public subscription. Althoughwith different emotions, both theseevents distressed and harassed him inan extraordinary degree. In a letterwritten shortly afterwards, he breaks offwith " But, oh! my son, my son!" and,in allusion to what he calls " the othervery distressing affair, he writes, " Oh !why could not my friends, who knowhow much I detest such parade, havestopped such a hasty measure ! As aprivate man, with some peculiarities, Iwished to retire into obscurity andsilence. Indeed, my friend, I cannotbear the thought of being thus draggedout. It deranges and confounds allmy schemes my exaltation is my fall,my misfortune."On his arrival, therefore, in England,in 1787, he refused to direct the disposalof the sum collected, (1,500,)part of which was reclaimed by thesubscribers, and the remainder left untoucheduntil the time of his death.In this and the following year, heagain visited Scotland and Ireland,where he inspected the ProtestantCharter School, with a view to the reformationof the various abuses which,in a former visit, he had observed, andreported to a committee of the Irishhouse of commons. Whilst at Dublin,he was created L.L.D., and at Glasgowand Liverpool he was enrolled amongtheir honorary members. On his returnhome, having again inspected the prisonsin England, and the hulks on theThames, he published an account ofhis last laborious investigations, in AnAccount of the Principal Lazarettos inEurope, with various Papers relative tothe Plague ; together with FurtherObservations on some Foreign Prisonsand Hospitals ; with additional remarkson the present state of those in GreatBritain and Ireland, with a great numberof plates. At the conclusion of thework, having stated it to be his intention" again to quit his native country,for the purpose of revisiting Russia,Turkey, and some other countries, andextending his tour in the east," he setoff from London, in the summer of1789, and proceeded through Germanyto Petersburghh and Moscow, and fromthence to a Russian settlement calledPierson, on the river Dnieper. Accordingto Mr. Palmer, the principalobject of Mr. Howard's last travels, wasto try the effect of James's powders incases of malignant fever; which, havingbroken out at the place where he nowwas, he administered that medicine toseveral patients. In his attendanceupon one of them, he himself caughtthe infection ; and, although PrincePotemkin sent him his own physician,and everything was done to save him,he died on the 20th of January, 1790.He expired with perfect resignation,and was buried in the garden of thevilla of M. Dauphine, at his own request;observing, as he made it, " thathe should there be equally near toheaven, as if brought back to England."His death, which was lamented notonly as a national calamity, but as aloss to the whole civilized world, wasannounced in the London Gazette, anhonour of an unprecedented nature.Several poets of eminence employedtheir talents in his praise ; and, withthe remainder of the subscription beforealluded to, a monumental statue,executed by Bacon, was erected to hismemory in St. Paul's. All his biographershave vied with each other instriving to do justice to his exaltedcharacter; but no posthumous eulogiumon Mr. Howard is to be compared tothat pronounced by Mr. Burke, previousto his election at Bristol, in 1780 :I cannot," said the orator, " namethis gentleman without remarking thathis labours and writings have donemuch to open the eyes and hearts ofmankind. He has visited all Europe,not to survey the sumptuousness ofpalaces, or the stateliness of temples ;not to make accurate measurements ofthe remains of ancient grandeur, norto form a scale of the curiosity ofVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.modern art; not to collect medals, orcollate manuscripts ; but to dive intothe depths of dungeons ; to plunge intothe infection of hospitals ; to surveythe mansions of sorrow and pain ; totake the gauge and dimension of misery,depression, and contempt; to rememberthe forgotten, to attend to theneglected, to visit the forsaken, and tocompare and collate the distresses ofall men in all countries. His plan isoriginal, and it is as full of genius asit is of humanity."In person, Mr. Howard was slightlybeneath the middle size ; with a long,sallow countenance, and an appearancesomewhat mean and forbidding, at firstsight. His manners will be betterappreciated if we say that they denotedrather the Christian than the gentleman; though, even in the most worldlysense of the word, he was by no meansdeficient in the qualities of the latter.This was particularly exemplified inhis conduct towards women, to whomhe paid particular attention and respect ;and it is related of him, that whilst onhis passage from Holyhead to Dublin,when the packet was much crowded,he resigned his bed to a maid-servant,and slept upon the floor. He wasaverse to general society, but threw offhis natural reserve in the select companyof the few, whose sentiments weresimilar to his own, and conversed withgreat fluency and animation. As neitherhis youth nor his fortune had led himinto dissipation, his disgust increasedwith his years at the conduct and languageof the profligate, which he neverwanted the moral courage to denounce,whenever either came under his observation.In private, he set an exampleof all the religious, moral, and domesticduties ; which he regulated with theorder of a system, inculcated with thesolicitude of a parent, and enforced withthe authority of a master. His charityhad no bounds save those of prudence ;and, lest he might incur the guilt ofpecuniary accumulation, he left no partof his income unexpended ; and refusedto leave more than a small portion tohis son, saying, that it was iniquitousto provide for one the luxuries, whilstso many remained without the necessaries,of life. In mentioning his son,we pass over in silence the charges thathave been brought against Mr. Howardof parental cruelty, as they have beenindisputably proved to have had nofoundation whatever. His ideas ofeducation were certainly peculiar, andhe was resolute in adopting them ; buthis firmness never degenerated intoharshness, nor his peremptoriness intoanger. A disposition to censure, ratherthan to praise, has also been attributedto him in the prosecution of his publicplans ; but, however this may be, asMr. Aikin justly observes, "a Hercules,going about to destroy monsters, cannotbe expected to use all the fair formsof life." In his mode of living he wasabstemious, even to excess; and it isrelated of him, that when travelling,although he always ordered his supperwith beer and wine, he would makehis man attend and take it away, whilsthe was preparing his bread and milk.Piety was one of the most decided featuresof our philanthropist's character ;nor were his thoughts less than hisactions imbued with the spirit of purereligion. He lived and died a moderateCalvinist, and some have asserted thathe was a predestinarian ; but the maturedeliberation by which all his planswere preceded, sufficiently confutesthis supposition. With respect to hismental capacities, Mr. Howard was not,in a high degree, possessed of extensivecomprehension, nor of the facultyof generalizing; but was rather a manof detail, of laborious accuracy, andminute examination. " I am the plodder,"he used to say, " who goes aboutto collect materials for men of geniusto make use of." In politics he joinedno party, but was strongly opposedto aristocratical influence, and gloriedin the triumph of American independence.To an indignation at whatever wasunjust or oppressive, he joined greatfirmness in the maintenance of his ownrights ; in proof of which, the followinganecdote is related : Whilst travellingin the King of Prussia's dominions,his carriage was met by that ofa courier in a part of the road whereit was too narrow to admit of morethan one vehicle passing. Mr. Howardasserting that the courier ought to haveblown his horn, refused to turn back ;and the former being equally obstinate,both remained in their respective equipagesfor a considerable time, till theJAMES COOK.courier at length gave way, and sufferedthe philanthropist to drive on.In addition to the works alreadymentioned, the subject of our memoircontributed a few papers to the PhilosophicalTransactions, besides publishinga translation of the Grand Duke ofTuscany's new code of criminal law ;and, in 1791, appeared an Appendix,containing Observations concerningForeign Prisons and Hospitals, collectedby him in his last tour. In concludingour memoir of Howard, wecannot forbear to remark how inadequatehas been the posthumous homageof the country that gave him birth, toone of the greatest, because one of thebest, of men. In tracing the pictureof the occurrences that have taken placesince his death, he appears a holy andpleasing relief to the startling lightsand shadows cast over the canvass bythose who, in the more prominent charactersof warriors and statesmen, havesucceeded in fixing the attention of posterity.But his name has acquired alasting, if a noiseless, fame; and althoughamid the bubbles that now and thenspring to the surface of the times, fromthe tumultuous subsiding of individualor popular glory, it may occasionallybe obscured or overwhelmed, yet whenmyriads of these shall have risen andburst, and the mirror of the past hasre-assumed its former transparency, theimage of Howard will always re-appearin undiminished purity, and be againcontemplated with the regard due tohis immortal memory.CAPTAIN JAMES COOK.His celebrated navigator, the son ofa labouring man at Marion, in the NorthHiding of Yorkshire, was born there onthe 27th of October, 1728, and receivedhis education at the expense of Mr.Sotto, to whom his father was bailiff.At the age of thirteen, he was apprenticedto a haberdasher, but owing tosome disagreement with his master, hisindentures were cancelled, and havingan inclination to the sea, he bound himselffor seven years to Messrs. Walker,of Whitby, who had several vesselsin the coal trade. Having afterwardsserved for a few years as a commonsailor, he was appointed mate of one ofMessrs. Walker's ships, in which capacityhe displayed great assiduity inacquiring a knowledge of practical navigation.Being in London in the springof 1755, when the war broke out betweenFrance and England, he, forsome time, concealed himself to avoidimpressment; but at length enteredvoluntarily on board the Eagle, of sixtyguns. His diligence in this vessel gainedhim the notice of the captain, and hispromotion being forwarded by privateinterest, he was, on the 15th of May,1759, appointed master of the Mercury,which sailed to America, to join the fleetengaged in the siege of Quebec. Onthis occasion he was employed to takethe soundings of the St. Lawrence, betweenOrleans and the north shore, aswell as to survey the most dangerousparts of the river below Quebec, whichimportant services he most successfullyperformed.On the 22nd of September, he wasappointed master of the Northumberland,stationed at Halifax, where hefirst read Euclid, and studied the scienceof astronomy. Having assisted at there-capture ef Newfoundland, with theNorthumberland, he, in 1762, returnedto England, at the end of the year, andmarried Miss Elizabeth Bates, at Barking,in Essex. Early in 1763, he wentout with Captain Greaves, to newfoundlandas surveyor of its coasts; and, inthe following year, accompanied SirHugh Palliser to Labrador and Newfoundland,in the capacity of marinesurveyor, a situation in which he continuedtill 1767. While thus employed,he transmitted to the Royal Society,an, account of his Observation of anEclipse of the Sun at Newfoundland,with the longitude of the place deducedfrom it, which was printed in the fifty-seventhvolume ot the PhilosophicalTransactions. In 1768, he was presentedwith a lieutenant's commission, andVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.appointed to the command of the Endeavour,in which he sailed to Otaheite,accompanied by Mr. (afterwards SirJoseph);Banks, and Dr. Solander, witha view of making astronomical observationson a transit of Venus over thesun's disk, expected to take place in1769.Having accomplished this object,Lieutenant Cook traced the easterncoast of New Holland, which he namedNew South Wales, and ascertained'itsseparation from New Guinea passingthrough the intersecting channel, whichhe named Endeavour Straits, and madevarious other valuable discoveries.Throughout the whole of the voyage,he displayed the greatest firmness inthe many dangers he had to encounter;and, in his intercourse with the nativesof the different places at which thevessel touched, he evinced equal prudenceand humanity. He not onlyseverely punished every act of wantonaggression on the part of his crew,but forbade them, when assailed in theirturn, by the natives, to defend themselveswith the spirit of retaliation. Onone occasion, however, he appears tohave repelled an attack of the NewZealanders with an intemperance whichhe afterwards regretted, and which heattempts to palliate by saying that thenature of .his service required him toobtain a knowledge of their country,which he could only do by forcing it inahostile manner, or gaining admissionthrough the confidence and good-will ofthe people. This, although no justificationof the sanguinary part he confessesto have acted, may be accepted as anexcuse from one, who, in addition to hisown subordinate notions and professionalambition, had under his command a setof men,who, according to Hawkesworth,all along showed as much inclination todestroy the Indians as a sportsman doesto kill the game he pursues. Afterencountering many difficulties in thevoyage home, and having lost by diseaseupwards of thirty of the crew, theEndeavour arrived in England on thellth of June, 1771; and on the 29thof August in the same year, Mr. Cookwas made a captain in the navy. Anaccount of this voyage, drawn up byMr. Hawkesworth," was given to thepublic, who read it, says Gorton, " withan avidity, proportioned to the noveltyof the adventures which it recorded."In the following year, the subject ofour memoir was appointed to commandanother expedition, which had been resolvedon, tor the purpose of ascertainingthe existence or non-existence of acircumpolar southern continent. Heaccordingly set sail in the Resolution,accompanied by the Adventure ; and,after having proceeded as far south as thelatitude of seventy-one degrees, wherea barrier of ice opposed farther progress,he discovered beyond the possibility ofdoubt, that no southern continent existed.Among the valuable fruits of thisexpedition may be mentioned, the discoveryof the extent of the Archipelagoof the New Hebrides ; and of New Caledonia,which, next to New Zealand, isthe largest island in the Pacific Ocean.During his voyage, Captain Cook alsodiscovered a method of successfullytreating the scurvy, and other diseasesgeneral among seamen, which he foundso effectual that only one man was lostby sickness in the three years of thevessel's absence from England. He waspromoted to the rank of post-captain,on the 9th of August, 1775; and was,three days afterwards, appointed acaptain in Greenwich Hospital, a situationintended to afford him a pleasingreward for his illustrious services. Thenarrative of his second voyage was composedby himself; but was prepared forthe press under the superintendence ofDr. Douglas, afterwards Bishop of Salisbury.In March, 1776> our voyagerwas elected a member of the RoyalSociety; and, in the same year, havingcontributed the best experimentaUpaperto their transactions, the subject ofwhich was, the means he had taken topreserve the health of the crew of theResolution, he was rewarded with theColeman gold medal.Before, however, he could receivethis honour, he had already set outon his third and last expedition, theobject ' of which was, to determinewhether a maritime communicationexisted between the Atlantic and PacificOceans in the arctic regions of the globe.The Resolution was accompanied bythe Discovery; and, though the mainobject of the expedition was not accomplished,several new islands were discoveredin the South Pacific, as well asagroup of islands .in the North Pacific,JAMES BRUCE.and a considerable portion of thewestern coast of North America. Theprincipal interest of the voyage, however,arises from the calamitous circumstanceswhich occurred at Owhyhee, an islandwhose inhabitants seemed more numerousand powerful than those of any ofthe others that Captain Cook had previouslydiscovered. During seven weeksemployed in exploring the coasts of thisisland, he continued to be on the mostfriendly terms with the natives, whoseinoffensive behaviour removed everydoubt of their sincerity. Owing, however,to some petty thefts committed bythe inhabitants, and resented by CaptainCook, a feeling of hostility sprangup, which led to open rupture. Atlength, the large cutter of the Discoveryhaving been stolen, our voyager, attendedby a lieutenant of marines, aserjeant, a corporal, and seven privatemen, went, on the 14th of February,177>, on shore, intending to seize theperson of the king, to be kept as ahostage, till the boat should be restored.It appears, that the king showed nounwillingness to go on board ; but hissubjects, who had previously armedthemselves, would not, on his arrival atthe beach, allow him to leave them.Captain Cook, seeing the danger ofhis situation, was about to give hisorders to remark, when a stone wasthrown at him, and he resented theinsult by a discharge of small shot fromhis pistol ; an attack was now madeon the marines, some of whom werekilled, and Cook having made a signalto the boats of the Discovery, whichwas either not sufficiently understood,or not promptly enough obeyed, remainedundefended against the resentmentof the natives. The foremost ofhis pursuers seemed at first undeterminedto strike him ; but, at length,giving him a blow on the back of thehead, he fell to the ground, and wasultimately despatched by a stroke froma club. His body, or rather a portionof it, dreadfully mutilated, was recoveredby dint of threats, after frequentnegotiations ; and was committedto the deep with the usual militaryhonours.The death of this great seaman waslamented as a national misfortune, andboth at home and abroad, posthumoushonours were paid to his memory. Amedal in commemoration of him wasstruck by order of the Royal Society ;his eulogy was pronounced in the FlorentineAcademy, and was made a prizesubject by one of the French scientificsocieties. He is mentioned in the versesof several British poets, and his widowand three surviving sons were pensionedby government.Captain Cook possessed genius inan eminent degree, great application,and a large extent of scientific knowledge.Though his opportunities werefew, he had attained to a great proficiencyin general learning, and waseven a clear, if not an elegant writer,as may be seen from his own account ofhis second voyage. He showed greatperseverance in difficulty, and fortitudein danger; and had such a reliance onhis own judgment and precaution, asenabled him to sleep calmly in the mostperilous situations. In private life hebore an estimable character, and wasan excellent husband and father, anda sincere and steady friend. His mannersand conversation were simple andunassuming, and without the smallestparticle of vanity. In person he wasabove six feet high ; having a smallhead, nose well shaped, eyes quick andpiercing, and a countenance which altogetherhad an air of austerity.JAMES BRUCE.JAMES BRUCE was born at Kin-laird,near Falkirk, in Stirlingshire, onthe 14th of December, 1730; and, in1738, was placed under the care of hisuncle, a barrister in London, who senthim, in January, 1742, to school, atHarrow. Here he so successfully prosecutedhis studies, that Dr. Cox, thehead-master, said of him, in a letter toa friend, "When you write to Mr.Bruce's father about his son, you cannotsay tco much ; for he is as promising aVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERSyoung man as ever I had under mycare; and, for his years, I never sawhis fellow." From Harrow, he went,for a few months, to a private academy,where he renewed his classical studies,and acquired a knowledge of French,drawing, arithmetic and geometry. Inthe November of 1747j he entered-theUniversity of Edinburgh, with the intentionof studying the law; winch, athis father's desire, he had determinedon adopting as his profession. Disinclination,however, and ill-health, inducedhim, in the spiring of 1748, torelinquish forever the sedentary laboursof a law student ; and being threatenedwith consumption, he retired to Scotland,where he remained until 1753.In the July of that year, he went toLondon, with the intention of embarkingfor the East Indies, where he purposedsettling as a free trader, under thepatronage of the Company, to whom hehad already prepared a petition. Anattachment, however, frustrated thisdesign ; and, in February, 1754, hemarried a Miss Alkrr, daughter of adeceased wine-merchant; and, for ashort time, held a share in the business.This he relinquished on the death ofhis wife, which happened in Paris,eight months after her marriage ; andsuch was the bigotry of the catholicstowards protestants, that he was compelledto inter her at midnight, and tosteal a grave in the burying ground assignedto the English embassy.After this event, he again turned hisattention to literature, and acquired aknowledge of the Spanish and Portuguesetongues, as well as the art ofdrawing ; all of which studies he pursuedwith a view to their utility in the futuretravels that he secretly contemplated.At the commencement of the vintageseason, in July, 1757, he embarked forthe continent; and, after landing atCorunna, traversed Spain and Portugal,where he sojourned till the end of theyear, devoting much attention to thesocial and political state of those countries.At the beginning of 1758, hepassed over the Pyrenees to France;thence down the Rhine into Germanyand the Netherlands, whence he wasrecalled to England, in July, by a letterannouncing the death of his father.Whilst at Brussels, having taken thepart of a youth stranger r insulted in hispresence, he was challenged to fight aduel, in which he severely wounded hisantagonist, and was obliged to fly thecity. The death of his father entitledhim to an inheritance which affordedhim ample means of efficiently and uninterruptedlypursuing the studies, whichwere necessary to the success of hisdesigns; and, by the year 1761, he hadcollected most of the Dutch and Italianbooks on the subject of oriental literature.He had also made great progressin- the Arabic and Ethiopia languages,to the study of which was owing hisdetermination to explore the sources ofthe Nile.About this time, a rupture being anticipatedbetween England and Spain,he visited Mr. Wood, the under-secretaryof state, whom he requested to laybefore the minister, Mr. Pitt, a plan hehad concerted, when abroad, of an expeditionagainst the latter country, byattacking Gallican, in Ferrol. Aftermuch negotiation, his suggestion wasadopted by the ministry, but it wassubsequently abandoned, owing to thePortuguese ambassador having representedthe great danger that wouldresult to his country from such anexpedition. Chagrined at the failureof his military project, he meditatedreturning to Scotland, where the recentdiscovery of some valuable nones on hisestate would have enabled him to livewith comfort and independence, whenhe received a message from Lord Halifax,requesting to see him before heleft London. His lordship ridiculed theidea of Bruce's retirement ; and, afterhinting to him the encouragement whichthe king would bestow on enterprise anddiscovery, suggested Africa to him, asafit region for the exercise of both ;and, as a further inducement to hisvisiting that country, offered him thesituation of consul-general at Algiers,with leave to appoint a vice-consul inhis absence. He promised him, in addition,the rewards stipulated in theaffair of Ferrol, and advancement toa higher diplomatic station, if he madewide incursions into the former country.He at length acceded to the proposalof Lord Halifax, and, in June, 1762,having previously been introduced tothe king, set out tor Africa. He reachedthat country on the 20th of March,1763; when such was his knowledge ofJAMES BRUCE.the Arabic, that he was able to fulfil hisconsular duties without the aid of aninterpreter. On his way thither, hepassed through the principal cities ofItaly, where he made several sketchesof its temples and ruins ; and, it appearsfrom his manuscripts, that he also intendedwriting a dissertation on theancient and modern state of Rome.Shortly after his arrival at Algiers, adispute occurred between him and thedey, concerning Mediterranean passes,for carrying which in a form differingfrom that originally prescribed, severalBritish vessels were seized and destroyed; of which, having first remonstratedwith the dey, he immediatelywrote to inform government. Theministry, however, who had been .secretlyprejudiced against him, by aParty hostile to him at Algiers, treatedis communication very lightly; and, inMay, 1765, being recalled to England,he was compelled, either to abandonthe principal design of his residence inBarbary, or to make his intended excursionsas a private individual. Aftersome consideration, he adopted thelatter alternative; and, on the 25th ofAugust, sailed for Tunis, stopping, onhis way thither, at Utica and Carthage,the ruins of which cities he stayed sometimeto examine, making drawingsof the most important parts, in whichhe was assisted by a young Bologneseartist, whom he had brought with himfrom Italy. In one of his incursionsinto the interior of the country, hediscovered Carta, the capital of Syphax,whence he returned to Tunis, andstarted thence for Tripoli, by way ofGabs and Verba. On entering thedesert which borders the latter town,he was attacked by the Arabs, andcompelled to return to Tunis, wherehe remained till August, 1766, when hecrossed the desert in safety, and arrivedat Tripoli. He next proceeded, acrossthe Gulf of Hydra, to Bengazi and Ptolo-meta, and shortly afterwards, set sailfor Crete, when a shipwreck drove himagain upon the African shore, with theloss of every thing but his drawingsand books, which he had fortunatelydespatched from Tripoli to Smyrna.From Bengazi, the place of his shipwreck,and where he was very cruellytreated, he escaped, by a French vessel,to Canea, where he was detained by anintermittent fever, till the end of April,1767, when he proceeded, by way ofRhodes, to Sidon.On the 16th of September he commencedhis journey to Balbec, which hereached on the 19th of the same month ;and, having returned to Tripoli, set out,in a few weeks, for Palmyra. Aftermaking several drawings, which, as wellas those of Balbec, he afterwards presentedto the king, he travelled along thecoast to Latakia, Antioch, and Aleppo,where he was attacked by a fever, fromwhich he, with great difficulty recovered.About this time, meditating the discoveryof resource of the Nile, he leftAleppo for Alexandria, where he arrivedon the 20th oLJune, 1768. From hencehe proceeded by land to Rosetta, wherehe embarked on the Nile for Cairo.After impressing the bey of the citywith an idea of his skill in medicine andprophecy, he sailed to Syene, visiting,in his way thither, the ruins of Thebes;and, on the 16th of February, 1769, setout from Kennel, through the Thebaiddesert, to Coster, on the Red Sea; andfrom thence proceeded to Tor andJidda, where he landed on the 5th ofMay. After making several excursionsin Arabia Felix, he quitted Loheia, onthe 3rd of September, for Casual ;where, on his arrival, he was detainedfor some weeks, by the treachery andavarice of the governor of that place,who attempted to murder him, in consequenceof his refusal to make himan enormous present. In February,1770, he entered Gondar, the capital ofAbyssinia, the ras of which city appointedhim gentleman-usher of theking's bed-chamber, commander of thehousehold cavalry, and governor of aprovince.On the 27th of October, after havingtaken an active part in the councilsof the sovereign, and effected severalcures of persons about the court attackedwith the small-pox, he left thecapital, and set out in search of thesource of the Nile, which he discoveredat Scala, on the 14th of the followingNovember. The joy he felt on theoccasion is thus described by himself:It is easier to guess, than to describethe situation of my mind at that moment;standing in that spot which hadbaffled the genius, history, and inquiryof both ancients and moderns, for theVoyagers AND T K A V L L E RS ,course of nearly three thousand years.Kings had attempted this discovery althe head of armies, and each expeditionwas distinguished from the lastonly by the difference of the numberswhich 'had perished, and agreed alonein the disappointment which had uniformly,and without exception, followedthem all. Fame, riches, and honour,had been held out, for a series of ages, toevery individual of the myriads thoseprinces commanded, without havingproduced one man capable of gratifyingthe curiosity of his sovereign, or wipingoff the stain upon the enterprise andabilities of mankind, or adding thisdesideratum for the encouragement ofgeography. Though a mere privateBriton, I triumphed here in my ownmind over kings and their armies ; andevery comparison was leading nearerand nearer to the presumption, whenthe place itself where 1 stood, the objectof my vain glory, suggested what depressedmy short-lived triumphs. I wasbut a few minutes arrived at the sourceof the Nile, through numberless dangersand sufferings, the least of which wouldhave overwhelmed me, but for thecontinual goodness and protection ofProvidence ; I was, however, then buthalf through my journey, and all thosedangers which 1 had already passed,awaited me again on my return. 1 founda despondency gaining ground fast uponme, and blasting the crown of laurelsI had too rashly woven for myself."After returning to Gondar, our travellerfound much difficulty in obtainingpermission to proceed on his way homewards;it beingarule with the inhabitantsnever to allow a stranger to quit Abyssinia.A civil war breaking out in thecountry about the period of his intendeddeparture, he was compelled to remainin it till the December of the followingyear, and took part in one of theirbattles, in which his valiant conductwas such that the king presented himwith a rich suit of apparel, and a goldchain of immense value. At length,at the end of 1771, he set out fromGondar, and, in the February of thefollowing year, arrived at Senaar, wherehe remained two months, suffering underthe most inhospitable treatment,and deceived in his supplies of money,which compelled him to sell the goodchain he had been presented with. liethen proceeded by Chien, and Good,through the Nubian desert, and on the29th of November, reached Assouan, onthe Nile, after a most dreadful and dangerousjourney, in the course of whichhe lost all his camels and baggage, andtwice laid himself down in the expectationof death. Having procured, however,fresh camels, he returned to thedesert and recovered most part of hisbaggage, with which, on the 10th ofJanuary, he arrived at Cairo ; where,ingratiating himself with the bey, heobtained permission for English commandersto bring their vessels andmerchandize to Suez, as well as toJidda, an advantage no other Europeannation had before been able to acquire.In the beginning of March he arrivedat Alexandria, whence he sailed to Marseilles;where he landed about theend of the month, suffering under greatagony from a disease called the Guineaworm, which totally disabled him fromwalking, and had nearly proved fatalto him during his voyage. Notwithstanding,however, the perils he underwent,and the barbarities he witnessedin the course of his travels, and particularlyat Abyssinia, yet even that countryhe left with some regret, and would oftenrecal, with a feeling almost of tenderness,the kindnesses he had receivedthere, especially from the ras's wife,Ozoro Esther, between himself andwhom, a very affectionate intimacy hadexisted.After residing a few weeks in thesouth of France, he set out for Paris,in company with Buffon, to whom hecommunicated much valuable informationwhich that celebrated naturalist hasacknowledged in his advertisement tothe third volume of the History of Birds.His health being still unconfirmed, heleft the French capital in July, andmade a second tour into Italy, where heresided till the spring of 1774, when heagain returned to France, and thenceproceeded to England, which he reachedin June following, after an absence oftwelve years. Previously to leavingScotland, he had contracted an engagementwith a lady, whom, during histravels, he never forgot; and he wasso incensed, on his arrival at Rome, onhearing that she had married an Italianmarquess, that he insisted on fightingwith her hu^ba d, who, however, de jJAMES BRUCE.lined the challenge. After remainingsome months in London, he returnedto his mansion at Kinnaird, to regulatehis private affairs, which he foundgreatly disordered in consequence ofhis relations having supposed him dead,and taken possession of great part ofhis effects ; to prevent a recurrenceof which, he married the daughter ofThomas Duncan, Esq ,of Fingal, who,after bearing him three children, diedin the spring of 1785.In 1790, the account of his travels,which had long been looked for withanxiety, appeared in five quarto volumes,with plates, maps and charts.The extraordinary events and discoverieswhich they contained, occasionedmany to doubt the truth and accuracy ofBruce ; and some went so far as to assert,that he had never even been in Abyssinia.Recent travellers, however, andamong them Mr. Salt, one of his mosthostile sceptics, have confirmed thegreater part of his assertions relativeto that country, though many of themstill remain doubtful and unauthenticated.Such was the effect of the reportscirculated against his work, that,according to Dr. Clarke, a short timeafter its publication, several copies weresold in Dublin for waste paper. Being,however, translated into French, hisbook was widely circulated on the continent;and he had made arrangementsfor printing an octavo edition, when, onthe 26th of April, 1794, he fell down thestairs of his mansion at Kinnaird, whilein the act of handing a lady to dinner,and expired the following morning.The person of Mr. Bruce being nearlysix feet four inches in height, and ofgreat muscular strength, was well suitedto the enterprises he undertook and thedangers he encountered. Though hishair was of a dark red, his countenancehad a handsome cast; and though hepossessed great urbanity of manners,his mien was dignified, and almosthaughty. Me paid particular attentionto his dress, especially during his travels,the fatigue and danger of which neverprevented him from appearing in themost elegant costume of the differentcountries he visited. He was an excellenthorseman and swimmer, and anunerring marksman ; and, for lais skillin the latter capacity, was mistaken bythe barbarians, who were unacquaintedwith the use of fire-arms, for a magician.In addition to his numerousliterary accomplishments, he acquireda considerable knowledge of physic andsurgery, which he practised with greatsuccess in Africa and Abyssinia. He;sessed a mind prudent and vigorous,and a spirit untameable by danger ordisappointment, so that he was enabledfinally to ensure the success of his mostambitious projects. In Abyssinia hediscovered a plant very serviceable incases of dysentery ; and brought theseeds of it to England, where it isknown by the name of Bruce, havingbeen so called by Sir Joseph Banks,in honour of its finder. An island inthe Red Sea, on the coast of Abyssinia,also bears his name.The doubt which prevailed respectingthe truth of his narratives, was in agreat degree owing to the habit he hadof telling his own exploits, which heembellished with a colouring of romancecalculated to weaken the credulity ofhis hearers. His account of his travelsbecame the subject of much disputation; and Dr. Vincent, who defended it,allowed that Bruce was in some instancesmistaken, by aspiring to knowledgeand science which he had not sufficientlyexamined; though, he adds, "hiswork throughout bears internal marksof veracity, in all instances where hewas not deceived himself; an his observationswere the best which a man,furnished with such instruments, andstruggling for his life, could, obtain."He was often pompous and ostentatious,especially in his character of consul.The Bey of Cairo, having, after a longconversation, ordered him a purse ofsequins, he declined accepting any thingmore than a single orange, saying tothe bey, who requested to know hisreason, " I am an Englishman, andthe servant of the greatest king inEurope : it is not the custom of mycountry to receive pecuniary gratuitiesfrom foreign princes without the approbationof our sovereign." In alludingto his pictures of Palmyra and Balbec,which are in the king's library at Kew,he used to speak of them as " the mostmagnificent presents ever made in thatline by a subject to a sovereign." Ithas been said, however, that he receivedfor these drawings the sum of 2000.He was descended, on his mother's side,VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.from Robert Bruce, King of Scotland, acircumstance he was excessively proudof; and he once said to a friend, that"he was entitled to give his servantsroyal livery." He occupied much ofthe latter part of his life in the formationof a museum, in his own house,which contained many rare and valuablecuriosities.He expressed an utter contempt forall kinds of suspicion with regard tohis veracity, which he could never beprevailed on to take any pains to substantiate.When requested, by hisfriends, to alter or explain any thing,he would sternly repeat, " What I havewritten, I have written!" with whichwords he concluded the preface to his travels." Dining out, one day," says MajorHead, "eat the house of a friend, a gentlemanpresent observed, 'that it wasimpossible the natives of Abyssinia couldeat raw meat;' on which, Bruce withoutsaying a word, left the table, and shortlyreturned from the kitchen with a pieceof raw beef-steak, peppered and saltedin the Abyssinian fashion, and said tothe gentleman, ' Sir, you will eat that,or fight me;' the person addressed choseto do the former, when Bruce calmlyobserved, ' Now, sir, you will neveragain say it is impossible'" MajorHead also relates the following anecdote: " Single-speech Hamilton, whowas Bruce's first cousin, one eveningsaid to him, ' that to convince the worldof his power of drawing, he need onlydraw something then in as good a styleas those paintings which it had been saidwere done for him by his Italian artist'Gerard !' replied Bruce, very gravely,you made one fine speech, and thworld doubted its being your own composition; but, if you will stand up nowhere,and make another speech as good,we shall believe it to have been yourown.' "He used to teach his daughter, whowas scarcely . twelve years old, theproper mode of pronouncing the Abyssinianwords, " that he might leave,"as he said, " some one behind him whocould pronounce them correctly'* Herepeatedly said to her, with feelingshighly excited, " I shall not live, mychild, but you probably will, to see thetruth of all I have written thoroughlyconfirmed."EARL MACARTNEY.GEORGE MACARTNEY was bornIn Ireland, on the 14th of May, 1737.He received his education at TrinityCollege, Dublin, where he took thedegree of M. A. in 1759 ; after whichhe came to London, and entered himselfa student of the Middle Temple.Having, however, no intention of practisingat the bar, he proceeded to thecontinent; and, in the course of histravels, became acquainted with Voltaire,and other celebrated characters.In April, 1764, he was appointed,through the interest of Lord Holland,envoy extraordinary to the court ofRussia, and performed his diplomaticmission equally to the satisfaction ofthe courts of St. Petersburghh and St.James's. At the former, he receivedthe honour of knighthood, of the Polishorder of theWhite Eagle, and-his addressto the empress called forth the eulogy offox, who wrote to him, " I think yourspeech to the czarina one of the neatestthings of the kind I ever saw ; and 1can assure you, Burke admires it prodigiously."In February, 1768, hemarried 'Lady Jane Stuart, seconddaughter of Lord Bute ; and, in thesame year, through the influence of hiswife's family, he was returned memberfor Cockermouth, in the British, andfor Armagh, in the Irish parliament.In 1769, he was appointed secretary tothe lord-lieutenant of Ireland, and resignedthat post in 1772, in which yearhe was made a knight-companion ofthe Bath. Continuing to support ministersin parliament, he was, in 1775,appointed captain-general and governorof the Carried Islands, Grenada, theGrenadines, and Tobago ; and, in 1776,he was raised to the Irish peerage.The invasion of Grenada by theFrench, about three years after hisarrival, called forth his utmost energiesEARL MACARTNEY.in its defence ; but he was at lengthcompelled to yield to superior force ;and, after a gallant resistance, he wassent a prisoner to France. On hisreturn to England, in 1780, he sat inthe British parliament for Beeralston,and was shortly afterwards appointedto the presidency of Madras. On hisarrival, a misunderstanding taking placebetween himself and General Stuart,respecting the measures to be pursuedtowards Tippoo Said, he put the generalunder arrest, and afterwards pursuedsuch a line of conduct, as induced theEast India Company to offer him thesituation of governor-general of Bengal,which he, however, declined. On hisreturn to England, in 1786, he wasaddressed by General Stuart, in a mannerthat induced him to send him achallenge; and, in the duel which followed,his lordship was slightlywounded. About the same time, theEast India directors voted him a pensionof 1,500 a year, for the forbearanceand justness of his conduct atMadras, arid for his zeal, and " greatpecuniary moderation."In 1788, he took his seat in the Irishhouse of peers ; was made custos rotulorumfor the county of Antrim ; andadvanced to the command of a regimentof militia dragoons. In the beginningof 1792, he was appointed ambassadorto China, and shortly afterwards wassworn in a privy-counsellor, and raisedto the dignity of Viscount Derrick.Having arrived in the Indian Seas, hesailed round the south-east coast ofChina, a tract almost unknown toEuropean navigation, to Pekin, wherelie was introduced to the emperor, svograciously received the presents lie hadbrought, and entertained him withgreat magnificence and hospitality.The subject of our memoir conductedhimself with great prudence and addressin his diplomatic character ; and,though he was not able to obtain permissionfor the residence of an Englishambassador in China, he secured tothe British government many of theadvantages which it was the object ofthe embassy to attain. In return forthe homage he paid to the emperor,he procured an order that Chinesenoblemen, of the same rank as himself,should pay similar respect to a paintingof the British monarch.On the 19th of December, 1793 haentered Canton, where he was splendidlyentertained by the viceroy, andthen proceeded to Macao ; from whichport he sailed for Europe, and arrivedin England in September, 1794, inwhich year he was raised to the dignityof Earl Macartney. In June, 1795,he was sent to Italy, on a state matterof a delicate and confidential nature ;and, on his return, in 1796, he wasraised to ,the British, peerage, by thetitle of Baron Macartney, of Parkhurst,Sussex. In January, 1797, he wentout as governor and captain-general ofthe Cape of Good Hope, where liegained the esteem of all parties by hisjudicious conduct, which he, however,particularly displayed in the promptitudewith which he put an end to themutiny of the British fleet, lying inTable Bay. In the November of 1798,he was compelled, by ill health, to quitthe colony; and, for the same reason,on his arrival in England, declined toaccept the situation of president of theboard of controul. After six years ofsuffering from the gout, he died ofthat disease, on the 31st of March,1806.Few men, as public servants, haveacquitted themselves so honourably asdid this distinguished nobleman. Hisdischarge of his duties and the braveryof his conduct,. as governor of Grenada,deserve the highest praise ; and, fromhis government at Madras, he is saidto have returned with purer hands thaneven" Cicero of old did from his governmentof Cilicia. " I think," he says,writing to Lord Hillsborough, fromIndia, " I am now worth about 10,000more than when I arrived in India ;and I do assure you, that I mighteasily have been worth ten times thesum, if I pleased, without any reproachesbut those of my own conscience."At another time he writes,I have been twenty-two years in hismajesty's service, and my appointmentsnever, before that to India,equalled my necessary expenses. InRussia, I sustained my character leyinvolving myself in a debt of 6,000.When I resigned the embassy, I gaveup the plate-warrant, equipage-money,&c. which I might have retained, asmy predecessor, who never left England,kept, to the value of 10,000. IVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERSsave up the muster-mister's place inireland, which was settled at near2,000 per annum, and received a pensionwhich produced 1,000 per annumin England, which I sold to pay mydebts. At Grenada, I lost my service ofplate, and ail my property there, to avery great amount, at the storm of theHill; for which I never received the leastcompensation, yet I do not complain,nor am I discontented." His highlycultivated mind and literary acquirementsgained him the friendship of Dr.Johnson, Burke, Fox, and most of theeminent men of the day ; and thelatter, when at Oxford, did not disdainto be guided by his advice, in somemeasure, as to the authors best calculatedto improve the mind.In person, Lord Macartney wasabove the middle size, with a placidand agreeable countenance; and, whenhe first returned from his travels, wasconsidered the handsomest young manof his day. His manners were easy anddignified, and in his deportment anddress he was equally neat and engaging.As a parliamentary speaker,he was chiefly noted for the good-natureand firmness with which hemet the eloquence of the opposition inthe Irish house of commons, of whichhe was, for some time, considered theministerial leader. His works, A Treatiseon Russia ; An Account of Ireland,in 1773; Journal of an Embassy fromthe King of Great Britain to the Emperorof China ; and, Letters to Fox,entitle him to no mean place in therank of literary and political writers.MAJOR Houghton.MAJOR HOUGHTON was born inIreland, about the year 1740; andhaving entered the army, appears, in1779, to have acted as fort-major in theisland of Gore, under General Rooke.On his return to England, he married alady of fortune, an event, which, as hehad been previously in embarrassedcircumstances, caused such importunityon the part of his creditors, that hismarriage rather added to, than diminishedhis difficulties. In this situation,and prompted also by an enterprisingspirit, joined to a tolerable knowledgeof the character and language of theAfricans, he informed the African Associationof his willingness to undertakethe execution of a plan which he heardthey had formed, of penetrating to theNiger by the way of Gambia. His offerwas accepted ; and with instructions toascertain, if possible, the rise and terminationof the Niger, and to visit and Houssa, he left England onthe 16th of October, 1790. On the 10thof November he arrived at the entranceof the Gambia, and was kindly welcomedby the King of Barra, from whom hereceived a promise of protection andassistance. Having engaged an interpreter,he proceeded to Junkiconda,where he purchased a horse and fiveasses, with the intention of proceedingto Medina, the capital of Woolly. Previouslyto starting, his slight knowledgeof the Mending language enabling himto overhear a plan formed against hi*life, by the negro mistresses of thetraders, who feared injury to their commercefrom his intended expedition,he determined not to travel by tin-customaryroute, and thus arrived safeat Medina. His despatches from thisplace to the Association were lost, inconsequenceof the wreck of the vesselby which they were sent, but in aletter which reached Mrs. Houghton,he speaks highly of the people and theking, eulogizes the healthiness, beauty,and security of the country, and expresseshis earnest hope, that his wifewill hereafter accompany him to a placein which an income of ilO a year willsupport them in affluence." Nor didhe express himself in a less sanguinemanner, respecting the commercial advantageshe anticipated from a settlementat Medina.The brightness of his expectations,however, were soon clouded by anevent, which, for the time, totally disheartenedhim : " A fire," says theMAJOR HOUGH TON.writer oi' the Proceedings of the AfricanAssociation, 1790, " the progress ofwhich was accelerated by the bambooroofs of the buildings, consumed withsuch rapidity the house in which helived, and with it the greatest part ofMedina, that several of the articles ofmerchandize, to which he trusted forthe expenses of his journey, were destroyed;and, to add to his affliction,his faithless interpreter, who hadmade an ineffectual attempt on hisgoods, disappeared with his horse, andthree of his asses ; a trade gun whichhe had purchased on the river, soonafterwards burst in his hands, andwounded him in the face and arms ;and though the hospitable kindness ofthe people of the neighbouring townin Tarragona, was anxiously exertedtor his relief, yet the loss of his goods,and the consequent diminution of histravelling fund, were evils which nokindness could remove." In this statehe, on the 8th of May, 1791, set outbymoonlight, on foot, with his twoasses, which carried the wreck ofhis fortune, in company with a slavemerchant; and on the 13th, he crossedthe uninhabited frontier which separatesthe kingdoms of Woolly andBondou ; thus passing the former limitof European discovery. After traversingthe latter country, the populationof which he describes as a branch ofthat numerous tribe under the appellationof Follies, and of Arab original,he reached, on the banks of Faleme,the south-western boundary of thekingdom of Bambouk. The king ofthis nation, whose woolly hair andsable complexion, says our before-mentionedauthority, bespeak them ofthe negro race, having lately ceded tothe King of Bondou that part of histerritory in which Major Houghtonwas now remaining, our traveller madesuch presents to the victorious prince,as had, in similar cases, proem ed forhim a gracious reception. But althoughhis presents were detained, he was,himself, sternly repulsed, and desiredto repair to the frontier town fromwhence he came. This was accompaniedby an intimation that he shouldhear again from the king, and accordingly,on the next day, the king'sson, accompanied by an armed force,entered the dwelling of the major,and demanding a sight of his merchandize,did not depart until he hadseized upon such articles as had pleasedhis fancy.The slave merchant, who had accompaniedthe major to Faleme, havingpromised also to proceed with him toTimbuctoo, our traveller expressed hisdesire of setting out for that city,immediately. The merchant, however,not being in readiness to start, MajorHoughton determined on paying aprevious visit to Ferbanna, on theeastern side of the Serra Coles, and thecapital of Bambouk. He arrived thereaftera perilous journey ; his guidehaving mistaken his way, and forcedhim to pass the night on grounddeluged by the rainy season, just commencing,and under a sky " exhibitingthat continued blaze of lightning which,in these latitudes, often accompaniesthe tornado." On reaching the city, he,with difficulty recovered from a deliriousfever, which his sufferings hadcaused; but on his recovery, he wasreceived by the King of Bambouk, inamanner that made him forget allhis hardships. :He was on the pointof concluding <a negotiation with theking, to open a trade with the English,when it was interrupted by the celebrationof an annual festival of the peopleof Bambouk ; before the termination ofwhich, he had accepted the offer of anold merchant of . the city, to conducthim on horseback to Timbuctoo, andto attend him back to the Gambia.Previously .to his departure, the King ofBambouk presented him with a purseof gold; and, on the 24th of July, 1791,he closed his despatches with the Society,and started for Timbuctoo in goodhealth and spirits. Of his subsequentprogress, no certain account exists ; andthe only communication received fromhimself was in a note dated the 1st ofSeptember, to Dr. Ladle, on theGambia, in which he simply says :"Major Houghton's compliments* toDr. Ladle, is in good health on hi:- jway to Timbuctoo, robbed of all hisgoods by Feuds Bucer's son." The nameof the place from whence it was datedbeing written in pencil, was nearlyobliterated, but it appeared to beSinging.Intelligence of his death shortlyfollowed, but neither the place, nor theVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.time of his decease have ever been ascertainedwith precision, though the formeris supposed to be Barra. The nativesreported that he died a natural death,and added in their account " that hisremains lay under a tree in the wilderness."Whether or not he was murdered,is a matter of doubt; but it hasbeen ascertained that he was no favouritewith the natives in general;and that he had exposed himself totheir rapacity by carrying about withhim, contrary to the advice of hisfriends, coo large an assortment ofbale goods.The expedition of Mr. Houghtonwhich was followed up by Mungo Park,though it terminated fatally for himself,was not without its advantages to thecause in which he perished. " Hisjourney from the Gambia to the kingdomof Bambouk," says our previousauthority, " has enlarged the limits ofEuropean discovery; for the intermediatekingdom of Bondou was describedby geographers; and the informationhe has obtained from theKing of Bambouk, as well as from thenative merchants with whom he conversed,has not only determined thecourse, and shewn, in a great degree, theorigin of the Niger, but has furnishedthe name of the principal cities erectedon its banks." Major Houghton waspeculiarly fitted for the adventures inwhich he was engaged ; possessing, ashedid, a natural character of intrepidityimpervious to fear, and an easy flow ofconstitutional good humour, that eventhe roughest accidents of life had nopower to subdue. His widow, on thepetition of the African Association, waspresented, by the king, with a pensionof 30 per annum.CONSTANTINE JOHN PHIPPS, LORD Margrave.CONSTANTINE JOHN PHIPPS,eldest son of the first Lord Margrave,was born on the 30th of May, 1744;and, having entered the naval serviceearly in life, served, as a midshipman,on board the Dragon, at the attack ofMartini. On the 17th of March,1762, he was promoted to the rank oflieutenant ; on the 24th of November,1763, to that of commander; andon the 20th of June, 1765, he was madea post-captain, and appointed to theTerpsichore frigate. In 1767, he obtainedthe command of the Boreas, oftwenty-eight guns ; and being, in thefollowing year, chosen member of parliamentfor the city of Lincoln, soonbecame distinguished as a speaker. In1773, he was sent out on an expeditionto the North Pole, for the purpose ofmaking observations and discoveriesrelative to the existence of a north-eastpassage into the South Seas. Twovessels, the Racehorse and Carcass,were fitted out for the occasion ; to theformer of which Captain Phipps wascommissioned, and having set sail fromthe Nore, on the 4th of June, he madethe land of Spitzbergen on the 28th.;His hopes of success were soon put anend to; for, on the 31st of the followingmonth, both ships becoming suddenlywedged in the ice, and cut fromcommunication with the open sea, hiswhole efforts were directed toward thesafety of the crews, who appeared reducedto the extremity of perishingeither by cold or famine. This wasonly averted by the greatest exertionsof all concerned in the expedition, incutting through the ice, and by thesudden turning of the current from aneasterly to a westerly direction, whichcarried them, together with the ice,once more into the open sea. Theships being out of danger, CaptainPhipps made a few ineffectual attemptsto proceed northward ; after which, theseason being far advanced, he deemedit prudent to return to England,' wherehe arrived on the 24th of September.On the 13th of September, 1775,Captain Phipps became Lord Margrave,by the death of his father; and, in 1777,was elected representative in parliamentfor the town of Huntingdon. Onthe 4th of December, he was appointedone of the lords of the admiralty; anoffice which he held till the 30th ofMarch, 1782. Soon after the beginningLORD Margrave.of the dispute with the American colonies,he was employed in the Ardent,of sixty guns, in cruising:, with othervessels, in the Bay of Biscay ; and, notlong before the commencement of hostilitieswith France, was promoted tothe Courageux, of seventy-four guns.He served in this ship during the wholeof the war, except when his attendancewas required in parliament or at theboard of admiralty. He was warmlyengaged in the action with the Frenchfleet off Ushant, on the 27th of July,1778, and had nineteen men killed orwounded.During the years 1779 and 1780, hewas employed on the home station ;and, on the 4th of January following,being on a cruise, he captured theMinerva, of thirty-two guns and threehundred and sixteen men, which hadbeen previously taken from the English.He was next sent to make an attemptupon the fort of Flushing; butthe enemy being apprized of the factbefore an attack had been made, theenterprise was abandoned. In the followingspring, he accompanied Vice-admiralDarby, and, in 1782, went withLord Howe, to Gibraltar; where, in theencounter on the 20th of October, withthe combined fleet, off the straits, heledthe division of the commander-inchief, and had one midshipman killedand four seamen wounded. Soon afterthe return of the fleet, peace ensued,and the Courageux being paid off, hislordship did not accept of any furthernaval command.In 1784, he was returned to parliamentfor Newark-upon-Trent; in themonth of April, was appointed jointpaymaster-general of the forces; and,on the 18th of May, a commissioner formanaging the affairs of India. Theseoffices, as also that of a lord of tradeand foreign plantations, he held till1791. On the 16th of June, 1790, hewas created a peer of Great Britain, byhis former Irish title ; and he died onthe 10th of October, 1792. In consequenceof his death without issue, theEnglish title became extinct; but wasrenewed, in the person of his brother,in the year 1794. Few naval captainshave been fortunate enough to attractso much of the public notice as LordMargrave. He added, to a knowledge.of his profession, the abilities of a statesman; and he was at great pains toimprove his natural qualifications byindustrious application. In private life,he was a man of the highest benevolenceand integrity. It is recorded ofhim, that the tailor on board the Courageuxhaving been killed in an engagementwith the French fleet, hislordship, in compliance with a promisemade to the poor fellow in his dyingmoments, provided handsomely for hiswidow, .and became the protector ofhis children.SAMUEL Hearse.SAMUEL Hearse was born inLondon, in 1745, and, at the age ofeleven, embarked on board a vesselunder the command of Captain (afterwardsLord) Hood ; with whom he wasengaged in many successful victoriesagainst the French, and acquired theright to a considerable share of prize-money,which he requested might betransmitted to his mother, who " wouldknow better than himself how to disposeof it." At the termination of thewar, seeing little chance of his advancementin the king's navy, hequitted it, and entered the service ofthe Hudson's Bay Company, who soonfound him to be a most intelligent andenterprising auxiliary. In 1768, hemade a voyage to the head of the bay,for the purpose of improving the codfishery in that part; and, at the sametime, made a very useful survey of theadjoining coasts. In the followingyear, he was appointed to head an expedition,the principal objects of whichwere to ascertain the situation of theCopper Mine River, and the possibilityof a north-west passage. Accordingly,on the 6th of November, 1769, he setout, accompanied by four attendants ;when, after having crossed the SealRiver, and walked some time over theVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.barren grounds beyond it, the depth ofthe snow and scarcity of his provisionscompelled him to return, having proceededno farther than the sixty-fourthdegree of latitude.Undiscouraged by this failure, heimmediately made arrangements for asecond expedition ; and, in February,1770, resumed the route he had beforetaken, advancing slowly northward andwestward iu the pursuit of his object ;determined, rather than leave it unattained,to perish by the famine to whichhe was constantly exposed. " Often,"he says, " I fasted whole days andnights, twice upwards of three days,and once near seven days ; duringwhich I tasted not a mouthful of anything,except a few cranberries, water,scraps of old leather, and burnt bones."In July, while between the sixty-thirdand sixty-fourth degrees of latitude, hetook up his winter quarters among atribe of Indians, with whom he remainedtill about the llih of August,when a gust of wind blowing down anddestroying his quadrant, he was compelledto return to Prince of Wales'sFort, where he arrived on the 25th ofNovember, with the loss of his gun andseveral of his most useful effects, whichhad been stolen from him by some ofhis attendants.On the 7th of the following month,accompanied by an Indian chief, whopointed out a new route likely to leadto the discovery of the copper'mine, heset out a third time, in the hope ofascertaining its situation. After determiningthe latitude of a place calledCongecathawhachaga, he began, on the15th of July, 1771 his survey of theCopper Mine River; in the course ofwhich, he was more than once shockedat beholding the massacre of severalparties of Esquimaux, by the Indianswho accompanied him. After a journeyon foot of nearly one thousand threehundred miles, he reached the mouthof the river, which, from the quantityof whalebone and seal-skins seen byhim in the tents of the Esquimaux, heassumed must empty itself into theocean ; and that, consequently, he "hadreached the northern shore of NorthAmerica, and stood on the borders ofthe Hyperborean Sea'' Mr, Barrowhowever, in his Chronological Historyof Voyages into the Arctic Regions,denies the conclusions of learned uponthis point, and observes, " equally unsatisfactoryis his statement as to thelatitude of the Copper Mine River;"which, instead of 71 deg. 54 min., hecites the authorities of Dalrymple andother geographers to prove, could onlybe about sixty-nine degrees.On leaving the Copper Mine River,Hearne proceeded, in a state of greatagony from the soreness of his feet, asfar as Lake Athapusco, or the SlaveLake; from which, in February, 1772,he departed eastward, and, on the 30thof June, arrived at Prince of Wales'sFort, after an absence of eighteenmonths, and having endured, in thelatter part of his journey, the horrorsof a famine, which destroyed several ofhis attendants, and nearly proved fatalto himself. On his return, he receivedthe thanks of the Company and a handsomegratuity ; and, in 1774, he establishedin the interior of the country,Cumberland Factory. In 1775, he becamegovernor of the Prince of Wales'sFort ; seven years after which, it wasattacked and. taken by a French squadron,under the command of La Peruse,who seized all the papers he found, butrestored the manuscript of Hearne, oncondition of its being printed on his jarrival .in England. Alter rebuilding,and putting in a good state of defence,the fort, he continued to reside theretill 1787 ; in which year he returned toEngland, and prepared his journal forthe press, which appeared about threeyears after his death, which took placesome time in 1792. The work, containinga preface, in which he refutesthe charges of Dalrymple as to thecorrectness of his latitudes, has beentranslated into most 'of the Europeanlanguages; and besides throwing alight upon one of the most importantpoints in geography, shows its authorto have been a man of extraordinarycourage and perseverance, of profoundobservation, and of a benevolent andenlightened mind. He had also intendedto publish copies of a vocabularyof the language of the northern Indians,which he had completed in sixteenfolio pages ; but the original was, unfortunately,lost by a friend to whom hehad lent it.JOHN LED V A RP.JOHN LED YARD.JOHN Edward was born about1750, at Groton, in the United States,and after having received a good education,and passed some time among theIndians of America, for the purpose ofstudying their manners, came intoEurope about the year 1776, andmade the tour of the world with CaptainCook, as corporal of a troop of marines.On his return to England in 1780,he formed the design of penetratingfrom the north-western to the easterncoast of America; and, after some conversationon the subject with Sir JosephBanks, who furnished him with somemoney, which he expended in sea stores,with the intention of sailing to NootkaSound, he altered his mind, and determinedon travelling overland to Kams-charta, from whence the passage is veryshort to the opposite shore of America.Accordingly, towards the close of theyear 1786, he started with only ten guineasin his pocket, and on his arrivalat Stockholm, he attempted to traversethe gulf of Bothnia on the ice, butfinding the water unfrozen, when hecame to the middle, he returned toStockholm, and proceeding northward,walked to the arctic circle, and passinground the head of the gulf, descendedon its eastern side to St. Petersburg!,where he arrived in March, 1787, withoutslices and stockings, which he wasunable to purchase. In this state, however,he was treated with great attentionby the Portuguese ambassador,who often invited him to dinner, andprocured him an advance of twenty guineason a bill drawn on Sir JosephBanks, and finally obtained him permissionto accompany a convoy of provisionsto Yakutz, where he was recognisedand kindly received by CaptainBillings, whom he had known in Cook'svessel, and with whom he returned toIrkutsk.From hence he proceeded to Ocsa-kow, on the coast of the KamschatkanSea, whence, in the spring, he intendedto have passed over to that peninsula,and to have embarked on the easternside, in one of the Russian vesselstrading to America; but finding thenavigation obstructed, he returned toYakutz, to await the termination of thewinter. His intentions, however, weresuddenly frustrated by the arrival of anorder from the empress for his arrest,which took place in January, 1788,without any reason being assigned forsuch a proceeding. He was deprived ofhis papers, placed in a sledge, andunder the guard of two cossacks, conductedthrough the deserts of Siberiaand Tartary, to the frontiers of Poland,where he was left, covered with ragsand vermin, and prohibited from returningto Russia on pain of death.In this situation he set out for Koanigs-bergh, on arriving at which town, heobtained five guineas, by drawing abill in the same manner as before, w : thwhich sum he proceeded to England.On his arrival, he called on Sir JosephBanks, who proposed to him to undertakea voyage to Africa, to discover thesource of the river Niger, at the expenseof the society for making discoveries inthat part of the world ; an offer he acceptedwith avidity, and being askedwhen he would be ready to set out,he exclaimed, " To-morrow morning!"On the 30th of June, 1788, he embai kedfor Calais, passed through France toMarseilles, reached Alexandria on the5th of August, and on the 19th arrivedat Cairo, where he had almost completedthe preparations for his departureto Sear, when he was seized with abilious fever, and died in the latter endof the following October.Mr. Ledyard was a man of extraordinaryvigour, both of mind and body,and no record exists of a more bold andpersevering adventurer. In person hewas of the middle stature, strong andactive ; and in manners, though unpolished,pleasing and urbane. " Littleattentive," says his biographer " to deferenceof yank, he seemed to considerall men as his equals, and as such herespected them. His genius, thoughuncultivated and irregular, was originaland comprehensive. Ardent in hiswishes, yet calm in his deliberations;VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.daring in his purposes, but guarded inhis measures; impatient of controul,yet capable of strong endurance; adventurousbeyond the conception ofordinary men, yet wary and considerate,and attentive to all precautions ;he seemed to be formed by nature forachievements of hardihood and peril."He appears to have undergone muchsuffering during his Siberian tour, and,like Mr. Park, more than once owedhis life to the kindness of women. " Inwandering," he says, in his journal,over the plains of inhospitable Denmark,through honest Sweden, andfrozen Lapland, rude and churlishFinland, unprincipled Russia, and thewide-spread regions of the wanderingTartar ; if hungry, dry, cold, wet, orsick, the women have ever been friendlyto me, and uniformly so ; and to add tothis virtue, these actions have beenperformed in so free and kind amanner, that if I was dry, I drank thesweetest draught; andif hungry, I eatthe coarsest morsel with a doublerelish."He left some manuscripts behind him,which were printed in London a fewyears after his death, in a work calledMemoirs of the Society instituted forencouraging Discoveries in the Interiorof Africa. A work, entitled Voyagesde MM. Ledyard et Lucas, en Antique,suivis extracts autres voyages, wasalso printed at Paris in 1804. Mr. Ledyard,in his journal, evinces great powersof observation, and a sound judgmentand understanding. Some idea of hissufferings may be formed, in readingthe following extract: " I have known,"he writes, " both hunger and nakednessto the utmost extremity of humansuffering. I have known what it is tohave food given me as charity to a madman; and I have at times been obligedto shelter myself under the miseries ofthat character, to avoid a heavier calamity.My distresses have been greaterthan I have ever owned, or ever willown, to any man. Such evils are terribleto bear; but they never yet hadnewer to turn me from my purpose. Ifive, I will faithfully perform, in itsutmost extent, my engagements to theSociety ; and if I perish in the attempt,my honour will still be safe, for deathcancels all bonds."GEORGE FORSTER.GEORGE FORSTER, born sometimeabout the year 1750, went out asawriter, in the service of the East IndiaCompany, to Madras, whence, in 1782,he set out on his return to England, bywayof Persia and Russia. Embarkingon the Ganges, towards the latter endof June, he proceeded through RajasMongrel, and Patna, to Benares,where he spent three months in familiaritywith the Hindooss, and in endeavouringto discover the origin of theBrahmin theology. After making anexcursion to the fort of Biggighur, andassuming, for safety, a Georgian name,he proceeded through the Delhi countryto Najebabad, where he representedhimself as a Turkish merchant, andjoined a kafila going to Kashmere. Onthe 6th of March, he crossed the riverJumna; and, on the 20th, arrived at afrontier town of the Punjab, or FiveRivers, whence, after a rest of three days,he left the caravan ; and, in companywith his servant, and another Kash-marian, passed through the respectivearmies of two rajahs at war with eachother; and, about the middle of April,reached Jummoo. Leaving this wealthyand commercial city, he set out, on foot,towards Kashmere, which, after a fatiguingjourney of ten days, he approached,on the 26th. at a time, heobserves, " when the trees, the apple,the pear, the peach, the apricot, thecherry, and mulberry, bore a variegatedload of blossom. The clustersalso of the red and white rose," hecontinues, " with an infinite class offlowering shrubs, presented a view sogaily decked, that no extraordinarywarmth of imagination was required tofancy that I stood, at least, on a provinceof fairy land."Whilst residing at Kashmere, lie wasdeclared, by a Georgian, who noticedGEORGE FORSTER,the flatness of his head, to be a Christian,but threatening his detector withthe confiscation of an estate he foundhim to possess at Benares, in the eventof his discovering him, he escaped exposure,and, immediately afterwards,solicited his passport, and left the city.On the 10th of July, he crossed theIndus, about twenty miles above thetown of Attack, and, on the followingday, passed the Kabul river to Akorah ;whence, after a journey, in which hewas nearly discovering his true religion,and a few transient dangers, he proceededto Kabul, which he reached onthe 2nd of August. A few days afterhis arrival, he was attacked by a malignantfever, which appeared on his bodyin bright blue spots, and left himscarcely strength to move for some timeafter his recovery. Having hired oneside of a camel, where he was placedin a pannier, he set out for Kandahar ; inthe course of his journey whither, hewas much annoyed, by the insults andreviling of the whole kafila, in consequenceof his no longer wearing hisMohammedan disguise, which, consequently,on his arrival at Herat, hethought it prudent again to assume.Here he joined another kafila, aboutto proceed to Tursheez, and obtainedgreat respect the whole way, by representinghimself as a pilgrim going tov; sit the shrine of Meshed. On the28th of December, he left Tursheez,with a body of pilgrims proceeding toMeanders, whence he journeyed toMushedsir on the Caspian Sea; embarkedat that city for Baku, shavedoff his beard, which had grown to anenormous thickness, and sailed to Astrachan,where he arrived in the beginningof 1784, and, in the followingJuly, landed in England.Immediately on his arrival he beganto put his manuscripts in form for thepress, and in 1780, published, in London,his Sketches of the Mythology andManners of the Hindooss. Returningsome time after this to India, he published,at Calcutta, in 1790, the firstvolume of his travels, under the title ofA Journey from Bengal to England,and was just about to print a second,when he died at Nagpoor, whither hehad been sent on an embassy, sometimein the year 1792. In 1798, acomplete edition of his travels waspublished in two quarto volumes, butso negligently edited, that it has beendoubted whether the second volumewas compiled from the manuscripts ofForster, of whom no account was given,nor of the manner in which his paperswere obtained. The work, though notgaining the reputation it deserved, receivedgreat commendation from theliterary world, and was translated intoGerman by Mines, and into French,with the addition of notes and twomaps, by Angles, who has written ashort memoir of Forster, in the BiographieUniverselle.Few travels have been more adventurousand hazardous than those ofForster ; yet the gay and spirited mannerin which the account of them is written,gives no indication of any apprehensionon the part of the author, who seems tohave been as much at home in thedeserts of Khorasan, as on the banksof the Thames. Indeed, had he notpreserved, during his travels, the unreserved,unsuspicious, and familiarmanner which his disguise of a Mohammedanrendered necessary, he wouldneither have had so good an opportunityof seeing the manners and dispositionsof his infidel associates, nor have lived,perhaps, to relate them.GEORGE VANCOUVER.GEORGE VANCOUVER, born aboutthe year 1750, accompanied CaptainCook in his second voyage round theworld, and, or. his return, went out withhim, in the Discovery, to the North Pole,and arrived again in England in 1780.In the latter end of the last-mentionedyear, he was appointed a lieutenant ofthe ship Fame, part of Lord Rodney'sfleet, then on its way to the WestIndies, where he remained till 1789,being employed, during the last sixf>0VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.years, on the Jamaica station, in thesloop Europa. On his arrival in England,in 1790, he was made master andcommander of the Discovery; in whichship he was sent out to ascertain ifthere existed in North America, betweenthe thirtieth and sixtieth degreesof latitude, an interior sea, or any canalsof communication between the knowngulfs of the Atlantic and the GreatSea ; a point about which Cook andother navigators had been able to giveno satisfactory information.On the 17th of August, 1791, hereached the southern coast of New Holland,where he discovered King Georgethe Third's Sound ; and, after leavingDusky Bay, in New Zealand, ascertainedthe situation of some dangerousrocks and an inhabited island, giving tothe former the name of the Snares, andto the latter that of Oparo. On the24th of January, 1792, he set sail fromOtaheite; and in the following March,arrived at Owhyhee, where he wasvisited by the chiefs of the island. Hethen proceeded along the north coastof New Albion to De Fusca's Straits,Nootka, and Monterrey Bay. Here hepassed some days, and having receivedan important communication from theSpanish commandant relative to thecession of Monterrey, he forwardeda despatch to England, by CaptainBrighton, in the ship Daedalus, togetherwith his journal of discoveriesup to that time.In February, 1793, he sailed to theSandwich Islands, where he endeavouredto establish peace between thedifferent chiefs, arid compelled them toexecute two islanders, whom he discoveredto have been the murderers ofLieutenant Largest and other seamenof the Daedalus. In April, he sailedalong the American shore as far asCape Decision ; and, after coastingalong the western side of Queen Charlotte'sIslands to Nootka, proceeded tothe Spanish settlements of New California,and discovered, to the south ofMonterrey, a. double chain of mountains,and that the one nearest the seawas the least in height. In January,1794, in which year he was made a post-captain,he reached Owhyhee, whichwas, shortly after his arrival, ceded bythe King Taniaahmaeah to the King ofEngland. On leaving Owhyhee, hepassed Trinity Isles, and discovered anisland uninhabited and covered withsnow, which he called T schericow. Hethen proceeded up Cook's River, andafter minutely examining several bays,straits, and inlets, and discovering KingGeorge the Third's Archipelago, heterminated his operations in Port Conclusion,which he reached on the 22ndof August, where he made the followingremarks in his journal: " Theprincipal object which his majesty appearsto have had in view, in directingthe undertaking of this voyage, havingat length been completed, I trust theprecision with which the survey of,thecoast of North West America has beencarried into effect will remove everydoubt, and set aside every opinion of anorth-west passage, or any water communicationnavigable for shipping, existingbetween the North Pacific andthe interior of the American continent,within the limits of our researches."On the 6th of July, 1795, he arrived atSt. Helena, and observed that, havingmade the tour of the world by the east,he had gained twenty-four hours ; itbeing, according to his estimation,Monday, instead of Sunday, the 5th ofJuly, as in the island.He arrived in London in November,1795, and, in a state of declining healthfrom the effects ot his voyages, devotedhimself to the arrangement of hismanuscripts for publication until withina short time of his death, which occurredon the 10th of May, 1798. Inthe same year, his work, edited byhis brother, was printed at the expenseof government, entitled, A Voyage ofDiscovery to the North Pacific Oceanand round the World, in which theCoast of North West America has beencarefully examined and accurately surveyed,undertaken by his Majesty'scommand, and performed" in the Years1790, 1791, 1792, 1793, 1794, and 1795;and was, shortly after its appearance,translated into French, German, and,Swedish.The world is indebted to Vancouverfor ascertaining the precise knowledgeof the North West American coast, ofwhich he entered parts never beforedeemed accessible but to the smallestsea boats, and travelled in a canoenearly nine thousand miles among thelabyrinth of isles which border thatWILLIAM GEORGE BROWNE.part of the coast. His maps afford anexact description of the discoveries,which he determined with great precision.Zealous, and indefatigable inthe pursuit of his object, he was, at thesame time, benevolent and unassuming,and insisted on his companions sharingin the credit of his undertakings. In hisaccount he offers some curious notionsin reference to the various inhabitantsof the north-west coast, the Russianand Spanish colonies, and the isles ofthe Great Sea; which, by their frequentintercourse with Europeans, had sufferedmuch change in an interval ofthirty years. His narrative, in additionto the information it contains, is alsoreplete with interest.WILLIAM GEORGE BROWNE.WILLIAM GEORGE BROWNE,the son of a wine-merchant, was bornon Great Tower Hill, London, on the25th of July, 1768. After having beensome time under the tuition of Dr.U halley, the editor of Ben Jonson'sworks, he went to Oriel College, Oxford,where he studied, very frequently,from twelve to fifteen hours a day.Being left a moderate competence byhis father, he declined following anyprofession, and devoting himself to literatureand politics, republished somepolitical tracts, among which was partof Buchanan's De Jure Regni apudScots. Excited, however, by the fameof Mr. Bruce's travels, and of the firstdiscoveries made by the African Association,he determined to be among thelist of adventurers, and leaving Englandin 1791, arrived at Alexandria inEgypt on the 10th of January, 1792.Hence he made an excursion to Sita,the supposed site of the temple of JupiterAmmon, but returned in April toAlexandria, without having been ableto effect " the discovery of that celebratedfane." He next visited Aboukir,Hashed, Terane", Fue, and Kahira, " theonly mint for Egypt," and of whichcity he gives a most animated and interestingdescription. He then made avoyage down the Nile to Assouan, stoppingon his way thither to examine themagnificent ruins and temples ofge,blanding at Kourna, he was asked byone of the women, if he was not afraidof crocodiles ? On his replying in thenegative, she said, emphatically, " Wearecrocodiles ;" and proceeded to depicther own people as thieves and murderers."'1'hey are, indeed," says Mr.Browne, " a ferocious clan, and differin person from other Egyptians." Hepassed the winter in visiting LakeMceris and the pyramids, and in March,1793, having previously made an excursionto Mount Sinai and Suez, returnedto Kahira, and prepared for his journeyinto the interior of Africa. He was,however, unable to proceed beyond thekingdoms of Darfur and Bornou, whichcountries he was the first to makekrtown to Europeans. He remainednearly three years in the former province,during which he chiefly residedat El Father ; where he experienced avariety of dangers and disasters. Hedid not reach Egypt till 1796, and afterhaving passed a year in Syria, he returnedto England, and, in 1799, publishedhis Travels in Africa, Egypt, andSyria, from the year 1792 to 1798, inone quarto volume. " The work," saysour traveller's biographer, in the EncyclopaediaBritannica, " was highlyesteemed, and is classed, by MajorKennel, among the first performances .of the kind ; but from the abruptnessand dryness of the style, it never becamevery popular."In 1800, Mr Browne again left England,but returned, after having passedthree years in visiting Asia Minor,Greece, and Sicily, and spent his timein retirement and study until 1812. Inthis year he set out with the intentionof penetrating into central Asia; andwhilst at Constantinople, made himselfmaster of the Turkish language, andassumed the character and costume ofthat country, in order to facilitate hisprogress among the Asiatics. He hadproceeded on his journey to Persia, asfar as Oujon, whence, after an audienceVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS,with the king, he continued his journeyto the pass of Ira, where he stoppedto take refreshment at a caravansera.That over," says Sir R. K. Porter,ne remounted his horse," but " hadscarcely proceeded half a mile, whensuddenly two men on foot came up behindhim, one of whom, with a blowfrom a club, struck him senseless fromhis saddle." He was at the same momentseized and bound by several othervillains, whom, on his recovery, he sawplundering his baggage. The robbersnow told him he should die, but thatthey had not arrived at the spot wherethey intended to despatch him. At hisrequest, however, they spared the lifeof his servant, and even made the manapresent of his master's gun and pistols.They then carried him away into avalley on the opposite side of the Kiz-zilouzan, where his body was afterwardsfound, stripped of every garment.Mr. Browne was thinly shaped, andslightly above the middle size. Hiscountenance was grave and pensive,and with a t fondness for every thingeastern, he imbibed the reserved andsilent manners of the orientals, almostto a repulsive degree. Even with hisfriends he was taciturn and gloomy,until he had taken up his pipe, whenhe would relate, in the most animatedconversation, the account of his adventures.He was a strict adherer totruth ; of a generous and liberal disposition; and beneath a cold exterior cherishedan ardent desire to distinguishhimself by some memorable achievement,in pursuit of which he was readyto brave danger and death. Mr. Pinkertonsays of him, that " in courage,prudence, love of science, and intimateacquaintance with the eastern languagesand manners, he has never beenexceeded."EDWARD DANIEL CLARKE.THIS distinguished traveller and antiquarian,son of the Rev. Edward Clarke,was born at Wellington, in the countyof Sussex, on the 5th of June, 1769.Whilst very young, he gave proofs of aroving disposition, and of a fondnessfor natural history and chemistry, andmany amusing anecdotes are related ofhis conduct under the influence of thesepredilections. He received the rudimentsof education at an academy in thevillage of Lichfield; and, in 1779, wassent to the grammar school tunbridge,then under the superintendence of thecelebrated Vicessimus Knox. Here hemade but little classical progress, but hisfondness for books was evinced by hishabit of reading late at night, when allhis schoolfellows were asleep, for whichpurpose he spent great part of hispocket-money in purchasing candles.In 1786, shortly after which his fatherdied, he entered Jesus College, Cambridge,where he obtained the situationof chapel clerk, to the duties of whichoffice he was scrupulously attentive, butdistinguished himself in no branch ofuniversity learning, excepting that ofEnglish declamation. He devoted himself,however, with great assiduity tohis self-selected studies, which consistedof history, antiquity, and everyvariety of learning comprehended underthe term of belles lettres. Natural history,and particularly mineralogy, alsooccupied great part of his time ; andhe evinced a capacity for scientific pursuits,by the construction of a largeballoon at Oxford, and of an orrery athome, for the purpose of deliveringlectures to his sister, his only auditor.His sole means of support at thistime were derived from an income ofabout 96 per annum, the source ofwhich was a Rustat scholarship, andhis exhibition from Tunbridge. Thussituated, and having made a vow toaccept no pecuniary assistance from hismother, whose income was extremelysmall, he determined to exert himself,and accordingly, as the time approachedfor his examination, he, for the firsttime, entered upon a regular course ofstudy, and on proceeding to his degree,in January, 1790, he obtained themathematical honour of a junior" optime,EDWARD DANIEL CLARKE.which, though it did not confer a highdistinction, enabled the college, w withsome shew of justice, to elect himafterwards to a fellowship. In the followingApril, on the recommendation ofthe Bishop of Gloucester, he becametutor to the Honourable Henry Lufton,nephew of the Duke of Dorset, withwhom he made the tour of GreatBritain; and, on his return, publishedan account of it; but the work is byno means on a level with his subsequentperformances.In 1791, he went with his pupil toCalais ; and, in the following year, heobtained an engagement to accompanyLord Berwick on a tour to Germany,Switzerland, and Italy. " He wasnow," says Mr. St. John, one of hisbiographers, " in the position for whichnature had originally designed him.""An unbounded love of travel," arethe words of Clarke himself, " influencedme at a very early period of my life.It was conceived in infancy, and I shallcarry it with me to the grave. WhenI reflect upon the speculations of myyouth, I am at a loss to account forapassion, which, predominating overevery motive of interest, and every tieof affection, urges me to press forward,and to pursue inquiry, even in thebosoms of the ocean and the desert.Sometimes, in the dreams of fancy, Iam weak enough to imagine that themap of the world was painted in theawning of my cradle, and that mynurse chaunted the wanderings of pilgrimsin her legendary lullabies." Heremained abroad about two years, andon his return, became tutor, successively,to Sir Thomas Mostyn, and totwo sons of the present Marquess ofAnglesey. In 1798, having previouslytaken his degree of M. A., he resumedhis residence at Cambridge; and, inthe following year, set out with hispupil and friend, Mr. Cripps, on a tourthrough Denmark, Sweden, Lapland,Finland, Russia, Tartary, Circassia,Asia Minor, Syria, Palestine, Greece,and Turkey. Having arrived at thegulf of Bothnia, Clarke declared hewould not return until he should have"snuffed the polar air," and he accordinglyproceeded as far as Enontakis,in latitude 68 deg. 30 min. 30 sec.north ; beyond which, illness preventedhim from venturing.On the 26th of January, 1800, hearrived at Petersburg!, whence he continuedhis course to Moscow, andTaganrog on the sea of Azoff; and, onhis reaching Achmedshid, in the Crimea,he passed some time with his pupil inthe house of Professor Pallas, He nextvisited Constantinople, where he wasemployed in searching for, and examining,Greek medals; and, amongother curiosities of the Turkish capital,he contrived to enter the seraglio,where," he says, " no Frank had beforeset his foot." Hence he made anexcursion to the Road, at the prospectof beholding which, he had previouslysaid in a letter to a friend, " Tears ofjoy stream from my eyes while I write."Egypt and Syria next claimed his attention; and whilst near the lake of Gene-sarti,he took particular observationof the Druzes, whom he describes asthe most extraordinary people onearth," and whose custom of prostratingthemselves weekly before the moltencalf, he observes, " is exactly that worshipat which Moses was so incensed indescending from Mount Sinai."In 1801, he returned to Egypt, andwhilst in that country, a dispute arisingbetween the French and English generalsrespecting the literary treasurescollected by the former, he was deputedby General Hutchinson to point outthose most worthy of being conveyedto England, which country is indebtedto him, amongst other things, for theacquisition of die famous sarcophagus ofAlexander die Great. From Europehe proceeded to Greece, where his enthusiasmseems to have reached itshighest stretch. " It is necessary," heexclaims, " to forget all that has precededall the travels of my life all Iever imagined all ! ever saw ! Asia,Egypt, the Isles, Italy, the AlpsWhatever you will! Greece surpassesall! Stupendous in its ruins! awfulin its mountains, captivating in itsvales bewitching in its climate. Nothingever equalled it no pen candescribe it no pencil can portray it!"Our traveller returned to Cambridgein 1802, when, in consequence of hispresents to the university, of which theprincipal was a Grecian statue of Ceres,he was presented with the degree ofL.L.D. k does not appear at whattime he took orders, but in 1S06, inVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS,which year he married Angelica, daughterof Sir William Beauvais Rush,he succeeded to the college living ofCarlton. in Cambridgeshire ; and shortlyafterwards to the vicarage of All Saints,Cambridge, where he officiated withgreat popularity, and upon which he bestowedan altar-piece, after the Grecianmodel. In the year last-mentioned, hecommenced a course of lectures onmineralogy, the excellence of which inducedthe university, in 1808, to found aprofessorship for the encouragement ofthat branch of learning when he wasunanimously elected to the chair. Aboutthe same time he received 1,000from the curators of the BodleianLibrary, Oxford, for the manuscripts hehad collected during his travels, includingthe famous one known as thePatmos Plato, to which Professor Personassigned a very high antiquity. In1810, the first volume of his travelsappeared ; and was succeeded, at subsequentperiods, by five others. The publicationof them produced him a sum of6595 ; and by no means a more thanadequate one, when it is consideredthat the work occupied five thousandpages of quarto letter-press ; a task,under which, he says, " I should certainlyhave sunk, had I not been blessedwith'double the share of spirits whichcommonly belong to sedentary men."Yet amidst all this toil and multifariousemployment, he pursued the study ofchemistry both with zeal and success,as appears in one of his letters to afriend, in September, 1816, in which hesays, " I sacrificed the whole month ofAugust to chemistry. Oh, how I didwork! It was delightful play to ma;and I stuck to it, day and night. Atlast, having blown off both my eyebrowsand eye-lashes, and nearly blownout both my eyes, I ended with a bangthat shook all the houses round mylecture-room. The Cambridge paperhas told you the result of all thisalchemy, for I have actually decomposedthe earths, and attained themin a metallic form." The death ofthis accomplished traveller took placeat the residence of his father-in-law,on the 9th of March, 1822, and he wasburied on the 18th, in the chapel ofJesus College, Cambridge, with academicsolemnities.For ardent enterprise, energy of purpose,industry of research, aside extentand variety of observation, few travellersare to be compared with Dr. Clarke. Hisworks have, on this account, becomemore .popular than any other of a similarnature, though containing an accountof countries both before and sincevisited and described. They wouldcertainly bear abridgment; but itwould require a most skilful hand toselect from pages where few paragraphsappear worthy of rejection, if of curtailment.Although he expresses himselfwith enthusiasm, and many of his reflectionsare hastily and inconsideratelyformed, his style is chaste and clear,and he details" the most curious factswith a simplicity incompatible withexaggeration* In speaking of the secondvolume, Lord Byron says, in aletter to the author, " in tracing someof my old paths, adorned by you sobeautifully, I receive double delight.How much you have traversed ! I mustresume my seven-leagued boots, andjourney to Palestine, which your descriptionmortifies me not to have seen,more than ever."A peculiar feature in the character ofDr. Clarke is the rapidity with whichhe passed from one pursuit to another.I have lived to know," he says in aletter to Dr. Doyle, " that the greatsecret of human ' happiness is this:never suffer your energies to stagnate.The old adage," heads, " of ' too manyirons in the fire,' conveys an abominablelie. You cannot have too many ; poker,tongs, and all keep them all going."His ardour for knowledge," says hisbiographer, the Rev. Mr. Otter, " notunaptly called by his old tutor, literaryheroism, was one of the most zealous,most sustained, and most enduring principlesof action that ever animated ahuman breast." As a preacher, hisbiographer speaks of " the sublimityand excellence of his discourses," andsays that his ardour in the pursuit ofscience, was " softened by moral andsocial views." In private life he wasamiable and benevolent ; and, to conversationequally interesting and intelligent,joined the most kind and captivatingmanners. He was survived byfive sons and two daughters.In addition to his Travels, Dr. Clarkewas the author of Testimony of differentAuthors respecting the Colossal StatueMUNGO PARK.of Ceres; The Tomb of Alexander;Description of the Greek Marblesbrought from the Shores of the Euxine,Archipelago, arid Mediterranean ; besidessome letters and pamphlets, onsubjects relating to science and antiquity.MUNGO PARK.THIS ill-fated traveller, the son of afarmer, at Foulshiels, near Selkirk, wasborn there on the 10th of September,1771. He was educated at the grammarschool of Selkirk ; and, on accountof the studious and thoughtful turn ofhis mind, was at first destined for theScottish church ; but, in consequenceof his partiality for the medical profession,was apprenticed to a surgeonin the town, about 1786. In 1789, heentered the University of Edinburgh,where he remained for three sessions asamedical student; and, in his summervacations, pursued the study of botany,for which he had always evinced a partiality.Having completed his academicaleducation, he repaired to London ;and, through the influence of Sir JosephBanks, he was appointed assistantsurgeon to the Worcester East India-man.He sailed, in 1792, for the EastIndies ; and having visited Bencoolen,in the island of Sumatra, returned toEngland in the following year, andcommunicated to the Linnsean Societythe observations in botany and naturalhistory he had made, which were accordinglyprinted.In May, 17 ( J5, he was engaged in theservice of the Society for the Promotionof African Discoveries; and, on the22nd of May, set sail from Portsmouthin the Endeavour, an African trader.Previously to my starting," saysMr. Park, in his preface to the Accountof his Travels, " I had been informedthat a gentleman of the name of Houghtonhad already sailed to the Gambia,and that there was reason to apprehendhe had fallen a sacrifice to the climate,or perished in some contest with thenatives ; but this intelligence, insteadof deterring me from my purpose, animatedme to persist in the offer of myservices with the greater solicitude. Ihad a passionate desire to examine intothe productions of a country so littleknown, and to become experimentallyacquainted with the modes of life, andcharacter of the natives. If I shouldperish in my journey, I was willingthat my hopes and expectations shouldperish with me ; and if I should succeedin rendering the geography ofAfrica more familiar to my countrymen,I knew that I was in the hands of menof honour, who would not fail to bestowthat remuneration, which my successfulservices should appear to them tomerit. My instructions," he continues,were very plain and concise. I wasdirected, on my arrival in Africa, topass on to the river Niger, and to ascertainthe course, and, if possible, therise and termination of that river ; thatI should use my utmost exertions tovisit the principal towns or cities in itsneighbourhood, particularly Timbuctooand Houssa; and that I should be afterwardsat liberty to return to Europe,by the way of Gambia, or by suchother route as should seem to be mostadvisable."Mr. Park landed at Illifree, on the21st of June in the year last-mentioned;and proceeded, shortly afterwards, toPisan, on the river Gambia, wherehe remained till the following December,when he continued his course toBarra, the frontier town of the Mons.In his way thither, he was made prisonerby the king of that territory, anddetained from the 7th of March tillJuly, 1796, when he succeeded inescaping, after having endured innumerablehardships. He wandered inwretchedness for three weeks in theAfrican desert, and at last came insightof the river Niger, when he madethe discovery that it flowed from westto east, which was the grand object ofhis voyage. At length he arrived atEgo, the Capital of Barbara, whenthe king refused to see him, but furnishedhim with the means for proceedingon his journey. At Bondagewas confined nine days by a fever,VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.where he felt himself a burthen to hislandlord, on account of the scarcitythat was prevalent, which was so great,that mothers sold their children for ascanty supply of provision. At Amelia,his life was preserved by the benevolenceof a negro, in whose house heresided for more than seven months;at the termination of which, he set outwitha caravan of slaves towards theGambia, on the 17th of April, andreached the banks of the river on the4th of June, 1797. After some otherdifficulties, trifling in comparison withthose he had before endured, he sailedfrom Antigua, on the 24th of November,and arrived at Falmouth on the 22ndof the following month.His return to London was hailedwith triumph by his friends, and theAfrican Association allowed him topublish an account of his travels for hisown benefit. The interest excited bythe announcement of the work wasalmost universal ; and the manner inwhich it was executed, as well as thematter it contained, fully answered theexpectations that had been raised concerningit. The publication of it tookplace in 1799, but the favourable receptionit met with, was accompanied by asuspicion that the author had lent himselfas the tool of a party inimical to theabolition of the slave trade. Whatevermay have been his motives, there canbe no question of his inconsistency ; for,though in conversation he always spokewith abhorrence of a traffic in slaves, yet,in his travels, his arguments in supportof the system are the strongest thathave ever been adduced. It has, however,been said, in palliation of hisconduct with respect to this transaction,that being a young man, inexperiencedin literary composition, and in a greatmeasure dependent, as to the prospectsof his future life, on his intended publication,he was obliged, by policy, tosuccumb to the opinions of the friendwho assisted him in his work, Mr.Bryan Edwards, a West India planter,and a systematic advocate of the slavetrade.Mr. Park's work, however, was receivedwith avidity and applause ; twoimpressions were rapidly sold off; severalother editions have since beencalled for; and it continues, even at thepresent time, to be a popular andstandard book. In the summer of thelast year, Mr. Park returned to Scotland ;where, on the 2nd of August, he marriedMiss Anderson, the daughter of thegentleman to whom he had served hisapprenticeship, and resided for twoyears with his mother at Foulshiels. InOctober, 1801, he settled, as an apothecary,at Peebles ; but not content toremain in so obscure a capacity, he, inDecember, 1803, left Scotland, havinggladly accepted a proposal to undertakea second expedition to Africa. Aftersome delay, of which he took advantageto improve himself in the science ofastronomy, and to acquire some knowledgeof the Arabic language, a brevetcommission of captain in Africa wasgranted to him, and he at length setsail, in the Crescent transport, on the30th of January, 1805. He proceeded,without interruption, as far as Payee,a small town on the Gambia, where heremained, making preparations for hisexpedition, till the 27th of April.The very interesting journal of MungoPark, gives the full particulars of hislast mission to Africa. He encountereddifficulties at every stage; at Pisan,he was obliged to leave five hundredweightof rice, not having a sufficientnumber of asses to carry it ; and whenhe had proceeded some distance further,the caravan experienced an attackfrom bees, by which seven beasts werekilled or lost ; and the baggage wasnearly destroyed by a fire the men hadkindled to cook their provisions, fromwhich they had been driven. On the4th of July, the guide was nearly destroyedby a crocodile ; and, on the12th of August, Park was in dangerfrom three lions ; but he succeeded ingetting rid of them by firing his piece,and afterwards, when one of them returned,he drove it away by a loudwhistling.On arriving at the Niger, out ofthirty-four soldiers who had left theGambia, six only remained ; and outof four carpenters, there was but onewho survived. The rest of the menhad either died, or dropped away,unable to proceeds on the voyage; andall, with the exception of Park himself,were seriously affected by the diseaseof the climate. He, however, seemsto have consoled himself that he hadbeen able to proceed so far, and thatMUNGO PARK,over an extent of five hundred miles,he had preserved the most friendly understandingwith the natives. On the28th of October, he lost his brother-in-law,Mr. Anderson ; and " then,"he says, " I felt myself as if left asecond time lonely and friendless amidstthe .wilds of Africa." On the 16th ofNovember, he finished his journal,every thing being ready for his embarkationon an utterly hopeless enterprise.His voyage was to be undertakenon a vast and unknown river, inacrazy canoe built by his own hands,manned by a few negroes, and fourEuropean soldiers, one of whom was inastate of mental derangement. Bythe letters, however, which he wroteat this time to some of his friendsand his wife, in which he informs herof the death of Mr. Anderson, he seemsto have been full of hope, and talks ofreaching England before the arrivalof his letters.Nothing, however, was heard of himtill 1806, when reports of his death havingbeen received, permission was given bygovernment to ascertain their truth, andIsaac, his guide, was appointed to themission. The result of Isaac's expeditionwas the confirmation of Park'sdeath, which was ascertained fromAmadis Fatima, who had been of theparty that had gone down the Niger ;and, as circumstances have corroboratedhis account, his testimony cannotreasonably be doubted. It appears,from this evidence, that Mr. Park wasdrowned in jumping from his canoe, toescape an attack that had been commencedby the natives ; but those whoare unwilling to believe Fatima'sstory, presume that, at least, he perishedon his passage down the Niger.The character of Mungo Park waseminent for a spirit of enterprise, unshakenresolution, and calm fortitude,together with an exceedingly sanguinetemperament, which often blinded himto the difficulties of his situation. Heseems to have acted on the maxim,Passant quia posse viclentur ;''and, indeed, had this been an infallibletruth, there is nothing that would nothave been within his power to accomplish.In his journals, he showed acorrectness of judgment, and an adherenceto bare facts, seldom unitedwith an enthusiastic mind. He rarelyindulged in conjecture; though he veri'tured to give it as his opinion that theNiger could only terminate in the sea.In private life, lie was a good husbandand father, as well as a sincere friend,though he was slow in forming acquaintances,owing to an aversion togeneral society. His popularity nevermade him vain, but he always preservedhis original simplicity of manner.In conversation, he generally disappointedthose who expected to find itstriking and remarkable. His person,which was well proportioned, and sixfeet in height, was robust, and wellfitted for exertion and the enduranceof hardships, and his whole appearancewas extremely prepossessing.Mr. Park's journal of his last missionwas published in 1815, together with asketch of the author's life.NATHANIEL PEARCE.NATHANIEL PEARCE was bornat East Acton, Middlesex, on the 14thof February, 1779. At an early age,he was sent to an academy at Thirst,in Yorkshire, where he remained sixyears; during which time, he says inhis autobiography, " I was given to allmanner of wild tricks, for which I wascontinually punished severely, till I gotso hardened that, at last, I did notmind a flogging for a pocketful ofapples or a jackdaw's nest." He, subsequently,passed five months at aschool at his native place ; after leavingwhich, he was bound apprentice to acarpenter, in London, but shortly afterwardsran away, and offered his servicesto the master of a merchant brig, saying,when his father urged him to return,that he would tie a shot to hisVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.neck and jump overboard sooner thango back.After having made a voyage to Petersburg,he visited his home) and, atthe request of his father, became boundto a leather seller; from whom, however,he eloped, in a few weeks, toDeptford, where he entered himself, asasailor, on board the Alert. On the10th of May, 1794, his vessel, while onits way to Newfoundland, being capturedby the French, he was conductedtonnes, whence, after three ineffectualattempts, he, at length, succeeded inescaping; and was put on board theBellerophon. On the arrival of thatship at Portsmouth, he deserted., and,having changed his name to Clark,worked his passage, in a coal brig, toSouth Shields; proceeded thence toLondon, and, shortly after, set out, inthe Thames East Indiamen, on a voyageto China. On his way thither, whilestopping off Amboyna, he, in companywith two others, swam ashore at night,and, falling in with a party of Malays,made them intoxicated with arrack ;for which, on returning to the vessel,he received twenty-four lashes ; andsubsequently, at Canton, underwent thesame punishment, on a discovery of anattempt he had made to desert.On reaching the Cape of Good Hope,in his passage homewards, he went onboardthe Sceptre, and declared himselfa deserter, which compelled thecaptain of that vessel to detain him,and carry him to Bombay, where heagain deserted, and a third time receivedcorporal punishment. In 1798,while at anchor in a bay near the Isleof France, the Sceptre was shipwrecked,and himself and forty others were theonly survivors out of a crew of fourhundred. He was now taken on boardthe Adamant, in which he sailed toMadras, Trincomalee, and Bombay ;where, having wounded a sepoy, inattempting to pass the hospital gateswithout leave, he was put in prison ;from which, with his usual good fortune,he escaped. Having changed hisname to Francis Dilvaro, he went onboardthe Antelope, in which he sailedto Mangalore ; whence he proceeded,with Lord Valentia, to the Red Sea;and on his arrival at Mocha, swam onshore from the ship at night, gave himselfup to the dole, and turned Mahometan.He, however, soon grew"tired of his situation, and on meetingwith Mr. Coffin, who had just arrivedat Mona, in the Panther, he said, " hewould give worlds to gateway, beggingMr. Coffin to use all the means in hispower to get him removed from hisforlorn and miserable condition."Having, at length, contrived to escape,he sailed to Massa, whence he waspermitted to accompany Mr. Salt andCaptain Rutland in their expedition toAbyssinia.On his arrival at Tigre, he expresseda desire to remain there ; and havingobtained from the ras a promise of protectionduring his stay, and a presentof some land, he built himself a houseat Chelicut, married a Greek girl,and commenced studying the variousAbyssinian languages ; of which heacquired a speedy knowledge, and wassubsequently enabled to ?ct as Mr.Salt's interpreter on many importantoccasions. During the early part of hisresidence at Chelicut, he continued toenjoy the favour of the ras, who, however,at length, began to treat him withsuspicion and coldness, which lastedtill 1807, when the latter being attackedby his enemies, Pearce, running throughthe flame's of the ras's palace, awakenedhim and saved his life. In consequenceof a subsequent quarrel, he left Antalo,where he then resided ; and, aftercrossing the lofty mountains of Same,arrived at Inchetkaub, where he wasattacked with ophthalmia, and, duringhis confinement, robbed of almost thewhole of bis effects. On his recovery,hearing that the Ras of Tigrfi was aboutto be attacked by the Ras Gojee, hehastened back to the assistance of theformer, who, on seeing him return,exclaimed, with tears in his eyes, to hisattendant?, " Look at that man ; hecame to me a stranger, about five yearsago, and not being satisfied with mytreatment, left me in great anger; butnow that I arn deserted by some ofmy friend?, and pressed upon by myenemies, he is come back to fight bymy side." .In the battles which followed hisreconciliation with the ras, who, alludingto Pearce, would often cry out in themidst of them, " Stop that madman,"he distinguished himself by his daring:and courage, and contributed greatly toNATHANIEL P E A H C E .the victories with which they terminated.In 1809, he proceeded withthe ras to Adowa, and subsequently toChelicut, and remained, in perfectfriendship with him, till 1814, whenthe ras, on the arrival of a patriarchalCopt, or abuna, whom he had sent forfrom Egypt, ordered Pearce to give uphis house and garden to him, andthreatened violence if he refused. " Onseeing my house surrounded," saysPearce, " I immediately ordered myservants to dig my grave on the floor,close to the couch I then lay on, andplace a piece of new while 'cloth formy mugganaz, the only coffin of anAbyssinian. While this was doing, Iwell loaded every gun and pistol I hadin the house, and laid them on eachside of me." He, however, at the requestof his wife, ultimately consentedto give up his house, and made hispeace with the abuna; who, notwithstanding,did all in his power to preventthe distribution of some bibles in theCoptic language, which Pearce hadrecently received from the Bible Societyin London.About this time, he sent to theLiterary Society, at Bombay, his FirstRemarks on Abyssinia, which wereprinted in the twelfth volume of itsmemoirs, and appeared, subsequently,in the New Monthly Magazine. In181G, the ras dying at Chelicut, andthat place being sacked and plundered,Pearce, after narrowly escaping assassination,resolved to leave Abyssinia forever,ami join Mr. Salt, then 'consul, atCairo, where, after many frightful andalmost fatal adventures, he arrived inFebruary, 1819. Here he materiallyassisted Mr. Salt in the duties of theconsulship, and also prepared his journalfor publication ; besides which, he was,at the same time, engaged in translatingfor the Reverend Mr. Jowett, the principalpart of the New Testament intothe Tigre language. In 1820, he embarkedfor England ; on his waywhither he died, at Alexandria, in thebeginning of the following June.Pearce appears to have been a braveand generous man ; and notwithstandingthe frequency of his desertions atsea, often hazarded his life by hisfidelity to the friends he met with inthe wild and barbarous countries wherehe had so long resided. He possessed,in an extraordinary degree, the spiritof enterprise; and the observations containedin his journal, which he left toMr. Salt, have thrown considerablelight upon the modern history of Abyssinia,and the moral and civil state ofitg inhabitants. In a letter to Mr.Salt, he wrote an account of his life,and, from the following sentence, seemsto admit the criminality of some portionof it : " Scandalous as it is," he observes," the truth of it will shame thedevil."MATTHEW FLINDERS.MATTHEW FLINDERS was bornsome time about the year 1780, at bennington,in Lincolnshire. At an earlyage he developed capacities and inclinationfor a marine life, and, in 1795,went as a volunteer to Port Jacksonwith Captain Hunter, who was sent outto take possession of, and to establish acolony in. Botany Bay. Immediatelyon his arrival, he meditated an expeditionof discovery down the river George,and having constructed a small boat,he set out, accompanied only by Bass,the surgeon of Captain Hunter's vessel,and a cabin boy, against the remonstrancesof his friends, who vainly endeavouredto dissuade him from whatthey termed, " so romantic a project."It was, however, successful ; he ascertainedmany points of the coast notbefore known, particularly the situationof Western Port, after having made amap of which, he was furnished witha sloop, by the governor of the colony,to enable him still further to pursuehis discoveries. In the course of thisvoyage he landed at many places unvisitedbefore, giving to three thenames of Cape Barren, Hudson's Isles,and Herdsman's Cove ; but the mostVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS,important discovery was that of a strait,which proved " the existence of awide opening between Van Dieman'sLand and New South Wales," and towhich he gave the name of his friendBass, who had first entered it in awhale boat. In a subsequent expeditionof six weeks' duration, he madefurther discoveries, to which he gaveappropriate names, and on his returnto England in 1800, the charts he hadmade were published, and government,shortly after, gave him the commandof a ship, to complete the investigationof the coasts of Terra Australis.In 1801, and two following years, heexplored the southern and eastern coastsof New Holland, and towards the north,Torres' Strait, and the gulf of Carpentaria.The first part of his voyage,between Spithead and Port Jackson,occupied seventeen months, in whichtime he had completed great part of theinvestigation of the Australian coast.The principal points he discovered andnamed were, Mount Manypeak, LuckyBay, Thistle's Cove, Goose Island,Fowler's Bay, Cape Radstock, LandgraveIsles, Investigator's Group, AvoidBay, Cape Catastrophe, so called fromthe loss, by a sudden rush of the tide,of eight of his^crew; Memory Cove,where he cause a sheet of copper tobe fixed on a post, with an inscriptioncontaining an account of this event;Gambier's Isles, and many others, sincewell known to, and further exploredby, subsequent navigators.In July, 1802, he left Port Jackson,and proceeded on a voyage of examinationalong the east coast to SandyCape, after leaving which he discoveredPort Curtis, whence he proceeded toHarvey's Isles, and found a new passage,unseen by Captain Cook, intoshoal water way, to which he gave thename of Port Bowen. In Novemberhe entered the gulf of Carpentaria,and, in the following month, sailedto Cape Vanderlin, which he found tobe one of a group of islands, instead ofa great projection from the main land,as represented in the old Dutch chart."In June, he re-entered Port Jackson,having lost many of his crew by diseasesand accidents ; and his ship being pronouncednot fit for further service, hewas obliged to remain inactive tillAugust, when he sailed out from SidneyCove in a vessel called the Porpoise.Being, however, wrecked upon a reefbank, on the spot where it is supposedDe la Peruse was lost, he wascompelled to put back to Port Jacksonin a boat, whence he returned in aschooner to examine the reef, respectingwhich he has made some very usefulobservations.In December, 1803, he entered PortLouis in the Mauritius, in a ship calledthe Cumberland, when, in consequenceof the war between France and England,and his having no passport for thevessel he then commanded, his paperswere seized, and he was put in prison.In the Mauritius he remained six years ;and during the time he was allowed toremain on parole, he made several excursionsinto the interior of the country.At length, in June, 1810, his paperswere restored, and, after having sufferedmuch rigorous treatment, he waspermitted to depart for England, wherehe arrived in the latter part of October.Though his health had been greatlyinjured by his confinement, he immediately,on his arrival at home, devotedhimself to writing an account of hisdiscoveries, and to the completion ofthe maps which accompany them.They were published in 1814, in twovolumes quarto, in the August of whichyear his death took place, a few daysafter he had corrected the last page ofhis work.The publication, and the atlas accompanyingit, have ranked Flindersamong the number of the first seamenand hydrographers of his age. Healso published a Memoir on the Useof the Barometer in ascertaining theproximity of the shore ; an Essay, insertedin the Philosophical Transactions,and a Letter to the Members ofthe Society of Emulation of the Isle ofFrance, on the reef wreck bank, andon the fate of De la Peruse, insertedin the " Annales des Voyages."HENRY SALT.HENRY SALT.HENRY SALT was born some timeabout the year 1780, at Lichfield, inStaffordshire, at the grammar school ofwhich city he received his education.His talent for drawing recommendedhim to the notice of Lord Valentia,whom he accompanied, in 1802, to theEast Indies, and subsequently to Greece,Egypt, and Abyssinia, to the emperor ofwhich country he was employed tocarry presents from the British sovereign,which mission he executed in1809-10.In the course of his travels, of whichhe published an account, with plates ofhis own drawings, he visited the Mozambiquesettlements, Mocha, Massa,Jidda, Ambakanko, where one of hisattendants was murdered, Logo Sere-mai,Mugga, Chelicut, and Gondar,where he presented the king's gifts tothe Emperor of Abyssinia, who wasalmost frantic with joy at receivingthem, and, in return, ordered prayersto be offered up weekly for the healthof the sovereign of Great Britain. Thepresents consisted of satins, jewellery,British muslins, a painted glass window,a picture of the Virgin Mary, and amarble table, on beholding which thenatives broke out into exclamations ofWonderful ! wonderful !"Mr. Salt relates that, though he foundMr. Bruce's statements generally correct,he proved many to be palpablyfalse, particularly the latter's assertionof the continuance of the wind in theRed Sea for six months in the samedirection, either one way or the other ;Mr. Salt declaring that, "in the northernpart it blows nine months down,and in the southern nine months up,while in the centre of the sea the windsare extremely variable." He also mentionsa conversation he had with SofterEsther, who denied that Bruce spokeeither the Tigre or Amharic language ;that he was compelled to make use of aninterpreter; that he was never actuallyengaged in war, though he was presentat one battle; and that Ras Michael,from whom he is said to have receiveda gold chain of one hundred and eightylinks, never made him any presentwhatever. Mr. Salt also mentions thefact of Bruce having been attended byone Bolugani, on his journey to theNile, of whom Bruce never once spokein the account of his travels, though theformer materially assisted him in hisresearches. Near Fulham, our travellerdiscovered the Option stone, describedby Pliny as " an opaque sort of glass,and reflecting images like mirrors, whenplaced against a wall."After Mr. Salt's return to England,when he was made F. R. S., he obtained,through the patronage of Lord Valentia,the situation of consul-general in Egypt,where he died, after ten years' service,much lamented and respected. Thecircumstances which preceded his deathare melancholy and interesting. Previouslyto setting out for the Nile, as alast hope of restoring his health, heoccupied himself in sealing up and destroyingseveral of his manuscripts andpapers, making such observations,during his operations, as shewed himto be fully sensible of his approachingdeath. During the burning of his manuscripts,the preservation of which noremonstrances could prevail on him toallow, he observed, " If I were a youngman, they might procure me notoriety,but that sort of notoriety can do thedying no good ; and, were I desirous ofbeing better talked of after death thanI have been living, there are otherpapers I might be more desirous ofgiving to the public. These letters," headded, taking up a packet, " are partof my correspondence with Belzoni;and they would exhibit the secret ofthat jealousy which induced him, whilecarrying on his researches at my expense,to load me with imputationswhich, in health, I had neither the inclinationnor leisure to refute; andnow, in sickness, have still less. Burnthem with the rest ; my remembranceof the quarrel shall be buried withtheir ashes." Seeing the physiciandisplay some reluctance in committingtl em to the flames, he snatched themfrom him, and threw them into theVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.grate, exclaiming, " Doctor, you wouldnot have done for Brutus's freedman ;you have forced an author to be hisown executioner."On reaching the Nile, to the astonishmentof the physicians, his healthand spirits returned to such a degree,that they began to entertain hopes ofhis recovery, which, however, almostimmediately abated on his arrival atDessus, where his illness graduallyincreased, and, at the end of threeweeks, he refused to attend to the prescriptionsof his doctors, observing toone of them, " It is in vain to seek toalter my opinion; your kindness nowis more valuable to me than the skill oftwenty doctors." He then orderedevery one to leave the apartment, exceptthe person thus addressed, whomhe desired to take down his last directions,during the dictation of which hewept profusely, and spoke repeatedly ofhis absent child, exclaiming " Will noone talk of her!" After receiving thevisit of a missionary clergyman, andpassing some time in prayer, and religiousconversation, he sank into a stateof delirium and delusion, which possessedhim to such a degree, that, on theThursday night preceding his death, hestarted from his bed, and, tottering to thecouch of his physician, seized him by thebeard, exclaiming " Doctor ! Doctor!this is no time for sleeping !" and, onthe latter inquiring why he had risen,he replied, " To show you the powerthat is left the superhuman power thathas enabled me to conquer death I amnow saved I am well." It was collectedfrom his expressions, that he hadfancied himself to be pursuing his ownfuneral, till he had at last overtaken hiscorpse, which he imagined to be in theapartment he had just left, and the keyof which, on being brought to him, hekissed repeatedly. The next night, thesame horrible scene occurred; he wasfound struggling with one of his attendantson the floor, who had heardhim fall, and, conceiving him to bedead, was pressing his thumbs upon hiseyelids. On being raised by his physician,he exclaimed, in a sepulchralvoice, "Oh! Doctor, this is Frankenstein!" and a few hours afterwards heexpired without further utterance. Hisdeath took place on the 30th of October,1828, and his funeral was the mostsplendid that had been witnessed formany years in Alexandria.In addition to the work already mentioned,he published one entitled, AnEssay on Dr. Young's Phonetic Systemof Hieroglyphics; with additional discoveries,by which it may be applied todecipher the names of the ancient kingsof Egypt and Ethiopia.JOHN BAPTIST Belong.JOHN BAPTIST BELZONI wasborn, about 1780, at Padua, in Italy,and passed the greater part of his youthat Rome, where he was preparing himselfto become a monk, when, he observes,"the sudden entry of the Frenchinto that city, altered the course of myeducation, and being destined to travel,I have been a wanderer ever since." In1S03, he visited England, and married;when, having but scanty means of subsistence,he went to Scotland and Ireland,and exhibited, at various theatres,a series of experiments in hydraulics, ascience to which he had devoted much ofhis time in Italy. Finding, however,that he received but little profit fromthese exhibitions, he determined on apublic display of his strength, whichhe put forth in feats that astonished andattracted crowded audiences whereverhe appeared. Though, at that time, veryyoung, he was six feet seven inches inheight; and such was his elephantinepower, that he could walk across thestage with no less than two-and-twentypersons attached by straps to differentparts of his body, In 1812, he exhibitedat Lisbon and at Madrid ; andsailed afterwards to Malta, whence, heset out for Cairo, for the purpose ofmaking a machine for raising waterout of the Nile to water the bashaw'sgardens. Whilst on his way to thepalace, he received so severe a blowon the leg, that he was confined toJOHN BAPTIST BELZONI.giMhis bed thirty days before he couldbe introduced to the bashaw ; whomerely observed, on being told of Belzoni'swound, " that such accidentscould not be avoided where there weretroops."Having concluded an agreement tomake a machine which should enableone ox to raise as much water as wasdrawn previously by four, he, after muchdifficulty and obstruction on the part ofthose whose cattle were employed in thegardens, completed his work, and demonstratedwith great success, a practicalexperiment of its power. Theopposition, however, of the Arabs to theue of his machine, which they hadmaterially damaged, induced Belzoni torelinquish his projects concerning it, andto undertake, at the suggestion of Mr.Salt and Mr. Burckhardt, an expeditionto Thebes, for the purpose of removingan enormous bust, to which they hadeven the name of " the youngermemnon."It has been erroneously stated,"says Belzoni, " that I was regularlyemployed by Mr. Salt for the purpose ofbringing the colossal bust from Thebesto Alexandria. 1 positively deny thatI was ever engaged by him in anyshape whatever, either by words orwriting, as I have proofs of the casebeing on the contrary. When I ascendedthe Nile, the first and secondtime, I had no other idea in my mind,but that I was making researches forantiquities which were to be placed in4;he British Museum ; and it is naturallyto be supposed, that I would not havemade these excursions, had I beenaware that all I found was for thebenefit of a gentleman whom I neverhad the pleasure to see before in mylife."Our traveller, accompanied by hiswife, left Boolak on the 30th of June,1815, examined the ruins of ancientAntique, and arrived at Ashoumain,where he met with the first remains ofEgyptian architecture, which he supposesto have been of a date anteriorto those of Thebes. Having arrivedat Shout, he requested of the bashaw'sphysician, permission to employ theworkmen necessary to remove thehead of Memnon j but not receivinga favourable reply, he, by means ofhis interpreter, procured the requisiteassistance, and after viewing the tombsof Issus, proceeded to Thebes. Onhis way thither, he visited, near Dendera,the Temple of Tenura, beforewhich he remained seated some time,lost in admiration, at " the singularityof its preservation," and the extent andmagnificence of its structure. On hisreturn to Dendera, the inhabitants insistedon detaining his interpreter,imagining him to be the same whohad joined the French army, someyears ago, and declaring " that he hadbeen long enough among Christiandogs." With much difficulty he procuredthe man's release, and in a fewdays, came in. sight of the ruins ofThebes, of which he thus writes:The most sublime ideas that can beformed from the most magnificentspecimens of our present architecture,would give a very incorrect picture ofthese ruins : for such is the difference,not only in magnitude, but in form,proportion, and construction, that eventhe pencil can convey but a faint ideaof the whole. It appeared to me likeentering a city of giants, who, after along conflict, were all destroyed, leavingthe ruins of their various temples as theonly proofs of their former existence."After pausing with wonder before thetwo colossal figures in the plain, heproceeded to examine the bust, whichit was the object of his expedition toremove. " 1 found it," he observes,near the remains of its body and chair,with its face upwards, and apparentlysmiling on me, at the thought of beingtaken to England." Finding the distanceto his boat on the Nile too far togo every night, he built a small hut withthe stones of the Memnonium, in which,with Mrs. Belzoni, he determined toremain till he had accomplished theremoval of the bust. This, after muchdifficulty and persuasion, he procuredsufficient men to raise from the ground ;which," says Belzoni, "so astonishedthe Arabs, that, though it was the effectof their own efforts, they said it wasthe devil that did it." On the 5th ofAugust, he reached, with the head, thatpart of the land which he was afraid ofbeing prevented from crossing by therising of the water; and on the 12th,he observes. " Thank God, the youngMemnon arrived on the bank of theNile." Next day he entered a cave inVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.the mountains of Gornou, for the purposeof taking out a sarcophagus, whichhad been mentioned to him by Mr.Drouetti ; and which, after having morethan once lost his way in the differentavenues that led to it, he was preparingto remove, when the Arabs, who wereworking for him, were put into prisonby the cache of Ferments, who replied,on his complaining of such conduct,that the sarcophagus had been soldto the French consul, and that no oneelse should have it."Whilst waiting the arrival of a boatfrom Cairo, he made an excursion tothe Temple of Ybsambul, the entranceto which, though choked up by an accumulationof sand to the height otthirty-six feet, he determined on usinghis utmost endeavours to open. Previously,however, to commencing hisoperations, he made a voyage to thesecond cataract of the Nile ; in referenceto which, he says, " though someauthors assert that the Nile has nowaves, but runs quite smooth, I canassure the reader, that we were this daytossed about as if by a gale at sea."On his return to Ybsambul, he immediatelybegan to clear the entrance tothe temple, and after five days' labour,had succeeded in uncovering twentyfeet of sand, when, finding that he hadneither sufficient time nor money forthe completion of his undertaking, heobtained a promise from the cache tokeep the place untouched till his return,and descended the Nile to Debate,where he took possession of an obelisk,twenty-two feet long, " in the name ofhis Britannic majesty's consul in Cairo."On arriving at Thebes, he met twoFrenchmen, who made some remarkson the head of Memnon to deter himfrom taking it away, and was told bytheir dragoman, that if he perseveredin his researches, " he should have histhroat cut, by order of two personages."After hiring a boat to convey the bustto Cairo, he proceeded to Carnal,where he employed twenty men todig away the sand from a large temple,from the ruins of which he transportedto Luxor six sphinxes and a whitestatue of Jupiter Ammon, which hesubsequently conveyed to England, andare now in the British Museum, Themerit of the discoveries he made herewas attempted to be taken from him byCount de Forbid, who published an account,extracted from Belzoni's letters.After examining the extensive ruinsof Medina Abo, which he describesas " best worthy of the attention of thetraveller of any on the west of Thebes,"and 'penetrating into several tombswhich he discovered in the valley ofBeban el Malook, Belzoni returned toLuxor, with the intention of putting onboardthe colossal head, which, aftermany impediments, he effected on the17th of November. On the 15th ofDecember he arrived at Cairo, with thebust and other antiquities; the latter ofwhich he left, according to the instructionsof Mr. Salt, at the consulate, andwith the former, departed for Alexandria,where he saw it safely depositedin a British transport. Having accomplishedthis important object, he proceededto resume his operations at theTemple of Ybsambul, stopping on hisway thither at Thebes, where he foundthe agents of Mr. Drouetti in the act ofcompleting many of the excavations hehad begun, and removing several statuesand sphinxes from the ruins. With somedifficulty our traveller procured sufficientworkmen to pursue his excavationsat Carnak, where he discovered a magnificenttemple, dedicated to the greatGod of the creation ; on entering which,he says, " my mind was impressed withideas of such solemnity, that for sometimeI was unconscious whether I wereon terrestrial ground, or in some otherplanet."From Carnak he again proceeded toGornou, a tract of rocks two miles inlength, and formerly the burial place ofthe city of Thebes ; of which subterraneanabodes, the most wonderful in theworld, he thus speaks: " In someplaces there is not more than a vacancyof a foot left, which you must contriveto pass through in a creeping posture,like a snail, on pointed and keen stones,that cut like glass. Once I was conductedfrom such a place, to anotherresembling it, through a passage ofabout two feet in length, and no widerthan a body could be forced through.It was choked with mummies, and Icould not pass without putting my facein contact xvith that of some decayedEgyptian ; but as the passage inclineddownwards, my own weight helped meon ; however, I could not avoid beingJOHN BAPTIST BELZONI,covered with bones, legs, arms, andheads rolling from above ; at the sametime, my throat and nose were chokedwith dust; but, though fortunately, I amdestitute of the sense of smelling, I couldtaste that the mummies were rather unpleasantto swallow." After collectingseveral papyri from the shrouds of themummies, and purchasing a pair ofbeautiful brazen vessels, which he describesas " two of the finest articles ofmetallic composition that ever were tobe found in Egypt," he returned toCarnak, where, among other discoveries,he dug up, and sent to England, acolossal head of red granite, still largerthan that of the younger Memnon.About this time he was joined by CaptainsMangles and Kirby, with whoseassistance he succeeded in entering thetemple at Ybsambul, which he foundto be one hundred and seventeen feetwide, and eighty-six feet high, and " enrichedwith beautiful intaglios, painting,colossal figures, &c." His next and mostimportant discovery was in the valleyof Beban el Malook, of a vast and magnificenttomb, described by him as " anew and perfect monument of Egyptianantiquity, which can be recordedas superior to any other in point ofgrandeur, style, and preservation."peaking of the day on which he discoveredthis tomb, he says, " I may callit one of the best, perhaps, of my life ;it led me to the fortunate spot whichhas paid me for all the trouble I tookin my researches."On his return to Cairo, he was muchannoyed to hear that the credit of thediscoveries he had made, had beenusurped by others, who had beenannounced, by name, in the Englishjournals, as the means of bringing tolight the principal temples which he hadso long been employed in excavating.Accordingly he resolved, in future, tokeep his operations as secret as possible;and with this view, went alone,to inspect the second great pyramid ofGhizeh, " that enormous mass which,for so many ages, has baffled the conjecturesof ancient and modern writers ;"and which, whether one solid mass, orpossessing any cavity in the interior,no one had yet been able to ascertain.Notwithstanding, however, the difficultyof the attempt, and the uncertainty ofsuccess, he resolved on making aneffort to discover an entrance to thetomb ; a project for the undertaking ofwhich, 20,000 had been considered byMr. Drouetti necessary, while Belzonidetermined to begin it with the smallsum of 200, all he, at that moment,possessed. Having procured the requisitenumber of workmen, he commencedhis operations, and after a month'slabour, to his inexpressible delight,found a passage, and penetrated intothe centre of the pyramid. So unsuccessful,however, were his attempts atfirst, that those who came to see him atwork, ridiculed the idea of his proceedingfurther, and the Count de Forbid,says Belzoni, " requested, in a kind ofsarcastic manner, when I had succeededin opening the pyramid, (which, nodoubt, he supposed I never would,)that I would send him the plan of it."Accordingly Belzoni sent it to the count,who taking advantage of the opportunity,on his arrival in Paris, caused it tobe published in the newspapers, that hehimself had penetrated into the pyramid,and produced the plan as an evidence.Having sent some account of hisproceedings to England, Belzoni madea third journey to Thebes, whence, aftertaking models in wax of the principaltombs, he set out on a voyage to theRed Sea, principally with the intentionof visiting Harriet Minor, said to be thesite of ancient Terence. Accordingly,on the 16th of September, 1818, accompaniedby Mr. Beechey, he embarkedat Gornou, and sailing down the Nile,was witness to one of the most calamitousinundations ever known ; the riverhaving risen three feet and a half higherthan usual, and swept away severalvillages, and some hundreds of theirinhabitants. On leaving the Nile, heproceeded across the desert to the RedSea, the coast of which he found tohave been accurately described byBruce ; and, at Cape el Golden, hediscovered the ruins of a town, which,from his own observations, and thoseof the geographer, Danville, he concludedto be the site of ancient Be-venice,of which city he had found notraces at Harriet Minor. Returning toGornou, he was met by Mr. Salt andMr. Banks, the latter of whom, havingbeen authorized to take possession ofthe obelisk found by Belzoni in theisland of Philos, engaged him to removef>6VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.it down the Nile to Alexandria, preparatoryto its embarkation for England.On reaching the spot where it lay, he,after some opposition on the part of Mr.Drouetti, who claimed the obelisk ashis own, commenced his operations forputting it on board, which he effectedafteia delay of three days, caused byits slipping from the machine into thewater. Having arrived at Luxor, helanded for a few days to visit the excavationshe had commenced at Carnak,when, on his returning to the boat, hewas suddenly attacked by a large partyof Arabs, headed by two Europeansand Mr. Drouetti, who endeavoured toforce Belzoni to deliver up theobelisk.He was, however, firm in his refusal;but, on reaching the Nile, hastened ontoAlexandria, determined to quit Egyptfor ever, as he observes, " I could notlive any longer in a country where Ihad become the object of revenge, to aset of people who could take the basestmeans to accomplish their purpose."Previously, however, to sailing for Europe,he made an excursion to Faiume,the ruins of ancient Arsinoe, LakeMorris, and the Oasis of Ammon, nearZaboo, where he received a severe injuryon his side, in consequence of hiscamel falling with him down a hardrock of twenty feet in depth. In thisjourney he tried to discover some remainsof the famous Temple of theLabyrinth; visited the noted fountainat El Caesar, mentioned by Herodotus ;and, after passing some time at variousplaces, in search of antiquities, returnedto Alexandria, whence, in the middle ofSeptember, 1819, he says, " thank God,we embarked for Europe; not that 1disliked the country I was in, for, onthe contrary, I have reason to be grateful;nor do 1 complain of the Turks orArabs in general, but of some Europeanswho are in that country, whoseconduct and mode of thinking are adisgrace to human nature." On hisarrival in Italy, he visited his friendsand family at Padua ; to which cityne presented two lion-headed statuesof granite, which were placed, by histownsmen, in the Palazzo della Justitia,who also struck a medal in honourof him. In 1820, he reached England;;md, in the same year, published anAccount of his Travels and Discoveries,a work which excited the interest andattention of the whole literary and scientificworld. In 1821, he exhibited,at the Egyptian Hall, in Piccadilly, arepresentation of two of the principalchambers of a tomb he had discoveredin Beban el Malook, besides a model ofthe entire excavation ; with several specimensof Egyptian sculpture, casescontaining idols, mummies, &c., and asuperb manuscript of papyrus.In the latter end of 1822, Belzoni leftEngland for Gibraltar, with the intentionof travelling through Africa to Senaar,by way of limbuctoo, a city which, uptothat time, had never been visited byan European. On reaching Fez, he wasintroduced to the Emperor of Morocco,who, at first, gave him permission tojoin a caravan about to set out for ;but, subsequently, remandedhim back to Tangier, whence our travellerproceeded to Gibraltar, determinednot to relinquish his project,although he had already fruitlesslyexpended .1,000 in his attempt toaccomplish it. Having arrived at Madeira,he continued his course to Tenetand Cape Coast Castle, where heresolved on taking a northerly direction,from the kingdom of Benim direct toHoussa, towards the east of whichcountry he had some hope of falling inwith the Niger. On the 30th of October,he reached the bar of Benim River ;and, after making an excursion to thecapital of Barra, about one hundredand twenty miles distant from Bobee,returned to the latter place, and set out,in company with Mr. Houtson, anEnglish merchant, on his expedition toTimbuctoo. Whilst stepping into thecanoe in which he departed, he evincedmuch agitation ; and when the crew ofthe vessel he had just left, gave himthree cheers, it was with trepidation,though with earnestness, that he exclaimed" God bless you, my finefellows ! and send you a happy sight ofyour country and friends !" He reachedGato on the 20th of November, 1823;and, on the 26th, departed for Benim,where he arrived in the evening of thesame day, suffering slightly from anattack of diarrhoea, of which he hadcomplained in the course of his journey.After some negotiation with the King ofBenim, to whom Mr. Belzoni was representedas an Indian, or Malay, onhis return home, it was arranged thatJOHN BAPTIST B I, Z O N I .he should be escorted as far as Houssa,whither, however, his diarrhoea, nowchanged to a dysentery, prevented himfrom preparing to proceed. On the2nd of December, his illness increasedto such an alarming degree, that he expresseda conviction of his approachingdeath, and begged Mr. Houtson to sendhim back to Gato, in the faint hope thatthe sea breezes might revive him. Onhis arrival there, though much fatigued,he appeared better for the voyage j resumedhis usual cheerfulness, ate anddrank, slightly, of bread and tea, andfell into a sound sleep, from which,however, he awoke with a dizziness inthe head, and coldness in the extremities; shortly after he lost the power ofspeech, and, in the afternoon of the 3rdof December, tranquilly expired.Previously to his dc auth, he had givendirections respecting his papers, and hadattempted to write to his wife ; but, hisstrength failing him, he requested Mr.Houtson " to bear witness that he diedin the fullest and most affectionate remembranceof her; and begged thatgentleman would write to her, and sendher the amethyst ring which he thenwore." He was buried on the day followinghis death, the funeral servicebeing delivered by Mr. Houtson, whoplaced over his grave the following inscription:" Here lie the remains ofG. Belzoni, Esq., who was attackedwith a dysentery at Benim, on the26th of November, on his way to ToussaintTimbuctoo, and died at Gato, onthe 3rd of December, 1823. The gentlemanwho placed this inscription overthe grave of this intrepid and enterprisingtraveller, hopes that every European,visiting this spot, will cause theground to be cleared, and the fencearound it put in repair, if necessary."The character of Belzoni was of an in- jtrepid and enterprising nature ; and hepossessed, in the midst of the many difffaculties and dangers which surroundedhim, a spirit of perseverance that wouldhave turned most men from their object.His person was as well favoured as itwas tall and powerful ; and his countenancewas handsome and intelligent.He was accompanied by his wife in allhis expeditions, except the last; shewas, for a woman, as prodigious in sizeand strength as Belzoni was for a man ;and proved of much assistance to himin the course of his researches in Egypt.The travels of Belzoni are the most'in-interesting ever recorded ; the account ofthem is written by himself, choosing, ashesays in his preface, to tell in his ownway his events and discoveries; beingmore solicitous about the accuracy ofhis facts than the manner of relatingthem. His narrative, however, althoughoccasionally confused, from an over-earnestnessto convey to the reader'smind an adequate idea of the difficultiesencountered by the author, is written inapure and unostentatious style, and inatone which occasionally approaches tothe poetic and sublime. Nor is hisdiction inelegant; and, notwithstandinghis want of a classical education, hedisplays, in his work, a very extensiveknowledge of ancient history, and particularlyof the classical traditions respectingThebes and other celebratedplaces of Egypt.SIR THOMAS STAMFORD RAFFLES.SIR THOMAS STAMFORD Raffleswas born at sea, in the shipAnne, off Port Moran, Jamaica, in thebeginning of July, 1781. At the age offourteen, after having been at schoolonly two years, he entered as a clerk inthe India House, where he assiduouslyperformed his official duties, and devotedthe whole of his leisure hours tothe improvement of his education.This he accomplished with such success,that, in 1805, his abilities induced SirHugh Inglis to send him out, as assist-undersecretaryto the new government ofPull Penang, now Prince of Wales'sIsland. In his voyage thither, he madehimself master of the Malay language;and on his arrival at Penang, was notlong in acquiring a complete knowledgeof the history, government, and localinterests of the neighbouring states andislands. In 1806, he was appointedVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.principal secretary to the colony, andregistrar of the new court of judicature; but ill health shortly afterwardsobliged him to proceed to Malacca, wherehe arrived just in time to prevent, by hisremonstrances, the destruction of the fortificationsand public buildings, for whichorders had been issued, for the purposeof deterring Europeans from establishingthemselves there ; and of transferringthe trade and population to Penang.Having returned to this settlement, hecommenced a correspondence with thelate Dr. Leyden, by whom some of hisletters being shown to the governor-general,Lord Into, that noblemanformed so favourable an opinion of Mr.Raffles' abilities that he intimated a wishto place in his hands the government ofthe Moluccas. This led to an interviewwith his lordship at Calcutta, when thesubject of our memoir, in consequenceof the recent junction of Holland withFrance, recommended the reduction ofthe island of Java, that Napoleon mightbe deprived of using the Dutch easternpossessions to the prejudice of Britishcommerce. His advice being followed,he was immediately sent to Malacca, asagent of the governor-general; instructedto prepare the necessary arrangements; and, with a view of ascertainingtheir feelings towards the Dutch,to open communications with the severalnative chiefs of the archipelago.The expedition against Java was entirelyplanned by him, and ended inthe reduction of that island, in 1811;when Lord Into, in his despatch announcingits capture, added, "its, government,though partly pledged toanother, he could not conscientiouslywithhold from him who had won it;and, therefore," said he, " as an acknowledgmentof the services he hadrendered, and in consideration of hispeculiar fitness for the office," he hadperformed a noble act of justice, byimmediately appointing Mr. Raffles tothe situation, under the title of lieutof Java and its dependenciesThe duties of this appointmenthe fulfilled with a zeal, ability,and humanity, which cannot be toohighly commended. He quelled allintestine commotions; reformed therevenue and the courts of justice;established a magistracy ; institutedtrial by jury and laws for the abolitionof slavery ; appointed the prosecutionof statistical surveys by means of acommittee ; established a benevolentsociety and schools for the natives;revived the Batavia society for encouragingscientific researches andmaking collections of natural history ;and most wisely raised the condition ofthe great agricultural population by theabolition of-forced deliveries of produce,conferring the privilege of bringing itto a free and open market.In 1816, he quitted Java for England;and, on his departure, was presentedwith a magnificent service of plate bythe Europeans, who testified their regretat parting with him in the mostaffecting manner. On his arrival inEngland, he availed himself of theextensive information he had collectedon the subject, in writing a History ofJava, which appeared in 1817, in twoquarto volumes, with plates ; a work ofthe highest value, and full of the mostinteresting matter. In the same year,he received the honour of knighthood,and the appointment to the residencyof Bencoolen, in Sumatra, and the of Fort Marlborough; previously to his departure forwhich, he was presented, by the PrincessCharlotte, with a valuable ring, asamark of her particular esteem. InMarch, 1818, he reached Bencoolen,where he found the aspect of affairsmost unpromising and uninviting.What with natural impediments,"he writes to a friend, " bad government,and the awful visitations of Providencein repeated earthquakes, wehave scarcely a dwelling in which tolay our heads, or wherewithal to satisfythe cravings of nature. The roads areimpassable; the highways in the townoverrun with grass ; the government-houseis a den of ravenous dogs andpolecats ; and the principal local revenuesof government," he afterwardsobserves, "both at Bencoolen and thedifferent residencies, are in the gamingand cock-fighting farms ; the continuanceof which," he adds, " would bedestructive of good government, socialorder, and the morals of the people."He devoted himself with indefatigableassiduity to the removal of these andother abuses ; and here, as at Java,strained every nerve for the abolitionof slavery, which he had the pleasureSIR THOMAS STAMFORD RAFFLES.of seeing effected throughout the settlement.He also, by his judicious andconciliating conduct, secured the goodwishes and co-operation of the navechiefs, and organized a plan for theeducation of the population of thecountry, who looked upon him astheir friend and benefactor. Duringhis stay in the settlement, he madeextensive collections in natural history,and discovered one of the largest andmost extraordinary flowers in the wholecreation, now known as the RafflesArnold. At this time, in consequenceof the British having given up everythingto the Dutch, Sir Stamford quittedBencoolen for Calcutta, and proposedto the Marquess of Hastings the proprietyof fixing on some central stationfor the benefit of British commerce,within the archipelago, so as to securea free and uninterrupted passage withChina, through the straits of Malacca.His sagacious spirit had already fixedon a position, in which, he says, heneither wanted people nor territory."All he asked, it is added, was " permissionto anchor a line-of-battle shipat the mouth either of the straits ofMalacca or Sunday, and the trade ofEngland would be secured, and themonopoly of the Dutch broken." Hewas, accordingly, appointed agent tothe governor-general; and, in February,1819, sailed to Singapore, thetaking of which island under Britishprotection, was an event equally advantageousfor the inhabitants and forthe commercial interests of this country.The progress of my new settlement,"he observes, in a letter to his relative,the Rev. Dr. Raffles, " is, in every way,most satisfactory; and it would gladdenyour heart to witness the activity andcheerfulness which prevail throughout :every day," he adds, " brings us newsettlers, and Singapore has already becomea great emporium." Nor was healone contented with giving the settlerscommercial importance ; but he alsoestablished scientific and literary institutionsfor their intellectual and moralimprovement.In 1824, the impaired state of ibishealth rendering it advisable for himto return to England, he embarkedon board the ship Fame, which takingfire on the evening of his departure,he escaped with nothing but hislife, the preservation of which wasdeeply embittered by the loss of hisproperty to the amount of nearly.30,000. But what he felt as thegreatest disaster was the destruction ofhis collections in natural history, hispapers and drawings, which altogetheroccupied one hundred and twenty cases.This misfortune, of which he gives avery interesting account in a letter toa friend, since printed, he bore withsingular fortitude; and, after havingpublicly returned thanks to God, hecommenced making another collectionin natural history, a portion of whichnow forms the most valuable part ofthe Zoological Museum, in BretonStreet, London ; an institution which,in conjunction with the late Sir humphreyDavy, he is said to have plannedand established. He arrived in Englandin the autumn of the last-mentionedyear ; but his return to his nativecountry proved of little service to hishealth, and he died in July, 1826, onthe day previously to the completion ofhis forty-fifth year.The life of Sir Thomas StamfordRaffles appears to have been one undeviatingcourse of solicitude and exertionfor the amelioration of his fellow-creatures,and for the promotion of hiscountry's interests. The extent of hisknowledge was equal to the excellenceof his intentions ; possessing, as he did,all the talents of a great, and all thevirtues of a good man. " No individual,"says a writer in the QuarterlyReview, " before or since his time, haspossessed so extensive a knowledge ofthe commerce, resources, laws, language,and customs of the varied populationof the great eastern archipelago, andmore particularly of the two magnificentislands of Java and Sumatra asdid Sir Stamford Raffles." The samewriter compares him to Bishop Hebe rboth in acquirements and disposition ;and, indeed, few men have so wellmerited the appellation of a Christianas the subject of our memoir.In all the domestic relations of life,his conduct was most affectionate andexemplary; and to his family he wasthe object of the most devoted attachmentand respect. " He entered," saysLady Raffles, in her very interestingmemoir of her husband's life, " withthe most child-like simplicity into oc-voyagersAND TRAVELLERS.occupations and pleasures which manywould consider beneath their notice.A mountain scene would bring tearsinto his eyes ; a flower would call fortha burst of favourite poetry; and it was,perhaps, peculiar to himself to be ableto remark, on his last return to England,that he had never seen a fired a gun."Sir Thomas was twice married; and,in addition to his History of Java, leftbehind him a memoir of Singapore,in manuscript, besides an edition ofFinlayson's Mission to Siam, withMemoirs of the Author ; and Dr.Leyden's Malay Annals, with an Introduction.JAMES SILK BUCKINGHAM.JAMES SILK BUCKINGHAM wasborn in Truro, in the county of Cornwall,about 1784 ; and, after havingmade a voyage at an early age, in thecourse of which he was carried a prisonerto Spain, he returned to his nativetown, and was bound apprentice to aprinter. He carried on business forsome time as a bookseller and stationer;but, desirous of a more exciting employment,he subsequently took thecommand of a trading vessel, in whichhe performed several voyages to theWest Indies, the two Americas, andthe Mediterranean Sea, in the jointcharacter of seaman and merchant.He continued to carry on an extensiveintercourse with India for several years,during which time he was frequentlyintrusted, by the merchants and nativeprinces, with the transacting of importantnegotiations.In 1813, he proceeded to Malta, withthe intention of settling there ; but theplague driving him to Smyrna, hethence continued his course to Alexandria,in Egypt, and was employedby the pacha, in tracing a set of Arrow-smith'scharts, in the Arabic character.He subsequently proposed re-opening,for his Egyptian majesty, the ancientcanal which had connected the RedSea with the Mediterranean ; but wasprevented carrying his design into effectby the pacha being called to join in thewar against the Wahabees. He thenproceeded to Cairo, and ascended theNile into Nubia, beyond the cataracts ;and afterwards, in crossing the desertof Kosseir, he was attacked by a partyof the pacha's mutinous soldiers, andstripped, plundered, and left entirelynaked, sixty miles from any habitation,food, or water. Returning, however,in safety, to Cairo, he traversed theisthmus of Suez ; explored all the surroundingcountry; and, habited as anEgyptian, speaking the language, andmixing freely with the people, he visitedevery part of Lower Egypt and theDelta.About this time, he made an unsuccessfuljourney to Bombay, at the instanceof a British merchant in Egypt,for the purpose of endeavouring toopen the trade with India by meansof the Red Sea; the merchants at Bombayrequiring securities not to be easilyobtained. His account of this expedition,which he performed by way ofMecca, Jidda and Mocha, under themost disastrous circumstances, was publishedin the Friendship's Offering for1827; in which annual, for 1829, is alsogiven the history of another of his tours.In 1815, he obtained the commandof a frigate, just launched for the Maunof Muscat, and was in the act of riggingher, when he received notice from thegovernment of Bombay to quit India,in consequence of his being there withouta license from the East Indiadirectors. Thus deprived of makingthe profitable voyages he had anticipated,he returned to Egypt by wayof the Red Sea; on the coast of whichhe collected ample materials for a newhydrographical chart. The merchantsof Alexandria now attempting to procurefrom the pacha the securities requiredby the merchants at Bombay, acommercial treaty was entered into bythe pacha, the British consul, and ourtraveller, which ended in his beingmade the bearer of letters, as ambassadoror envoy of the pacha, to India.JAMES SILK B U C K I N G II A M .He accordingly left Alexandria a secondtime, the latter end of 1815, and proceededby Tyre, Sidon, Acre, antiJaffa, to Jerusalem ; traversed nearlythe whole of Palestine, and the countrieseast of Jordan and the Dead Seavisited Damascus, Baalbec, Lebanon,&c. ; penetrated to the heart of AsiaMinor; and, after having inspected theruins of Nineveh and Babylon, wherehe discovered a portion of the ancientwall, and ascended to the summit ofthe Tower of Babel, he arrived, andmade a short stay, at Bagdad. Hencehe proceeded, by Kerrnanshal, to ,the ancient Ecbatana, Ispahan,Shiraz and Bu.shire ; where he embarkedin an East India Company'sship of war ; and finally reached Bombayat the end of 1816. Of thesetravels he afterwards published an account,in four volumes; a perusal ofwhich, observes the reviewer, in theNew Monthly Magazine for 1829, willrepay any reader for the toil.He was unable to accomplish theobject of his mission to Bombay ; buthaving received the Company's licenseto remain in India, he resumed thecommand of the Maun of Muscat'sfrigate, in which he sailed into thePersian Gulph ; and, after visitingMuscat and Bussorah, returned with asuccessful result to Bombay. He nextvisited the coast of Malabar, and arrivedat Calcutta in June, 1818, where hereceived the maun's orders to proceedto the coast of Zanzibar, in Africa, togive convoy to several vessels engagedin procuring slaves, as well as to takesome on board his own frigate ; " aservice," he nobly observes, in his briefmemoir, " in which, had the prospectof fortune been ten times as brilliantas it was, my abhorrence of slaverywould not permit me to engage ; and,accordingly, rather than acquire richesfrom such a source, I resigned the command,and with it all prospects of competencyand ease, which it had hithertopromised me."At this period, becoming acquaintedwith the famous East India merchant,Mr. John Palmer, he, at his suggestion,and encouraged by the Marquess ofHastings and the Bishop of Calcutta,Dr. Middle-ton, undertook the editorialdepartment of a paper, entitled theCalcutta Journal; at first a weekly, andafterwards a daily paper. It acquiredalmost instantaneous popularity, andproduced a nett profit of "8,000per annum to Mr. Buckingham, whosold a fourth share of it to the principalmerchants, and civil and militaryofficers in the Company's service, inshares of 100 each, for 10,000.During the whole of the marquess'sgovernment in India, which lasted tenyears, our author expressed himselffreely, without molestation ; but nosooner did the marquess's health obligehim to quit India, than his locum tenens,Mr. John Adam, and others to whomMr. Buckingham was obnoxious, determined,he says, to banish him fromIndia. To effect their purpose, resortwas had to the assistance of a Dr.Bryce, a Scotch presbyterian minister;who, in the John Bull, a paper, as hesays, set up by the authorities of theIndian government, for the avowedpurpose of defaming him, published alibel concerning him, for which he obtainedjudgment against the doctor, inan Indian court of justice, with largedamages ; the judge declaring the libelto be " so atrocious, as scarcely to bethoughtof without horror."Dr. Bryce, however, having been afterwardsappointed to an office, " I was,"says Mr. Buckingham, " for an articlereflecting upon this act of the government,a second time banished fromIndia ; by which I was made to lose100,000 in property, with the additionaldeprivation of 8,000 a yearfrom the labours of my ow j n pen ; withthe imputation that I "was a fire-brand,dangerous to the peace of the country."On reaching London, under theseoppressive circumstances, he commencedan evening paper, which didnot answer ; but he was more successfulin the establishment of the OrientalHerald, which being almost exclusivelydevoted to East India affairs, waseagerly sought after in every part ofthat country, and well esteemed by thestatesmen and legislators of this. InJuly, 1827, he established the Sphinx,and" sometime afterwards, the Athenaeum;in the conducting of which, hewas principally supported by the Rev.Henry Stabbing, author of the Livesof the Italian Poets. These journalstie sold, after carrying them on for twoor three years ; since which, he hasVoyagers AND TRAVELLERS.en principally occupied in delivering,the principal towns of England andbeeat the principalScotland, public lectures, in advocacyof a free trade to India, and on thegovernment, commerce, politics, &c. ofthe east. Besides the works alreadynamed, he published, in 1823, at Calcutta,A Faithful History of the Discussionsin Bengal, in reference, as hestyles it, to his being transported fromthat part of India without a trial; in1829, the Heads of his Lectures, withhis Life ; and, in 1830, A History of thePublic Proceedings on the Question ofthe East India Monopoly, during 1829.with an outline of his extempore descriptionsof the oriental world ; and itis some proof of his ability and correctness,that the map of Syria, containedin the Ancient Atlas of Geography,printed in 1829, was adjusted iron hismap of that country.Mr. Buckingham is a writer of greatoriginality and power of mind; as atraveller, enterprising and intelligent;in his capacity of lecturer, eloquent,clear, and concise ; and, as a memberof society, although, perhaps, mistakenin some of his views, honest, active,and useful. His private character isestimable ; and, with an independentspirit, he possesses a penetrating andphilanthropic mind, and a warm andgenerous heart.JOHN LEWIS BURCKHARDT.JOHN LEWIS BURCKHARDT,descended from an eminent family inSwitzerland, was born at Lausanne,about the year 1785. He received therudiments of his education at a schoolat Neufchatel, and completed his studiesat the universities of Leipsic and Got-tinge.At the latter, he recommendedhimself, by his talents and generalgood conduct, to the favourable noticeof the celebrated Blumenbach, whogave him a letter of introduction to SirJoseph Banks, upon whom Burckhardtcalled, on his arrival in London, inJuly, 1806. His acquaintance with SirJoseph brought him into connexionwith the other members of the AfricanAssociation, and ended in his undertaking,under the patronage of theSociety, to explore the interior of Africa.His offer was accepted in May, 1808,when he immediately set about preparinghimself for his journey, bystudying in London and at Cambridge,not only the Arabic language andoriental customs, but also astronomy,chemistry, mineralogy, medicine, andsurgery. In addition to this, he sufferedhis beard to grow, accustomedhimself to wear the eastern dress, andin the intervals of his studies, exercisedhimself by long journies on foot, bareheaded,in the heat of the day, sleepingupon the ground, and living uponvegetables and water.On the 25th of January, 1809, hereceived his final instructions, and onthe 2nd of March, he embarked atCowes, for Malta, where he appeared inan oriental costume, and, by his judiciousconduct, contrived to conceal hisreal character from several Swiss officers,whom he had previously known.Being unable to procure a vessel boundfor Cyprus, he embarked in one sailingto the coast of Caramania. " I introducedmyself," he says, " to the passengers,who were Crinoline, as anIndian Mohammedan merchant, whohad been, from early years, in England,and was now on his way home ; and Ihad the good fortune to make mystory credible. During the course ofour voyage, numerous questions wereput to me relative to India, which Ianswered as well as I could ; and whenI was asked for a specimen of theHindoo language, I answered in theworst dialogue of the Swiss German."Having landed at Catalina, he made anexcursion to Tarsus, where, finding avessel bound for the coast of Syria, heembarked for that country, and enteredit at the point where the Aasi, theAncient Orontes, falls into the sea.Here he joined a caravan proceeding toAleppo, in his way whither he wasmuch annoyed by the companions ofhis journey insisting that he was aFrank; and at Antakia, one going soJOHN LEWIS BURCKHARDT.far as to pull him by the beard, heresented the affront by giving theoffender a blow on the face. On hisarrival at Aleppo, he assumed the nameof Ibrahim, and applied himself withunceasing assiduity to the study of theArabic language, into which he madean attempt to translate robinson Crusoe.In July, 1810, he started, by way ofPalmyra, for Damascus ; and, in thecourse of his journey, was twice attackedby banditti, and robbed of his watchand compass. He quitted Damascus inSeptember, but returned to that city,after having visited the ruins of Balbec,Linus, and Mount Hermon. Hesubsequently made an excursion intothe Haul an, the patrimony of Abraham,and, on the 1st of January, 1811, againentered Aleppo. From hence he accompaniedan Arab sheikh into thedesert towards the Euphrates, but theprotection of his guide proving insufficient,he was robbed of all his clothes,and compelled to return, without havingaccomplished any of the objects of hisjourney. " It was in this excursion tothe desert," says Mr. Barker, the Britishconsul at Aleppo, " that Burckhardt hadso hard a struggle with an Arab lady,who took a fancy to the only garmentwhich the delicacy or compassion of themen had left him." On the 14th ofFebruary, he finally quitted Aleppo,and once more returning to Damascus,made another journey from thence intothe Hauran,in the course of which, hediscovered the ruins of a city unvisitedby any other European, which he conjecturedto be those of Petra, the capitalof Arabia Petrie. The ruins are situatein the valley of Thor, or Arabs, theexistence of which, he says, " appearsto have been unknown to ancient aswell as modern geographers." Speakingof Bala, he observes, " many ruinedplaces and mountains in that districtpreserve the names of the Old Testament;and elucidate the topography ofthe province that fell to the share of thetribes ot Gad and Reuben."After many hardships and dangers,our traveller reached Cairo, in Egypt,with the intention of joining a caravan,and travelling to Fezzan, in the northof Africa, the grand object of his mission.Whilst, however, the caravanwas preparing, he undertook an expeditionto Nubia, on which he set out,accompanied by a guide, on the 14th ofFebruary, 1813. They were mountedon dromedaries, and Burckhardt's onlyincumbrances were a gun, a sabre, apistol, a provision bag, and a woollenmantle, which served by day for acarpet, and for a covering during thenight. The country through which hepassed was in a state of great distraction,but he proceeded in safety as far as theMalays territory, on reaching which,he found himself," says Mr. St. John,in his life of our traveller, " in themidst of the worst description of savages.The governor, a ferocious black,furiously intoxicated, and surroundedby numerous followers in the samecondition, received him in a hut. Inthe midst of their drunken mirth, theycalled for their muskets, and amusedthemselves with firing in the hut, andBurckhardt every moment expectedthat a random ball would put an endto his travels." Having proceeded upthe Nile almost as far as Dongola, heturned towards the north, and at Kolbeswam across the river, " holding by hiscamel's tail with one hand, and urgingon the beast with the other." He thenvisited Ybsambul, Cosmos, Dear, andAssouan, where he remained till the2nd of March, 1814 ; his whole expenditureduring the time of his stay, forhimself, his servant, dromedary, and ass,not exceeding one shilling and sixpenceper day.Having assumed the character of apoor trader and a Turk of Syria, he,on the day above-mentioned, set outwitha caravan, through the desertsof Nubia, to Berber and Shandy, asfar as Suakim, on the Red Sea, whencehe performed his pilgrimage to Meccaby way of Jidda. During-this journey,in the course of which he had an opportunityof confirming many of the statementsof Bruce, he endured a series ofhardships and sufferings scarcely inferiorto those of Park in Africa. Whilstmad with thirst in the burning desert,he beheld the mocking mirage ; and ifhe escaped burial beneath the overwhelmingsand, lifted like a wave bythe tempestuous blast, it was doubtfulwhether he had not yet a more dangerousfoe to meet in the plundering Arab.At Darner, he cried beads for sale, toprocure provisions for his ass ; at Jidda,his finances were so low, that he wasVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.compelled to sell his slave, and he hadalready thoughts of resorting to manuallabour, for his subsistence, when hefortunately obtained three thousandpiastres (about 100) by giving a billupon Cairo. Crocodile's flesh occasionallyformed part of his food, and the dangersof the desert he found no greaterthan the inconveniences. Though almostworn out with fatigues, " I was obliged,"he says, " every day, to fetch andcut wood, to light a fire, to cook, to feedthe ass, and finally to make coffee ; a cupof which, presented to my companions,was the only means I possessed ofkeeping them in tolerable good humour."In his way through the Nubiandesert, he relates a singular custom ofthe Arab guides, for the purpose ofextorting small presents from travellers." They alight," he says, ' atcertain spots, and beg a present'; if it berefused, they collect a heap of sand, andmould it into the form of a diminutivetomb, and then placing a stone at eachof the extremities, they apprize thetraveller that his tomb is made ; meaning,that henceforth there will be nosecurity for him in this rocky wilderness."Our traveller remained at Mecca fromthe 9th of September until the 15th ofJanuary, 1815, during which time heaccurately noted the manners and customsof the holy city, without his realcharacter being discovered, though ithad been previously suspected by thePasha of Tayef, who jocosely observed,"It is not the beard-alone whichproves a man to be a true Moslem."On the 28th, Burckhardt reached Medina,which he quitted on the 21st ofApril, in a state of great mental, depression,and still suffering from therecent attack of an intermittent fever.To add to his dejection, he found, onhis arrival at Yambo, the plague in itsmost virulent shape; and being unableto procure a boat, he was obliged toremain a witness of its horrors for morethan a fortnight, during which time, hesays, " the air, night and day, was filledwith the piercing cries of those who hadbeen bereaved of the objects of theiraffection." At length, on the 24th ofJune, he reached Cairo, where, afterhaving recruited his health, he employedhimself in drawing up an accountof his travels. In the spring of 1816,he visited Mount Sinai ; and, havingreturned to Cairo, was making preparationsto commence his long-delayedjourney to Fezzan, to explore thesource of the Niger, when he wasattacked with dysentery on the 14th,and died on the 15th of" October, 1817.I have closed," says Mr. St. John,the lives of few travellers with moreregret." His obsequies were performedafter the Mohammedan custom, accordingto his own request to Mr. Salt,to whom he observed, a few momentspreviously to his death, " that as hehad lived as a mussulman in the east,the Turks would claim his body; andperhaps," said he, " you had .betterlet them."Thus fell another victim in the causeof geographical discovery, which, inMr. Burckhardt, may be said to havelost one of its most able and enterprisingdevotees. Patient, courageous,cautious, and intelligent, no fatiguesdispirited, no obstacle disconcerted,and no dangers dismayed him. Heconformed himself to the manners ofthe various countries through which hepassed with admirable tact ; and, withan apparent carelessness of what waspassing around him, suffered nothingworth observation to escape his attention.The penetrating and sagaciousturn of his mind displays itself throughoutthe whole of his various works;the first of which, containing an accountof his journey along the banksof the Nile to Malays, and from UpperEgypt to Nubia, was published in 1819,in quarto, by the African Association.In 1822, a volume was published containingthe particulars of his travels inSyria and the Holy Land, from theyear 1810 to 1816; in 1829, appearedhis Travels in Arabia; and, in 1830,another quarto volume was published,entitled Manners and Customs of theEgyptians.The whole of these publications willbe read with deep interest, not only forthe light thrown by them on the geographyof the countries described, butfor the personal sympathy which theycannot fail to awake in the breast of thereader. Mr. St. John, however, differsfrom Mr. Burckhardt's views of menand things, saying, "that he interpretedmen in too refined and systematical amanner, and often saw in their actionsDixon Dunham.more contrivance than ever existed :"how could Mr. St. John possibly knowthis ? Surely, the experience of Mr.Burckhardt is to be preferred to theopinions of him who, in the quotationabove, takes upon him. elf to contradictan affirmative upon nootherground thanhis own presumption to the contrary.Lieutenant-colonel DIXON Dunham.DlXON Dunham was born in Londonon the 1st of January, 1786; and,after receiving his education at MerchantTaylor's School, was articled to a solicitor.Finding, however, the professionhe had chosen, uncongenial to his gayand adventurous spirit, he relinquishedit altogether; and, in 1811, went as avolunteer into the army, in which heserved till the termination of the peninsularwar, during the latter part of thecampaign, as lieutenant of the twenty-thirdfusileers. His cheerfulness andgallantry rendered him a great favouritewith all his fellow-officers, andprocured for him the patronage andfriendship of Sir James Douglas, whoselife he saved at the battle of Toulouse,by carrying him oft' the field after hehad been struck on the leg by a cannonball.On his return to England, he wasappointed to a commission in the fifty-fourthfoot; and soon after, enteringthe Netherlands, was engaged in thebattle. of Waterloo; at the terminationof which, he proceeded with the alliedarmies to Paris, and set out from thenceon a tour through France and Italy.Returning to England in 1819, he obtainedfor himself an admission intothe senior department of the RoyalMilitary College, at Farnham, wherehe studied under the directions of thegovernor, Sir Howard Douglas, whosefriendship and commendation he wasnot long in gaining.After the death of Mr. Ritchie, theAfrican traveller, Captain Denham volunteeredto carry on his researches:and, for that purpose, was sent out byLord Bathurst to join Dr. Oudney andLieutenant Clapperton, who had alreadystarted on the same expedition. Havingarrived at Tripoli, he left that city onthe oil of March, 1822, and proceededto join Messrs. Oudney and Clapperton,at Memnon, whence he travelled toSockna, being the first of his countrymenwho had ever entered the town inan English dress ; which, contrary tothe information he had received, hefound to procure him a much more favourablereception from the inhabitantsthan if he had been in disguise.From Sockna, he continued his coursetowards Mourzuk, crossing, on his waythither, an extensive desert, where heexperienced great pain and peril fromthe effects of thirst and a tremendoussand storm which blew down his tenuiin the night, and nearly suffocated himbefore he was able to rise. On his arrivalat Mourzuk, finding the sultanunwilling to furnish him with an escortto Bornou, he left his companions, andreturned to Tripoli ; charged the bashawwith duplicity; and, on his hesitatingto appoint a time to convey him to theformer place, set sail for Marseilles,with the intention o f proceeding toEngland, and informing the governmenthow he had been deceived. Uponthis, says Major Denham, in his journal,The bashaw sent three despatchesafter me, by three different vessels, toLeghorn, Malta, and the port I hadsailed to, which I received in quarantine,informing me that Bhoo-Khaloomwas appointed with an escort to conveyus to Bornou." Accordingly, our travellerremarked for the shores ofBarbary, and re-entered Sockna on the2nd, ami Mourzuk on the 30th of October; and, in the latter end of thefollowing month, set out on his way toKouka, in Bornou.Passing through Raglan, over aroad of salt and sand, to Maefen, " anassemblage of date-huts, with but onehouse," he came up with Oudney andClapperton, at Patron; whence heproceeded to Tegerhy, where he remainedsome days in consequence ofthe illness of his two companions, andj of the rest he himself required previousto crossing the adjoining desert, a jour-voyagersAND TRAVELLERS.ney of fifteen days. On the 13th ofDecember, he set out for Kouka ; meeting,daily, during the first fortnight ofthe way, an immense quantity of skeletons,and dead bodies, some of whichhe found "with their arms claspedround each other, just as they had expired."Alluding to these corpses inhis journal, he relates, " Whilst I wasdozing on my horse, about noon, I wassuddenly awakened by a crashing undermy feet, which startled me excessively.I found that my steed had, without anysensation of shame or alarm, steppedupon the perfect skeletons of two humanbeings, cracking their brittle bonesunder his feet, and, by one trip of hisfoot, separating a skull from the trunk,which rolled on like a ball before him.This event gave me a sensation whichit took some time to remove." On the8th of January, 1823, he arrived atDerkee, where he was compelled tosanction the sending of a maraudingparty to capture some camels, the chiefpart of those who had attended himhaving died on the road. During ahalt of two days, nine others wereprocured, and he continued his journey,passing through Bilma, the capitalof the Tilboos, Chukcema, Dibla, Kasa-ma-soma, Beere-Kashifery, Lar, Woo-die,Burwha, Geudawhat ; and, afterhaving been without animal food forfifteen days together, and narrowlyescaping the jaws of alligators, hyaenas,and elephants, in the course of histravels, he arrived at Kouka on the 17thof February. " This," says he, " wasto us a momentous day, and it seemedto be equally so to our conductors.Notwithstanding all the difficulties thathad presented themselves at the variousstages of our journey, we were at lastwithin a few short miles of our destination; were about to become acquaintedwith a people who had neverseen, or scarcely heard of, an European ;and to tread on ground, the knowledgeand true situation of which had hithertobeen wholly unknown."On his presentation to the Sheikh ofBornou, he soon gained his confidence,and was promised, by him, all the assistancein his power to give him aknowledge of the country and its inhabitants.After passing about twomonths at Kouka, he joined a hostileexpedition, sent out by the sheikh,against the Felatahs ; in his way to attackwhom, he passed some days atMandate, the sultan of which countryjoined the Bornouese troops, who, togetherwith himself, after burning twosmall towns, were put to flight and defeatedby the Felatahs, at the siege ofMusfeia. The situation of Major Den-ham,in his retreat from the pursuers,was dreadful in the extreme ; both himselfand his horse were badly wounded ;and, after twice falling with the latter,and fighting singly against three or fourassailants, he at length lay disarmed onthe ground. " At that moment," herelates, " my hopes of life were toofaint to deserve the name. I wasalmost instantly surrounded; and, incapableof making the least resistance,was as speedily stripped. My pursuersthen made several thrusts at mewith their spears, that badly woundedmy hands in two places, and slightlymy body, just under my ribs, on theright side ; indeed, I saw nothing beforeme but the same cruel death I had seenunmercifully inflicted on the few whohad fallen into the power of those whonow had possession of me. My shirtwas now absolutely torn off my back,and I was left perfectly naked. Whenmy plunderers began to quarrel for thespoil, the idea of escape came likelightning across my mind ; and, withouta moment's hesitation, I crept underthe belly of the horse nearest me, andstarted as fast as my legs could carryme for the thickest part of the wood:two of the Felatahs followed, and gainedupon me ; for the prickly underwoodnot only obstructed my passage, buttore my flesh miserably ; and the delightwith which I saw a mountain-streamgliding along at the bottom of adeep ravine cannot be imagined. Mystrength had almost left me, and Iseized the young branches issuing fromthe stump of a large tree which overhungthe ravine, for the purpose ofletting myself down into the water ;when, under my hand, as the branchyielded to the weight of my body, alarge life, the worst kind of serpentthis country produces, rose from itscoil, as if in the very act of striking. Iwas horror-struck, and deprived, for amoment, of all recollection the branchslipped from my hand, and I tumbledheadlong into the water beneath : thisDIXON Denial.shock, however, revived me ; and, withthree strokes of my arms, I reached theopposite bank, which, with difficulty, Iclimbed up, and then, for the first time,felt myself safe from my pursuers."After dangers and disasters almost asappalling as those just related, MajorDenham returned to Kouka, where hearrived in the beginning of May, in astate of extreme wretchedness and despondency.In his way back, he relates,that the little food he could procure"was thrust out from under BarcaSana's (the sheikh's general) tent, andconsisted generally of his leavings:pride," he continues, " was sometimesnearly choking me, but hunger wasthe paramount feeling; I smotheredthe former, ate, and was thankful."Thus," he observes, on terminatinghis account of it, " ended our most unsuccessfulexpedition ; it had, however,injustice and oppression for its basis,and who can regret its failure ?" He,however, shortly after his return toKouka, accompanied, with Dr.Oudney,asecond expedition, headed by the sheikhin person, against the Mungo; butthat people making some concessions,he was not involved in any hostile encounter; and after visiting the river, and collecting much curiousinformation, (among other, that themonkies abounding in that part of thecountry, are called by the natives " theenchanted men") he again returnedto Kouka, where he remained till thetermination of the rainy season in1823.In January, 1824, he obtained permission,and an escort, from the sheikh,to visit the Loggun nation, a countryhe had for eleven months previouslybeen endeavouring to enter. On the2nd of February, he embarked atShowy in a canoe, and proceeded downthe river Shary to Joggabah, a onceinhabited, but then desolate, island ;approaching it by a wide piece of water,which he called, from the beauty of thesurrounding scenery, Bellevue Reach.Passing from Lake Shary, "into thatsea of fresh water, the Tchad," whichhe named Lake Waterloo, he veeredround to the north-east branch of ,and continued in that directiontill he arrived at the mouth of theShary; where, after discerning with histelescope nothing but a waste of watersbefore him, he commenced his returnto Showy ; on reaching which, he immediatelyset out for Loggun, by wayof Gulph, Willighi, Affadai, Ralph, andNursery ; a route seldom traversed, andwhich he describes to be " a continuedsuccession of marshes, swamps, andstagnant waters, abounding with uselessand rank vegetation ;" and where"flies, bees, and mosquito, with immenseblack toads, vie with each otherin a display of their peace-destroyingpowers." On the 16th of February,he entered Kernuk, the capital ofLoggun, by a street "as wide as PallMall ;" but was only allowed to remaina few days in the city, in consequenceof the approach of the Begharmi, againstwhom the Sultan of Loggun would notundertake to protect him. While inthe city, he was much annoyed by thecuriosity of the women, who examinedeven the pockets of his trowsers ;to give them their due," he observes,they are the cleverest and the mostimmoral race I had met with in theblack country."After enduring many vicissitudes anddangers, and witnessing, at Angela, thelast moments of Mr. Tooke, who hadaccompanied him in his expedition toLoggun, Major Denham returned, onthe 2nd of March, to Kouka, where hewas attacked with a slight fever; and,shortly after, received intelligence ofthe death of Dr. Oudney, at Murmur.Notwithstanding, however, the dishearteningcircumstances attending hisformer excursions, he, on his recovery,joined another expedition against theBegharmies, in the hope of makinghimself further acquainted with theircountry ; but a temporary defeat of theBornouese, whom he accompanied, renderingit unsafe for him to continue withthem, he once more returned to Kouka,whence, after an interview with Mr.Clapperton, then in a very ill state ofhealth, he set out, by way of Lar andWoodie, for Tripoli, carrying with himseveral presents from the Sheikh ofBornou to the King of England. Onthe 25th of December, 1824, the fourthChristmas-day he had passed in Africa,he arrived at Temesheen ; on the 5thof January, 1825, reached Sockna;and, on the 26th of the same moth,entered Tripoli ; whence, in a few days,he embarked for Leghorn, and arrivedVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.in England, accompanied by CaptainClapperton, on the 1st of the following-june." Our long absence," he says, inhis journal, " from civilized society, hadan effect on our manner of speaking,which, though we were unconscious ofthe change, occasioned the remarks ofour friends. Even in common conversationour tone was so loud as almost toalarm those we addressed ; and it wassome weeks before we could moderateour voices so as to bring them in harmonywith the confined space in whichwe were now exercising them."From the moment of his arrival athome, he became an object of publicinterest and private regard; which, onthe publication of his travels and discoveries,were increased to a peculiardegree : Earl Bathurst frequently invitedhim to his table; and, in testimonyof the high sense he entertainedof his courage and intelligence, offeredto his acceptance "a new and experimentalappointment to Sierra Leone,just then decided on, at the suggestionof General Turner, then governor ofthe colony." Accordingly, he wasappointed superintendent, or director-general,of the liberated African departmentat Sierra Leone, and the coasts ofAfrica ; and, on the 8th of December,1826, having, in the previous month,been promoted to the rank of ,he embarked for thatcolony, where he arrived in the Januaryof the following year. After occupyingsome months in surveying thevicinity of Free Town, he, in the latterend of 1827, made a voyage of inspectionto Fernando Po; on the coast ofwhich, he met with Richard Lander,who informed him of the death of CaptainClapperton, intelligence of whichhe was the first to send to England.In May, 1828, he returned to FreeTown, where he received the king'swarrant, appointing him lieutenant-governorof the colony, and shortlyafterwards held a levee ; a few daysafter which he was attacked by thefever of the country ; but hopes wereentertained of his recovery till the 8thof June, when the symptoms becameso malignant that he died on the followingday.Few men have gone to their gravesmore lamented by friends and acquaintancesthan Lieutenant-colonel Denham;his lively, buoyant, and benevolentheart, and the ardent and confidentspirit with which he undertook hisuseful, but hazardous, enterprises, haveendeared him not only to the peopleof his own civilized country, but tomany a barbarous chief and wild savageof the remote and pestilential countrieshe visited in the course of his wanderings.His journal contains an accountof perils and adventures which, in thedays of Bruce, would have been denouncedas incredible; it is, nevertheless,written in a simple and impressivestyle, that seems to warrant its truth ;and the most eccentric and extraordinaryfacts are accompanied with observationstoo reverent and profound toadmit of ridicule at, or a question asto, the truth of them. An anonymousbiographer thus concludes his memoir:If this sense of amply doing theduty he was sent out to perform, animatingthe natural strength of his fineconstitution, could have kept the warmblood envenomed in that benevolentheart; could have preserved the brighthealth which one hour glowed on thatmanly cheek, and in the next wasextinguished in livid paleness; if allthis could have sufficed to compasswith security the life of man in thatcolony, Denham would not have died !But the good, the brave, has indeedfallen !"SIR JOHN FRANKLIN.THIS intrepid navigator was born atSpilsby, in Lincolnshire, in the year 1786.In 1800, he went as a midshipman, onboardthe Polyphemus; and, in 1802,proceeded with Captain Flinders, toNew Holland, in the Investigator, fromwhich vessel, on its arrival at PortJackson, in July, 1803, he was removed,as supernumerary master's-mate, to thePorpoise store-ship, and was shortlySIR JOHN FRANKLIN.afterwards shipwrecked on a coral reef.He then joined the Bellerophon, inwhich he was engaged at the battle ofTrafalgar ; and, some time after, wasappointed an acting lieutenant of theBedford, in which he accompanied theroyal family of Portugal from Lisbonto South America; and, returning toEurope, assisted at the blockade ofFlushing, where he continued till 1814,when the Bedford was ordered out aspart of the expedition against NewOrleans, where he greatly distinguishedhimself by his skill and valour. In1815, he was made first lieutenant ofthe Forth; and, in January, 1818, wasappointed to the command of the Trentbrig, then about to accompany CaptainBuchan on a voyage to Spitsbergen ;and, on his return, he offered to undertakea journey to the North Pole, fromthe shores of the former, by travellingin sledge-boats across the ice.In the early part of 1819, he wasselected to head an expedition, overland,from Hudson's Bay, to the ArcticOcean; and having" embarked atGravesend, on the 23rd of May, arrivedat the former place on the" 30th ofAugust; and, on the 9th of September,began to ascend the streams betweenYork Factory and Cumberland House,a journey of six hundred and ninetymiles, which he performed in aboutsix weeks, having been nearly killedby an accident, which he thus relates :"sin the afternoon, whilst on my wayto superintend the operations, of themen, I had the misfortune to slip fromthe summit of a rock into the river,betwixt two of the falls. My attemptsto regain the bank were, for a time,ineffectual, owing to the rocks withinmy reach having been worn smooth bythe action of the water; but, after I hadbeen carried a considerable distancedown the stream, 1 caught hold of awillow, by which I held until twogentlemen came in a boat to myassistance." From Cumberland Househe proceeded along the snow, to FortChepywan, where he arrived on the26th of March, 1 820, after having walkedeight hundred and fifty-seven miles,with a weight on his ancles, the wholedistance, of nearly three pounds ; andin the course of which, he describes thecold to have been so severe, that " thetea froze in the tin pots before it couldbe raised to the mouth, and even amixture of spirits and water becamethick by congelation." On the 29th ofJuly, he arrived at Fort Providence,whence he \ proceeded to the YellowKnife River, and directed his coursetowards the Polar Sea, through a countrynever before visited by a European ;wintering, on his way thither, at FortEnterprise, near the head of the CopperMine River, where he remained, in ahut built by the Canadians, till the endof June, 1821 ; during which time, hewrote great part of his journal, and inwhich year he was made a commander.On the 7th of July, he reached thewesterly part of the Copper Mine Riverafew days afterwards, traversed theCopper Mountains, and pitching hislent beneath them, sent forward inadvance, his two Esquimaux interpreters,to inform their countrymen ofhis approach, and of the object of hisexpedition. After reconnoitring themouth of the Copper Mine River, andgiving to one of the neighbouring promontoriesthe name of Cape Hearne,he embarked in a canoe, on the 21st ofJuly, and " commenced the navigationof the Arctic Ocean, with a voyage beforehim of not less than one thousandtwo hundred geographical miles; FortChurchill, on the western shore of Hudson'sBay, being the nearest spot atwhich he* could hope to meet with acivilized being." The tempestuous weather,however, the shortness of his provisions,and the fears of the Canadians,who were unwilling to proceed further,compelled him to land at Cape Flinders.Hence he proceeded along the coast toPoint Turnagain, now called the Dukeof York's Archipelago; and having carriedhis researches so far as " to favourthe opinion of those who contend forthe practicability of a north west passage,"he, on the 25th of August, terminatedhis survey of the coast, at themouth of Hoc's River, where he left,n a box, an account of his proceedings,for the information of Captain Parry,who was then exploring the Arctic Stainan easterly direction.On the 31st of August, CaptainFranklin, having broken up his canoesto make smaller ones, commenced hisreturn to Fort Chepywan, where hearrived in July, 1822, after one of themost appalling and disastrous journeysVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.ever recorded. During the time itoccupied, his principal food was tripede roche, leather, and boiled bones ;three of his companions died of coldand hunger, and two were murdered,and devoured unconsciously by theremainder. The nights, in addition tothe danger attending them from thefrequency of the wolves, were so chilly,that the tents of himself and his partywere, every morning, surrounded withsnow to the height of three or fourfeet; and the blankets that coveredtheir bed, so hardened with frost, thatit was with difficulty they could befolded. Several times Captain Franklinfainted from fatigue, and the ice onwhich he kept continually falling, .preventedhim from travelling at the rateof more than two or three miles perday ; often had he to wade up to hiswaist through water, where the temperaturewas scarcely above the freezingpoint; and, on one occasion, he wasupset in his canoe, and only prevented,by clinging to a rock, from being dashedto pieces iu the cataracts of the rapids.The following extract from his journal,will give some idea of the sufferings heendured : " A partridge being shot,the feathers were torn off, it was heldto the fire a few minutes, and thendivided into six portions. I and mycompanions ravenously devoured ourshares, as it was the first morsel of flesheither of us had tasted for thirty-onedays ; unless, indeed, the small gristlyparticles which we found occasionallyadhering to the pounded bones may betermed flesh." The delivery of CaptainFranklin and his party from the deathwith which hunger, fatigue, and diseasedaily threatened them, was owing tothe assistance of some Indian hunters,who came to them in their last stageof despair. " They treated us," saysthe captain, " with the utmost tenderness,gave us their snow-shoes, andwalked without any themselves, keepingby our sides that they might lift uswhen we fell. They prepared our encampment,cooked for us, and fed us asif we had been children: evincing humanitythat would have done honourto the most civilized people."On his arrival in England, CaptainFranklin was made a post-captain ; hemarried, in August, 1823, the daughterof William Pendent, Esq., architect ofthe king's stables at Brighton ; and, atthe end of the same year, submitted toLord Bathurst " a plan for an expeditionover-land to the mouth of the MackenzieRiver, and thence, by sea, to the northwesternextremity of America ; with thecombined object, also, of surveying thecoast between the Mackenzie and CopperMine Rivers ;" an expedition whichhe was permitted to superintend, uponhis shewing to government, that " inthe proposed course, similar dangers tothose of the former over-land expeditionwere not to be apprehended."Accordingly, on the 16th of February,1825, he embarked at Liverpool, havingundergone " a severe struggle betweenthe feelings of affection and a sense ofduty," in taking leave of his wife, whosedeath, then hourly expected, took placesix days after his departure. On the29th of June, he arrived at the MethylRiver, and, in the following August, atthe left bank of the Mackenzie, whencehe proceeded to the mouth of that river,and, shortly after, found salt water ; incommemoration of which, he landedon an island which he had discovered,and hoisted on a pole, a silk union-jacksewed, and given him by his wife,under the express injunction that itwas not to be unfurled before theexpedition reached the sea." Onleaving this island, which he calledGarry's, and where he had deposited,beneath a signal-pole, a letter for CaptainParry, he commenced his ascent ofthe Great Bear Lake River, on thebanks of which he remained till thesummer of 1826, when, in spite of manydangers and obstacles, he proceeded toabout half-way between MackenzieRiver and Icy Cape, in lat. 70 deg.26 min. N., and long. 148 deg. 52 min.W. ; at which point he calculated hecould not with safety proceed further.His feelings at being compelled to return,he thus expresses in his journal;It was with no ordinary pain that Icould now bring myself even to thinkof relinquishing the great object of myambition, and of disappointing the flatteringconfidence that had been reposedin my exertions. But I had higherduties to perform than the gratificationof my own feelings ; and a mature considerationof all things, forced me tothe conclusion, that we had reachedthat point, beyond which, perseveranceWILLIAM HENRY SMITH.would be rashness, and the best effortsmust be fruitless."On the 1st of September, 1827, CaptainFranklin arrived at Liverpool,from New York, where he had receivedevery mark of attention both public andprivate ; and, in the same year, he waspresented by the Geographical Societyof Paris, with their annual gold medal,value twelve hundred francs, and alsoelected a corresponding member of thatinstitution. In November, 1828, hemarried a second time ; in the followingyear, had the honour of knighthoodconferred upon him, and also the degreeof D.C.L. by the University of Oxford;and, in 1830, he was appointed commanderof the Rainbow. In bothexpeditions to the Arctic Sea, CaptainFranklin was accompanied by Dr.Richardson, a journal of whose discoveriesis appended to the former'ssecond narrative, which, as well as thatcontaining an account of his first voyage,combines the most intense interest withthe most valuable information, and iswritten with great spirit, elegance, andaccuracy. In the course of his perilousjourney, by sea and land, CaptainFranklin evinced a contempt of personaldanger in the pursuit of his enterprise,and a degree of kind-heartedness to,and consideration for, those who accompaniedhim, that has rendered himequally the pride of his friends, and anhonour to his country.WILLIAM HENRY SMITH.WILLIAM HENRY SMITH, son ofan American loyalist, was born at Westminster,on the 21st of January, 1788.After perfecting himself in the study ofseamanship and navigation, during avoyage he had made to the East andWest Indies, he entered the king'sservice in 1805, and continued in activeemploy from that time till 1814, havingbeen present at all the principal bombardmentsin the peninsular war, andgreatly distinguished himself by hisvalour and skill. At the commencementof the peace, " finding one avenueto professional reputation closed," heendeavoured to open another, by commencing,of his own accord, a survey ofthe Sicilian ports, in the hope of obtainingan official appointment. Whilst in theMediterranean, he married, at Naples,a Miss Warrington ; visited Bonaparte,at Elba ; and, shortly after, transmittedto government, through Admiral Penrose,an account of his hydrographicaloperations, with plans and drawings,which received the approbation and patronageof the board of admiralty, atwhose expense the Atlas of Sicily wasengraved, together with a memoir of hisobservations, of which they purchasedone hundred copies, and which subsequentlyreceived a favourable notice inthe principal countries of Europe.In 1816, he joined Lord Mouth'ssquadron, near the Barbary shore ;and landing at Tripoli, proceeded toexamine the ruins of Depths Magna, toascertain the possibility of conveyingto England some ancient pillars whichthe bashaw had offered to the Britishking ; but he was only able to removesome architectural fragments, which, ontheir arrival in London, were sent tothe British Museum, and subsequentlyto the palace at Windsor. After embarkingthese ancient relics, he madean excursion into the interior of thecountry ; and was so successful in hisresearches, that, in the official answerof Sir Charles Penrose to his accountof them, he is thus complimented :In acknowledging your despatch,"says Sir Charles, " communicating theresult of your labours at Debita, aswell as much other highly interestingmatter, which you have so skilfullybrought forward, I congratulate myselfthat the undertaking fell to your lot ; Ishall not fail to transmit to the lordscommissioners of the admiralty a copyof your report, together with the highsense I entertain of your spirit, talent,and indefatigable exertions."About this time, Captain Smith wasappointed to the command of the Aidsloop, in which he proceeded to fix thelatitudes and longitudes, but then imperfectlyknown, of the principal portsVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS,and islands in the Mediterranean. Hewas shortly afterwards intrusted withthe completion of the survey, begun bythe command of Napoleon, of the shoresof the Adriatic, which he finished sometimein the year 1819, and returned toEngland in' 1820. On his arrival, hehad an interview with Lord Melville,by whom he was sent to Paris to communicatethe result of his hydrographicaloperations to Captain Du Pare,of the French navy, in order that achart of the Mediterranean Sea mightbe formed from their combined discoveries.In 1821, having been previouslyadmitted a member of the antiquarianand Astronomical Societies, hewas appointed to the command of theAdventure, and was sent out to terminatehis investigation of the ' Africancoast between Egypt and Tripoli, whichhe completed in the latter end of 1823,and returned home in September, 1824;in the February of which year he wasmade a post-captain. Respecting hisvoyage, he thus speaks in his officialreport : " It is with pleasure I am ableto add, that though, from the verynature of my mission, I have beenobliged to hang on lee-shores andcoasts little known to, and thereforeavoided by, other navigators, this servicehas been effected, not only withoutthe ship having touched the ground,but without the loss of a spar, a sail, acable, or an anchor."The plans and charts he had madeduring his survey, obtained for himthe eulogy of all the scientific men ofEurope, and are now used by the naviesof all the principal countries in thatquarter of the globe. Captain Beaufortthus speaks of them in a letter toCaptain Smith: " The more I see ofyour Mediterranean surveys, the moreI admire the great extent of your laboursthe perseverance of your researches,the acuteness of your details, and thetaste with which you have executed thecharts. Take them altogether, no surveyhas ever before issued from the admiraltythat can be compared to yours.It is quite astonishing the work you did,and did it in such a masterly manner, inthe time you were abroad." And thecelebrated Baron Each, in the firstvolume of his journal, thus alludes tohim : " On ne cherche pas, et on trouveplus rarement encore, chez un bon marin.Assortment on ne pouvait conferune expedition aussi importance a unnavigate plus habile, plus expert, etplus zee que le Capitaine Smith."He also, whilst abroad, received varioustestimonies of the personal interestwhich many foreign monarchs took inthe success of his enterprising labours;the Emperor of Austria gave him a goldsnuff-box; and from the Crown Princeof Denmark he received a present ofthe maps containing the last discoveriesof Loevenoern, accompanied by a kindand complimentary letter. In 1826, hewas elected a F. R. S. ; in 1829, anassociate of the Academy of Sciencesat Palermo ; and in 1830, one of thecouncil of the Geographical Society ofLondon. In addition to his work onSicily, he published one on Sardinia,and another called The Life and Servicesof Captain Philip Beaver ; besidesvarious miscellaneous articles whichappeared both in English and foreignreviews. Captain Smith, on his shipbeing paid off, retired to his residenceat Bedford, where he passes the chiefpart of his time in astronomical observations,in an observatory built byhimself,HUGH Clipperton.CAPTAIN HUGH Clipperton,son of a surgeon at Annann, in Scotland,and one of twenty-one children,was born in that town in the year1788. At an early age, he was placedunder the care of Mr. Downe, a celebratedmathematician, under whom hemade himself acquainted with practicalmathematics, including navigation andtrigonometry. In 1805, he became cabinboy to Captain Smith, commander of atrading ship called the Postlethwaite,in which he made many voyages toNorth America, and distinguished him-hughClipperton,self by his skill and intrepidity. Beingat Liverpool, at a time when rock saltwas very dear, and with which hisvessel was laden, he was detectedbringing on shore a few pounds of itin his handkerchief, and was immediatelyseized by the custom-houseofficers, who released him only on hisconsenting to go on board the Tender,in which he was conveyed to the Re-nommee frigate, at the Nore, andranked as a man before the mast. ~ Onrepresenting his situation, however, toa friend at Annann, who wrote to CaptainBriggs, the commander of the Chloride,to which vessel he was subsequentlyremoved, he was promoted to the rankof midshipman, and was shortly afterwardssent to the dock-yard, at Plymouth,to be instructed in the cutlassexercise ; which, on having attained asufficient knowledge of, he was appointedto teach to others ; and, forthat purpose, was removed to the Asia,a seventy-four ship, under the commandof Sir Alexander Cochrane. In1814, he went out to Bermuda, acting,in his way thither, as drill sergeant,a situation he filled with great skilland credit, and made himself so usefuland agreeable, that he gained thefriendship of the admiral and thewhole crew. On arriving at Bermuda,he was despatched, in a flag-ship, toHalifax, whence he proceeded to UpperCanada, where he was made a lieutenant,and ultimately appointed to thecommand of the Confiance schooner.In 1817, he returned to England, andretired on half pay to his native town,where he continued till 1820, when heremoved to Edinburgh, and becomingacquainted with Dr. Oudney, agreed toaccompany him in an expedition toAfrica.He arrived at Tripoli about November,1821, where he was joined byMajor Denham, with whom and Dr.Oudney, he proceeded to Mourzuk ;whence, after making an excursion tothe westward, he travelled to ContainBomou, passing, in his way thither,several hundred bodies of black slaves,who had died of fatigue in their waythrough the Tibboo desert. At Koukahe remained a month, and proceededthence to Mandate, Munga, arid theGambarou ; and, returning to Kouka,he was attacked with a delirious fever,from the effects of which he neverperfectly recovered. In December, 1823,he parted from Major Denham, andtravelled with Dr. Oudney, who wasthen in very ill health, through theterritory of Soudan, to Murmur; wherethe latter died of a diarrhoea, and wasburied by Mr. Clapperton, who helpedto dig his grave, and read the funeralservice over him. To the loss of Dr.Oudney, which afflicted him extremely,he thus alludes in his journal: "Atany time, and in any place, to bebereaved of such a friend, had proveda severe trial ; but to me, his friendand fellow traveller, labouring alsounder disease, and now left aloneamid a strange people, and proceedingthrough a strange country which hadhitherto never been trodden by Europeanfoot, the loss was severe, andafflicting in the extreme." From Murmur,our traveller proceeded to Cockatoo,the capital of Houssa, and, onreturning to the first-mentioned place,was much exasperated on hearing ofthe destruction of the clay wall roundDr. Oudney's grave. " 1 felt," he says,"so indignant at this wanton act ofbarbarity, that I could not refrain fromapplying my horsewhip across the governor'sshoulders, and threatened toreport him to his superior, the governorof Katagum, and also to despatch aletter on the subject to the sultan,unless the wall was immediately rebuilt ;which, with slavish submission, he promisedfaithfully to see done withoutdelay."In 1825, Clapperton returned toEngland, when he was made a commander;and, before he could completethe account of his recent journey, wasemployed by government to make asecond expedition to Sackatoo, for thepurpose of delivering certain presentsto the Sultan of the Fellows, in compliancewith a request made by thelatter, through Clapperton, to the Kingof England. Accordingly, on the 25thof August, he embarked in the shipBrazen, and arrived at Whidah thelatter end of the following November.In the succeeding month he commencedhis journey to Sackatoo, accompaniedby Captain Pearce, Dr.Morrison, and his servant, RichardLander; and, on the 9th, arrived atDagmoo, where, in consequence ofVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.keeping during the night in the openair, himself and all his companionswere taken ill, and Captain Pearce andDr. Morrison shortly afterwards died.He subsequently reached Katunga,where he was within thirty miles ofthe Quorra, or Niger, but was notpermitted to visit it. Continuing hisjourney northwards, he arrived atKano, and then proceeded westwardto Sackatoo, where he was in hopesof obtaining permission to continue hiscourse to Timbuctoo. On his arrival,however, at the former place, in December,1826, his baggage was suddenlyseized, under pretence that hewas a spy, and was conveying warlikestores to the Sultan of Bornou, then atwar with the Sultan of the Fellows,who opened all the letters addressedto, and also seized all the presentsintended for, the former. This treatmentdestroying all his anticipations,preyed so deeply on his spirits, thathe is said, by his servant, Lander,never to have smiled afterwards;"and a dysentery at the same time attackinghim, on the 12th of March,1827, he sank into a state which soonbrought on his death.Twenty days," says Lander, " mypoor master remained in a low and distressedstate. His body, from beingrobust and vigorous, became weak andemaciated ; and, indeed, was little betterthan a skeleton." A short time beforehis death, he called him to his bed, andsaid, " Richard, I shall shortly be nomore; I feel myself dying; do not beso much affected, my dear boy ! it isthe will of the Almighty ; it cannotbe helped. Take care of my journaland papers after my death ; and whenyou arrive in London, go immediatelyto my agents, send for my uncle, whowill accompany you to the colonialoffice, and let him see you deposit themsafely in the hands of the secretary.After I am buried, apply to Bello, (thesultan,) and borrow money to purchasecamels and provisions for your journeyover the desert Do not lumber yourselfwith my books ; leave them behind,as well as the barometer, boxes andsticks, and every heavy article you canconveniently part with. Remark whattowns or villages you pass through ;pay attention to whatever the chiefsmay say to you, and put it on paper.The little money I have, and all myclothes, I leave to you : sell the latter,and put what you may receive for theminto your pocket ; and if, on your journey,you should be obliged to expendit, government will repay you on yourreturn." " He then," says Lander,took my hand betwixt his ; and, lookingme full in the face, while a tearstood glistening in his eye, said, in alow, but deeply affecting tone, ' Mydear Richard, if you had not been withme, I should have died long ago ; Ican only thank you, with my latestbreath, for your kindness and attachmentto me ; and if I could have livedto return with you, you should havebeen placed beyond the reach of want ;but God will reward you.' This conversation,"continues Lander, " occupiednearly two hours, in the courseof which my master fainted severaltimes. The same evening he fell intoa slumber, from which he awoke inmuch perturbation, and said he hadheard distinctly the tolling of an Englishfuneral bell : in a few days afterwardshe breathed his last." He died on the13th of April, and was buried at thevillage of Hungary, or Jungle, byRichard Lander, who gave two thousandcowries to the natives to build ahouse four feet high over the spot.The person of Mr. Clapperton wastall and handsome, and of prodigiousstrength ; he possessed a bold and enterprisingspirit, and was remarkablealike for his religious feelings, and hisactive and practical benevolence.Several anecdotes are recorded of hisdaring and courage. During his firstexpeditions to sea, he would oftenplunge into the water with his clotheson, and swim alongside the vessel ; anexperiment which once nearly costhim his life. In the winter of 1815,while in command of a block-house,he was attacked, and vanquished, byan American schooner, and reduced tothe alternative, either of being madeprisoner, or of crossing Lake Michiganto York, a journey, over the ice, ofnearly sixty miles. He chose the latter,and had proceeded with his party aconsiderable distance, when a boy, benumbedby the cold, was unable tomove further ; Clapperton instantlytook him upon his back, and, supportinghimself with a staff, walked withFRANCIS LYON.his burthen for eight or nine miles,when he found that the boy was dead.Another proof of his ~ strength andhumanity is told of him by RichardLander, who says, " Whenever we cameto a stream which was too deep to ford,and unfurnished with a ferry-boat,being too weak myself to swim, mygenerous master used to take me onhis shoulders ; and, oftentimes, at theimminent risk of his own life, carryme in safety to the opposite bank."His journal, though written in aloose, uneducated manner, teems withvaluable and novel information ; andthe addition he has made to the geographyof North America, by his observationson the latitude and longitudeof various places, is as considerable asimportant. He was the first Europeanwho traversed the whole of centralAfrica, from the Bight of Benin to theMediterranean ; and by thus establishinga continuous line from Badagry to Tripoli,he has materially lessened thedifficulties of future researches.FRANCIS LYON.FRANCIS LYON, after having servedas a midshipman in various vessels, andbeen engaged in several sea-fights, wasappointed lieutenant of the Berwick, inJuly, 1814 ; and joined, subsequently, theAlbion, flag-ship of Admiral Penrose,in which he was present at the battle ofAlgiers, on the 27th of August, 1816.In 1818, he accompanied Mr. Ritchiein his travels into Africa, with whom heproceeded as far as Mourzuk, whence,after witnessing the death of his companion,he set out on an expeditioninto the interior of Fezzan, and havingpassed a year in exploring it, returnedto Tripoli, and sailed for Leghorn, wherehe landed, and travelled through Italyand France, to London. About a yearafter his arrival, which took place inJuly, 1820, he published his journal,under the title of A Narrative of Travelsin Northern Africa, accompanied byGeographical Notices of Soudan, andof the Course of the Niger, with plates,and maps ; from which it appears, thatprevious to his commencing the journey,he understood Arabic, and taught thatlanguage to Mr. Ritchie. The workcontains much new and valuable informationrespecting the natives andcustoms of Africa, and a very interestingaccount of the adventures and sufferingsof the author.Shortly after the publication of hisjournal, he was mentioned to L ordMelville, by Captain Smith, as an aileassistant to him, in his intended investigationof the coast of Tripoli;.Lieutenant Lyon," he writes, " Ihave no hesitation in recommending assingularly eligible for such a mission,from his natural ardour, his attainments,his professional habits, and, above all,his very complete assumption of theirish character." For some reason,Moorhowever, he did not proceed to Tripoli,but was appointed to the command ofthe Hecla, in which he accompaniedCaptain Parry on his first expedition tothe North Pole; and, on his return,published a very minute account of themanners and condition of the Esquimaux.In November, 1823, he was made apost-captain ; and in the following year,went out as commander of the Griper,on a second voyage to the Arctic Sea,having been presented a few days previousto his departure, with the freedomof his native city, Chichester, by themayor and corporation, who publiclycomplimented him on the zeal and perseverancewith which he had prosecutedhis travels in Africa; into which unhealthyand inhospitable country, notwithstandingthe death of his companion,the treachery of the natives, and thefailure of his resources, he had penetratedfurther than any Englishmanwho had ever come back to give anaccount of his travels.The principal object of his secondvoyage to the icy regions, was to endeavourto connect with the discoveriesof Captain Franklin, the western shoreof Melville Peninsula; but repeated anddreadful tempests, after his arrival inthe Arctic Sea, so disabled his snip,VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.that he was obliged to return to Englandwithout accomplishing his object.After mentioning in his journal, thestriking of his vessel in a storm, hispreservation in which made him callthat part of the ocean where it occurredthe Bay of God's mercy," he thusdescribes another tempest : "The hurricaneblew with such violence as to beperfectly deafening; our ship pitchedat such a rate, that it was not possibleto stand even below; while on thedeck we were unable to move withoutholding by ropes, which were stretchedfrom side to side. The snow fell insuch sharp, heavy flakes, that we couldnot look to windward, and it froze ondeck to above a foot in depth. Thesea made incessant breaches quite foreand aft the ship, and the temporarywarmth it gave while it washed over us,was most painfully checked by itsalmost immediately freezing on ourclothes. To these discomforts we addedthe most horrible uncertainty as towhether the cables would hold out untilday light ; and the conviction, also, thatif they failed us, we should instantly bedashed to pieces; the wind blowingdirectly to the quarter in which we knewthe shore must lie."In November, 1824, Captain Lyonarrived in England, and in the followingyear, a few months previously to his !marriage with the youngest daughter of !Lord Edward Fitzgerald, he received, |from the University of Oxford, thehonorary degree of D. C. L. Shortlyafterwards, having become one of thecommissioners of the Real del MonteMining Company, he went out toMexico, and on his way back in 1827,was wrecked off Holyhead, and onreaching the shore in safety, receivedintelligence of the death of his wife.He has since visited Brazil on a miningspeculation, from which he has not yetreturnedTHOMAS EDWARD Bodice.THOMAS EDWARD Bodicewas born in the year 1790, at Bristol,and received the rudiments of his educationat the grammar school of thatcity, from which he was removed toa celebrated academy at Cobham, inWiltshire, where he completed hisstudies. On leaving school, though atfirst intended for the bar, he enteredthe counting-house of his father, andpassed some years in a mercantileapprenticeship, at the termination ofwhich he married, and became a partnerin his father's business. About ayear afterwards, the occupations oftrade, to which he had always beenaverse, became so disagreeable to him,that he obtained the appointment ofwriter in the service of the AfricanCompany, and arriving at Cape CoastCastle, in 1816, was received by hisuncle, the governor-in-chief, throughwhose influence he was soon enabledto distinguish and enrich himself by theexertion of his talents.In i17. he was appointed second incommand of a mission to Ashantee, buton his arrival at Coomassie, circumstancesinduced him to take the conductof the expedition into his own hands,and, on sending an account of his proceedingsto the governor, he receivedan authority approving of his acts, andauthorizing him to assume the futuredirectorship of the negotiation, which heconducted with such skill and address,that he persuaded the Ashantee monarchto conclude a treaty, on termsparticularly advantageous to the Britishsettlements on the Gold coast. On hisreturn to England, he, in 1819, published,in one quarto volume, an accountof his mission, the following extractsfrom which will give some idea of theperils to which he was exposed duringhis return from the Ashantee capital:A violent tornado ushered in thenight ; we could not hear each otherholla, and were soon separated ; luckily,I found I had one person left with me,(the Ashantee) who, after 1 had gropedhim out, tying his cloth round hismiddle, gave me the other end, andthus plunged along, pulling me afterhim, through bogs and rivers, exactlylike an owl tied to a duck in a pond".THOMAS Edward Bodice.The thunder, the darkness, and thehowling oi the wild beasts were awful;out the loud and continued crashing oflarge trees which fell very near to meduring the storm, was even more so, tomy ear. The Ashantee had draggedme along, or rather through, in thismanner, until I judged it to be midnight,when, quite exhausted, with the remnantsof my clothes scarcely hangingtogether, I let go his cloth, and fallingon the ground, was asleep before Icould call out to him."Mr. Bowdich's work excited greatpublic interest, and received the eulogiesof the principal literary and scientificmen of the day; but he felt somewhatdisappointed at receiving no official encouragementto pursue his researches inAfrica, to which country, he at lengthdetermined to make a second expedition,at his own expense. With this intentionhe proceeded to Paris, for the purposeof studying mathematical and physicalscience, and the various branches ofnatural history, with which he was butimperfectly acquainted. On his arrivalin that city, he received great assistanceand attention from Humboldt, Cuvier,and other celebrated Frenchmen ; and,in testimony of the idea entertained ofhis merits, a public eulogium was pronouncedupon him at an assembly ofthe four academies of the Institute.After devoting to the preparation ofhimself for his expedition into Africa,a space of three years and a half, inwhich time he also published severalworks, he, in August, 1822, embarkedat Havre, for Lisbon; whence he proceededto Madeira, and passed severalmonths on the island, of which hecompleted a geological description, besidesseveral other interesting noticesrelating to it, which have been sincepublished, edited by Mrs. Bowdich.From Madeira, he sailed to the Cape deVerde Islands, and the river Gambia,of which, just previously to his intendeddeparture for Sierra Leone, he commenceda trigonometrical survey, in thecourse of which, by his frequent exposureto heat and cold alternately, hewas attacked with a fever, and aftergreat suffering, expired in the arms ofhis wife, on the 16th of January, liS2-i.Besides the works already mentioned,he published, during his residence atParis, Translations of Million's Travelsto the Sources of the Senegal and Gambia,and a Treatise on Taxidermy ; alsoan Essay on the Geography of NorthWest Africa, accompanied by a mapcompiled from his own discoveries; AnEssay on the Superstitions, Customs,and Arts, common to the AncientEgyptians, Abyssinians, and Ashantees ;besides three works on Natural History,exemplifying the modern classificationot mammalia, birds, and shells. Whilstat Lisbon, he collected from variousmanuscripts, an account of all the discoveriesmade by the Portuguese inSouthern Africa, which was publishedin 1824, together with a memoir, calledThe Contradictions of Park's last JournalExplained; but the work whichmost distinguished him, and which receivedthe encomiums of all the scientificinstitutions and individuals of the day,was his Mathematical Investigation,with Original Formulae for ascertainingthe Longitude of the Sea by Eclipsesof the Moon.Mr. Bowdich was a man possessingboth personal and mental attractions;his countenance was animated and intelligent,his heart sensitive and susceptible,benevolent and affectionate ; hepursued his enterprises with an ardourand perseverance that insured theirsuccess ; and his writings, as well as hisactions, evince how dear to his heartwas the cause of genius and science.SIR WILLIAM EDWARD PARRYTHIS distinguished voyager, fourthson of Dr. Parry, a physician of eminence,was born at Bath, on the 19thof December, 1790. He received therudiments of education at the grammarschool of that city ; and, in 1803, wentto sea with the Honourable WilliamCornwallis, in the Ville de Paris, wherehis conduct gained him the esteem andapprobation of his commander. Speak-voyagersAND TRAVELLERS.ing of him, in a letter dated August,1804, Admiral Cornwallis says, " I neverknew any one so generally approvedof: he is a fine, steady lad; and will,I ana sure, be fit for promotion beforehis time of servitude is out ;" and, onhis quitting the admiral's ship, in 1806,the latter, recommending young Parry'sfriends not to send him to Portsmouth,added, " though he is so well disposed,that I do not think even a sea-portguard-ship could hurt him, who, atfifteen, has been the pattern of goodconduct to all our young people."In May, the subject of our memoirjoined the Tribune, of thirty-six guns,and was employed until the end of theyear in blockading a squadron of theenemy off Orient. In May, 1808,he removed to the Vanguard ; and, onthe 6th of January, 1810, was promotedto the rank of lieutenant ; shortly afterwhich he joined the Alexandria, andwas employed in the Baltic, and in protectingthe Spitzbergen whale fishery.Whilst upon this service, he passedpart of the nights and days in studyingthe situation of the fixed stars, and healso made a survey of Malta Sound andthe Woe, in Shetland, the chart ofwhich he presented to the admiralty.In 1813, he was ordered to join the LaHogue, seventy-four guns, at Halifax,which he reached in June, and continuedto cruise in that vessel until thesummer of 1816, when he was appointedfirst lieutenant of the Niger,n 1817, in consequence of the deathof his father, he obtained leave to visitEngland; and, in 1818, was appointedto the command of the Alexander, thesecond ship destined to explore thenorth-western passage, under the ordersof Captain Ross, in the Isabella.On his return, Lieutenant Parry wasappointed to the command of a newexpedition; and in May, 1819, he leftDeptford, in his own ship, the Hecla,accompanied by the Griper, under thecommand of Lieutenant Beechey, theunited crews of which amounted toninety-four. His principal instructionswere, to make the best of his way tothe entrance of Davis's Strait; to advance,when the ice would permit, alongthe western shore to Baffin's Bay ; toenter Lancaster's Sound ; explore thebottom thereof; and, if possible, passthrough it to Behring's Strait.On the 28th of July, our voyagerreached the entrance of Lancaster'sSound, just one month earlier than thepreceding expedition had done, althoughCaptain Ross had sailed above a fortnightsooner. " We were now," saysCaptain Parry, " about to enter andexplore that great sound or inlet, whichhas obtained a degree of celebrity beyondwhat it might otherwise have beenconsidered to possess, from the veryopposite opinions which have been heldwith regard to it." After a sail of twoor three days, during which he discoveredCroker's Bay, and Navy Board'sInlet, and was now flattering himselfthat he had fairly entered the PolarSea, he was informed, on the 4th ofAugust, six p. m. that land was a-head.It, however, turned out to be only anisland, which, together with a secondone subsequently discovered, he namedafter Prince Leopold; and, about thesame time, he added to his discoveriesMaxwell Bay. On the 6th, heentered a large inlet, ten leagues wideat its mouth, to which he gave thename of Prince Regent's Inlet; afteran accurate examination of which, hearrived off a channel of eight leaguesin width, which he named after theDuke of Wellington ; at the same timedistinguishing the .magnificent openingby which he had effected his passageinto it, by the appellation of Barrow'sStrait. On the 23rd, he made sail forCape Gotham, to the southward ofwhich, it was his intention to seek adirect passage towards Behring's Strait.His progress was, for some time, uninterrupted,and animating in the highestdegree ; but he had no sooner reachedCape Gotham, than an obstruction appeared,which proved insurmountable.But although thus thwarted in this andhis subsequent attempt to trace out apassage, he, on the 4th of September,had the satisfaction of crossing thmeridian of 1 10 deg. west from Greenwich,in the latitude of 74 deg. 44 min.20 sec., by which the expedition underhi orders became entitled to the sum of5,000. On the following day, he succeededin rounding Cape Hearne, atthe distance of a mile and a quarter ;and our sanguine navigator again gaveway to flattering hopes, when a compactbody of ice once more put an endto them. Towards the end of Septem-sirWILLIAM EDWARD PARRY.ber, the expedition took up its winterquarters in Winter Harbour ; whenCaptain Parry made every arrangementfor rendering the dreary sojourn ofhimself and crew as comfortable andcheerful as possible. Among the entertainmentsgot up under his superintendence,were the performance ofplays, and the compilation of a weeklynewspaper, under the name of TheNorth Georgia Gazette and WinterChronicle ; and, " perhaps," says CaptainParry, " for the first time sincetheatrical entertainments were invented,more than one or two plays were performedon board the Hecla, with thethermometer below zero on the stage."It was not before the end of July,1820, that the ships were under sailagain, and able to leave their winter quarters,from which they were at lengthsteered, after lying in latitude 74 deg.26 min. 25 sec., and longitude, by chronometers,113 deg. 54 min. 43 sec.; thewesternmost point to which, accordingto Lieutenant Marshall, the navigation ofthe Polar Sea, to the northward of theAmerican continent, has yet been carried.Our voyager now deeming anyattempt to penetrate further useless,turned his course towards home ; and,after having named and discovered severalother islands and capes, he arrivedin England about the beginning ofNovember, and was immediately madea commander. He also received 1,000as his proportion of the reward beforementioned ; and in March, 1821, hewas presented with the freedom of thecity of Bath.On the 30th of December, in the previousyear, Captain Parry had receivedhis appointment to the command of asecond expedition, and his final instructionsbeing delivered to him on the 4thof May, 1821, he, on the 8th, left theNore, in the Fury, accompanied by theHecla, Captain Lyon, and the Nautilustransport, which was destined to relievethe two former vessels of part of theirstores their passage across the Atlantic.The ships were, on this occasion, muchbetter fitted out than on the first expedition; their united crews amounted toone hundred and eighteen men, andthe two commanders were instructed,on no account, to part from each other.The expedition reached Hudson's Straitin July, when the ships were unavoidablyparted by the numerous icebergs,by the pressure of which, both theHecla and Fury were slightly damaged,the former having already losther anchor. Whilst in latitude Cl deg.50 min. 13 sec., longitude 67 deg. 07min. 35 sec., our voyager discoveredseveral islands, called Saddle-back, bythe inhabitants of which they werevisited, and where two Esquimaux womenoffered to barter their children forafew articles of trifling value. " Uponthe whole," says Captain Parry, " itwas impossible for us not to receive avery unfavourable impression of thegeneral behaviour and moral characterof the natives of this part of Hudson'sStrait, who seem to have acquired, byan annual intercourse with our ships,for nearly a hundred years, many ofthe vices which unhappily attend a firstintercourse with the civilized world,without having imbibed'any of the virtuesor refinements which adorn andrender it happy."In the beginning of August, the expeditionbeing about to enter uponground hitherto unexplored, CaptainParry, after a most anxious considerationof all the contradictory evidence ofDobbs and Middleton, respecting thehydrography of these parts, came to theresolution of attempting the direct passageof the Frozen Strait, " though Iconfess," he says, " not without someapprehension of the risk I was incurring."Having arrived in sight of CapeComfort, in latitude 64 deg. 54 min.,and longitude 82 deg. 57 min. the pointwhere Baffin relinquished his enterprise,our voyager, persisting in hiscourse, discovered a magnificent bay,which he named after the Duke ofYork, and penetrated through FrozenStrait to Repulse Bay, through which,according to his instructions, he attempted,but found impracticable, apassage to the westward. His subsequentresearches were equally fruitless,up to the month of October, when theexpedition was unable to proceed further,and the ships were placed, aftermuch difficulty and danger, in a secureposition for the ensuing winter. " Inreviewing, however," says CaptainParry, " the events of this our firstseason of navigation, and consideringwhat progress we had made towards theattainment of 'our main object, it wasVoyagers AMD TRAVELLERS.impossible, however trifling that progressmight appear upon the chart, notto experience considerable satisfaction.Small as our actual advance had beentowards Behring's Strait, the extent ofcoast newly-discovered and minutelyexplored in pursuit of our object, in thecourse of the last eight weeks, amountedto more than two hundred leagues,nearly half of which belonged to thecontinent of North America." Duringthe winter, Captain Parry, as in hisformer expedition, contrived bothamusement and employment for theships' companies, by means of a theatre,and a school where the sailorslearned to read and write.In the beginning of July, 1822, thevessels being disencumbered of the ice,Captains Parry and Lyon continuedtheir operations with vigour during thesummer months ; and on two occasions,they imagined themselves on the pointof discovering the long-sought passage.The winter, however, again set in withoutthe object of the expedition beingaccomplished; and it was not until theAugust of the following year, that CaptainParry was able to resume his researches.It had been his intention tohave despatched the Hecla to Englandabout this time; and after having takena year's provisions from her stores, toremain in the Fury another summer, inthe hopes of penetrating through some ofthe inlets he had discovered, before theend of the year 1824. In consequence,however, of the appearance of the scurvyamong a part of the crews, and of theincertitude respecting the breaking upof the ice, he resolved on returning toEngland, where he arrived, in companywith the Hecla, on the 16th of October,1823. This expedition, though unsuccessfulin its main object, led to manydiscoveries both by land and sea, whichwould tend considerably to lessen thedifficulties of a future voyage, and touse Captain Parry's words, " at leastserved the useful purpose of shewingwhere the passage is not to be effected."On his arrival in England, CaptainParry found he had been promoted topost rank; and in the December of theyear of his return, he was appointedacting hydrographer to the admiralty,and presented with the freedom of thecity of Winchester ; and on the 17th ofJanuary, 1824, he was placed in thecommand of another expedition, forthe purpose of again exploring thehyperborean regius. The same shipswere employed as in the last voyage ;the Hecla, however, being commandedby Captain Parry, and the Fury byCaptain Hopper. Having reachedPort Bowen, our voyager remainedthere from the 28th of September untilthe 20th of July, 1825, when the icedamaging the Fury to such a degreethat it was necessary to abandon her,he found himself obliged, under all thecircumstances, to return to England,where he arrived about the middle ofOctober. His proceedings giving satisfactionto government, his appointmentto superintend the hydrographical officewas confirmed by the admiralty,on the 22nd of November, 1825; and,in the following December, the freedomof Lynn was voted to him by the corporation," in testimony of their highsense of his meritorious and enterprisingconduct"In April, 1826, Captain Parry proposedto the admiralty to attempt toreach the North Pole, from the northernshores of Spitzbergen, by travellingwith sledge-boats over the ice, orthrough any spaces of open water thatmight occur. By the recommendationof the Royal Society, the expeditionwas determined on, and he accordinglysailed in the Hecia, from Deptford, onthe 25th of March, 1827. On the 20thof June, he anchored in TreurenbergBay, latitude 79 deg. 55 min. 20 sec.,longitude 16 deg. 48 sec. 45 min. E. ;and on the following day, started withtwo sledge-boats, which he named theEnterprise and the Endeavour, acrossthe ice. On the 28th of July, he reachedthe highest latitude he was able toattain, being a little beyond 82 deg.45 min., at which point the expeditionhad traversed nearly three hundredmiles. After giving the name of LieutenantRoss to a small islet, which isinteresting as being the northernmostknown land upon the globe, CaptainParry set out on his return to hisship, in which he sailed from Treu-render Bay, on the 28th of August,and arrived in the Thames, in thefollowing October. In his narrative ofthis expedition, he says, " sincerely aswe regretted not having been able tohoist the British flag in the highestALEXANDER GORDON LAING,latitude to which we aspired, we shall,perhaps, be excused in having felt somelittle pride in being the bearers of it toa parallel considerably beyond thatmentioned in any other well-authenticatedrecord."As some reward for his services, he,on the 29th of April, 1829, receivedthe honour of knighthood ; and, in theJuly following, the honorary degree ofDec. L. was conferred upon him in aconvocation at Oxford. In the courseof the same month, having previouslyresigned the office of hydrographer tothe admiralty, he sailed to New SouthWales, as commissioner for the entiremanagement of the Australian AgriculturalCompany's affairs, with a salary,it is said, of 2.000 per annum. SirWilliam Edward Parry has issue by hismarriage, in October, 1826, with IsabellaLouisa, fourth daughter of Sir ThomasStanley, Bart. ; and, in addition to hisother distinctions, is a fellow of theRoyal Society ; member of the LondonAstronomical Society ; and honorarymember of the Imperial Academy oafSciences at St. Petersburghh.The name of Parry cannot fail to beperpetuated as that of one of the mostintrepid, and comparatively successfulnavigators of this or, any other age orcountry. For an idea of the dangers heunderwent, and the difficulties he surmounted,the reader is referred to his ownaccounts often, published, successively,in three quarto volumes, than which fewwill be found more replete with interestand information. As a writer, he aspiressuccessfully to something more than amere recorder of events, but it must beconfessed, that the whole of his worksmight be reduced, with advantage, toat least one-half of their present bulk.ALEXANDER GORDON LAING.ALEXANDER GORDON LAING,son of a celebrated schoolmaster atEdinburgh, was born in that city onthe 27th of December, 1794. He completedhis education at the Universityof Edinburgh, with the intention offollowing the profession of his father,in whose academy he, for some time,acted as uglier. Having, however, in1810, entered" a volunteer corps, he becameso captivated with a military life,that he determined to adopt it; and,accordingly, in 1811, went out to theWest Indies, where he performed theduties of deputy quarter-master generalat Jamaica, and of fort-major at Honduras.The assiduity with which heserved in these capacities, brought on adisease which compelled him to returnto Scotland, about 1817; but in the latterpart of 1819, he was appointed lieutenantand adjutant of his last regiment,the second West India, and shortlyafterwards, set out for Sierra Leone.About eighteen months after his arrivalin that colony he was employed by thegovernor, Sir Charles M'Carthy, toundertake a mission to Gambia, principallywith a view " to ascertain thestate of the country ; the disposition ofthe inhabitants to trade and industry ;and to know their sentiments and conductas to the abolition of the slavetrade." After remaining at Gambia asufficient time to fulfil his instructionsrelating to commercial transactions, hecrossed the river Searches to Malacouri,where, learning that Sanassee, an inferiorMandingo chief, was about to beput to death, by Amara, the king ofthat country, Lieutenant Laing, by hispersonal exertions, saved the life of theformer. He was induced to do this inconsequenceof the friendly dispositionof Sanassee towards the English. Onhis return to Sierra Leone, LieutenantLaing, finding the life of the same chiefto be in danger from Yarradee, an allyof Amara's, undertook a second expedition,and again secured the safety ofSanassee.On his return to Sierra Leone, hecommunicated to the governor that " hehad observed, that many men whoaccompanied the Soolima army, werein possession of great quantities of gold,and had ascertained an abundance ofivory to be in the country ;" facts,which he suggested might render athird expedition serviceable to the com-VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.mere of the colony, besides the greatobject which would be gained by it,in knowing the resources of manycountries directly to the eastward ofSierra Leone, which were, like that ofthe Soliman, as yet known only byname.His proposition being accepted,he, on the 16th of April, 1822, set outwithinstructions to penetrate to thecountry of the Soliman, in whateverdirection he might think fit; his party,including himself, consisting of sixteenpersons. Sailing up the Rochelle, helanded at Navarre, a town of the Tim-mansecountry, and was shortly aftermet by one of the principal chiefs atRpkou ; after two or three days' disputewith whom as to the value of the presentsoffered him, he proceeded throughNunkawa, and other small towns, toMa Bung, where, in consequence ofdrinking too freely, after " a thirst ofthirty hours' duration," he was compelledto remain in a state of the mostacute torture for nearly a week. On the7th of May, he arrived at Ma Boom ;where, after being detained some daysby the avarice and treachery of thehead-man " of the town, he proceeded,through the Kooranko country,to Koufala, where, on retiring to rest,he says, in his journal, " out of complimentto the first white man who hadever set foot in Kooranko, the inhabitantscommenced such a din of drums,flutes, and various other instruments,accompanied with singing and dancing,which was kept up all night, that sleepwas banished from my pillow till daylight."From Koufala he travelled toSeemed, the capital of the Koorankocountry, the king of which receivedhim in a most friendly manner, and expresseda great desire" for the establishmentof a trade between his people andthe colonists ; and, instead of extortinga great quantity of presents, observedthat a black man ought to think himselfwell paid in the sight of a whiteman, for that white men did goodwherever they went." After witnessinga most tremendous tornado atSeemed, he left that town, and continuedhis course over some mountainstowards Kaniakoota ; picking up, in hisway thither, several " flat stones sostrongly impregnated with iron, as todraw and repel the needle at the distanceof several inches."After leaving Kaniakoota, and examiningthe source of the Tongolelle,he passed the mountain of Sa Well",where he afterwards learnt a plan hadbeen laid, by the head-man of Kansasto attack and murder him, inorder to obtain possession of " such aquantity of money as never had beforebeen heard of," which he was reportedto carry with him. Arriving at Kamatoo,he was attacked with a fever, fromwhich he had not quite recovered, whenhe entered Koonia, the first town inthe Soolima dominions, the king ofwhich country sent him one of his ownhorses to conduct him to Falaba, thecapital, where he arrived on the llthof June, and continued two months,being detained great part of the timeby an illness, which threw him into astate of delirium for four days. Afterseveral excursions into the vicinity ofFalaba, and making presents to "theSoolima king, and receiving from himgifts in return, and assurances of hisfriendly disposition towards a commercialintercourse with Sierra Leone, heset out on his return thither, on the17th of September, and reached FreeTown the latter end of October, afteran absence of six months.On his return, he found he had beenpromoted to the rank of captain, andshortly afterwards proceeded to join hisregiment on the Gold coast, where hewas engaged in fighting against theAshantees, till the death of Sir CharlesM'Carthy, in 1824, when he was sentto England to acquaint government ofthat unfortunate event. After he returnedto London, he devoted himselfwith great assiduity to the completionof his journal, the printing of whichhe was engaged in superintending, whenhe was appointed by Lord Bathurst toproceed on an expedition to discoverthe course and termination of the Niger,an undertaking which he had alwaysbeen most ambitious and desirous ofaccomplishing.Accordingly, on the 5th of February,1825, he set sail for Tripoli, touchingon his way at Malta, where he wasmost kindly received and entertainedby the Marquess of Hastings. On hisarrival at Tripoli, he made preparationsfor accompanying the caravan to ,with which he started on the15th of July, 1826, having, only theALEXANDER GORDON LAING.day previously, been married to MissWarrington, the daughter of the Britishconsul. An exact account of his proceedingsafter leaving Tripoli is notyet known ; but, from the differentstatements on the subject, it is collectedthat after crossing the chain of MountAtlas, the Fezzan country, the desertof Lempta, the Sahara, and the kingdomof Ahades,he arrived at Timbuctoo,and became entitled to the reward ofj3,000 offered by a society in Londonto the first adventurer who should succeedin reaching that city. During hisresidence there, he had employed himselfin arranging his journal, which consistedof the most valuable informationin all branches of science, and was onhis way back to Tripoli, when, accordingto the evidence of the servant whoaccompanied him, he was, at the endof his third day's journey, attacked andmurdered, while asleep, by the Arabsof the country, and the chief of theblacks who escorted him from .Another report states that hemade a desperate resistance in a previousencounter, in which he had hisright hand struck off, and speaks of aletter to his wife, giving an account ofthe combat, " written with his lefthand, in stiff characters, by unsteadyfingers, and all soiled with dust andblood." A third statement is from thepen of Mr. Caille, a young Frenchman,who visited Timbuctoo, in 1827, theinhabitants of which city describedMajor Laing as " the first white manwho was ever seen in their city." Mr.Caille states, from particulars which hegathered on the spot where the eventtook place, that Major Laing was attackedby a party of mussulman, who,on his refusal to obey their commandof addressing a prayer to the prophet,instantly strangled him. In whatevermode his death was effected, there isno doubt that his being a Christian, wasthe primary cause of the treacherywhich led to his destruction ; especiallyas Mr. Caille affirms the nations of theinterior of Africa to be savages onlyon the subject of religion, and thatthey think it a meritorious duty to killall who refuse to be converted toIslamism.The following, which is the substanceof an Arabic document, signed at by fifteen of the inhabitants,who state the contents of it to be withintheir own knowledge, will also throwsome light on the probable cause ofMajor Laing's death. " About a monthafter the arrival of Laing at Timbuctoo,the Prince of the Faithful wrote aletter to his lieutenant-governor, Osman,containing as follows : ' I have heardthat a Christian intends coming to you ;but whether he has already arrived ornot I do not know. You must preventhim from arriving, if he has notreached you ; and if he has, you mustexpel him the country in such a manneras to leave him no hope of returning.'" These documents then proceedas follows : " When Governor Osmanreceived this letter, he could not butobey it. He, therefore, engaged ,a sheikh of the Arabs of thedesert, to go out with the Christian,and protect him as far as the town ofArran. Barbooshi accordingly wentwith him from Timbuctoo ; but, onarriving at his own residence, he treacherouslymurdered him, and took possessionof all his property." This document,though giving, most probably,a true account of the manner of hisdeath, leaves it yet to be ascertainedwhether it was owing to the treacheryof Barbooshi, or of his employer, Osman,the governor, who might have interpreted,in a sense fatal to Major Laing,the instructions from the Prince of theFaithful, " to expel him the countryin such a manner, as to leave him nohope of returning."The papers of Major Laing havebeen ascertained to be in existence ;but, unfortunately, have not yet beengiven up. After much investigation,Colonel Warrington discovered them tohave been in the possession of HassounaDuchies ; who, after confessing that hehad delivered them up to a person,since declared to be Baron Rousseau,the French consul-general, in considerationof a debt incurred in France,escaped from Tripoli in an Americanvessel, and has since arrived in England.A letter in the hand-writing of MajorLaing was found at Timbuctoo, inwhich he alludes to his danger from theunfriendly disposition of the Fouls,and the hostility of the Sultan Bellotowards him. " The sultan," he writes,has now got intelligence of my beinghere ; and, as a party ofFoulahs areVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.hourly expected, Al Sadi Boubokartrembles for my safety, and has stronglyurged my departure." Further on, hecontinues, " I have been busily employedduring my stay, searching therecords in the town, which are abundant,and in acquiring information ofevery kind ; nor is it with any commondegree of satisfaction that I say myperseverance has been amply rewarded;I am now convinced that my hypothesisconcerning the termination of the Nigeris correct."The melancholy fate of Major Laing,after having accomplished the principalobjects of his expedition, was a lossfelt by his country almost as much asby his friends and relatives, to whom hismany amiable qualities so strongly endearedhim. Possessing, as he did, inan eminent degree, a profound andintelligent mind, it is the more to beregretted that we are as yet unacquaintedwith the contents of his journal,the work of one who had provedhimself to be so able a writer, andgiving an account of places never beforevisited by a European.FREDERICK WILLIAM Beecher.FREDERICK WM. Beecher,son of Sir William Beechey, Kent.,was born in London, on the 17th ofFebruary, 1796. In 1806, he went, asamidshipman on board the Hibernia;served, subsequently, in the Minotaur,the Foudroyant, the Elizabeth, and theStrata, in which vessel he took partin a victorious action against the French,which led to the recovery of the settlementof Tarnatave. In 1812, he returnedto England, and having recruitedhis health, which had been slightly impaired,joined, successively, the shipsMagicians, and La Vengeur, in thelatter of which he went to New Orleans,where he was removed to the Tonnant,flag-ship of Sir A. Cochrane, whileserving under whom he received hisfirst commission. In 1815, he was appointedlieutenant of the Niger ; of theTrent, in ISIS ; of the Hecla, in 1819;and of the Adventure, in 1821, thesecond-mentioned vessel being com-~landed by Captain Franklin, and thethird by Captain Parry, both of whomhe accompanied in their first voyage tothe Arctic Sea.In the Adventure he served underCaptain William Henry Smith, who wasabout to continue his survey of theAfrican coast, and with whom he arrivedat Tripoli, on the llth of September,1821, when, accompanied by his brother,and the requisite attendants, he left thevessel, with the intention of proceedingin an easterly direction along the shoresof the greater Syrtis, and Cyrenaica,while Captain Smith, at the same time,pursued his voyage by sea, along thecoast of Tripoli. On the 20th of November,he reached Messurata, whencehe proceeded, through Giraffe, MedinaSultan, and Hannah, to Sacri,where he found the form of the Gulf ofSyrtis to differ altogether from all thecharts and authorities with which hecompared it ; discovering " instead ofthe narrow and cuneiform inlet describedin modern maps, a wide extentof coast, sweeping due east and west,with as little variation as possible."On arriving at Bengazi, he madeexcursions to, and with the assistanceof his brother, made plans of, the citiesof Gyrene, Teuchira, Apologia, andPhilomela ; and after surveying the coastas far as Derna, embarked for Malta;and in a few months afterwards, arrivedin England, when he found himselfalready promoted to the rank of a commander; and, in January, 1825, hewas appointed to the Blossom sloop,destined to accompany and assist CaptainsFranklin and Parry, in theirsecond expedition to the "Arctic Sea.After visiting Teneriffe, and the islandsnear it, in one of which he had a hostileencounter with the natives, he touchedat Pitcairn Island, (the retreat of themutineers of the Bounty,) where he wasastonished at the prodigious strengthand size of the inhabitants, of which, inhis journal, he relates some singularinstances.After visiting Crescent Island andFREDERICK WILLIAM BEECHY.Gatnbier's group, he made for ClementTonnes, where he thus gives an accountof the danger of his ship from a waterspout:" Amidst a tremendous gale ofwind, and curving showers of rain, thewater-spout was discovered, extendingrn a tapering form from a dense stratumof cloud to within thirty feet of thewater, where it was hid, by the foam ofthe sea being whirled upwards with atremendous gyration. It changed itsdirection after it was first seen, andthreatened to pass over the ship; butbeing directed from its course by aheavy gust of wind, it gradually receded."On leaving Clement Tonnes, hepassed Egmont, and other islands, andafterwards discovered those of Croker,Cockburn, Martin, Barrow, and Melville,names by which he himself distinguishedthem ; and, in his journal, hegives an interesting account of the probablemanner in which these, and otherisles he visited, were peopled. In May,1826, on his way to the SandwichIsland, he lost several of his crew, by adysentery; and, on the 8th of June,arrived at the harbour of Petropoulski,in Kamschatka, where he received fromEngland, information of the failure ofCaptain Parry's expedition, and instructionsto leave unfulfilled that part of hisvoyage relating to the Hecla and Fury.After quitting Kotzebue Sound, wherehe detected a mistake of that navigator,in asserting four islands to be in themiddle of the strait, instead of three, aslaid down in the chart of Captain Cook,he sailed to Beaufort Bay, and soonafterwards perceived the huts of theEsquimaux, and the motion of severalicebergs, along a coast, the continuity ofwhich, he says, " proved to me, thatCaptain Franklin would be unable tofind a passage south of the Cape towhich I had given his name."Previously to It having Behring's Strait,he twice witnessed the aurora borealis,the brightness of which was so great,that he at first mistook it for the sun.Having crossed the Pacific Ocean, hesurveyed several bays and harbours onthe coast of Kamschatka, gave the nameof Port Clarence to an immense havendiscovered to the south-eastward ofCape Prince of Wales, and returned to.a small island, in Kotzebue Sound,whence, after firing on some Esquimaux,by whom he was attacked, he proceededto Monterrey, and St. Francisco, inCalifornia, and along the Mexican coastto Valparaiso, where he landed in April,1828, and in the following Septemberarrived in England ; about two monthsafterwards he married a daughter ofColonel Stapleton.Captain Beechey is among those intrepidnavigators, whose zeal and abilityhave done much towards the increaseof our stock of geographical and hydrographicalinformation.RICHARD LEMON LANDER.RICHARD LEMON LANDER, wasborn at Truro, in Cornwall, some timein the year 1804. At an early age heevinced a restless, wanderingdisposition;and would often, when a child, strollfrom village to village, in the neighbourhoodof his home, and alarm hisparents by his sudden disappearanceand long absence. In 1815, he went,as attendant to & merchant, to St. Domingo,where he remained three years,in the course of which he nearly losthis life from an attack of the epidemicfever. Between 1818 and 1823 hepassed his time as valet to variousgentlemen; and, in the February of thelatter year, became servant to MajorColebrook, with whom he embarkedon a voyage of inquiry into the stateof the British colonies ; and arrived,after a very dangerous passage, inSermons's Bay, South Africa, in themiddle of the following July.After having traversed, with MajorColebrook, the colony of the Cape ofGood Hope, he returned to Englandin 1824, and obtained a menial situationin a nobleman's establishment,which he subsequently quitted, toattend Captain Clapperton in hisintended expedition to the central partof Africa, for the purpose of ascertainingVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS,the source and termination of theNiger. On informing his friends ofthe engagement he had entered into,they used every argument, and a gentlemanin Truro offered him a lucrativesituation in South America, to dissuadehim from fulfilling it ; but his desire tovisit distant and undiscovered countrieswas too strong to be allayed by fearsor entreaties, and his determinationremained unshaken. " There was acharm," he observes, " in the verysound of Africa, that always made myheart flutter on hearing it mentioned :whilst its boundless deserts of sand ;the awful obscurity in which many ofthe interior regions were enveloped;the strange and wild aspect of countriesthat had never been trodden by thefoot of an European ; and even the veryfailure of all former undertakings toexplore its hidden wonders, united tostrengthen the resolution I had cometo, of embracing the earliest opportunityof penetrating into the interiorof that immense continent."Accordingly, on the 24th of August,1825, he set sail for Africa; and, inthree months, reached the Badagryroads, and, after having passed a fewdays in that city, left it, on the 7th ofDecember, for Latoo, where he wasattacked with a fever, which provedfatal to many of his party, and of whichhe had scarcely recovered the effects onhis arrival at Katun ga, the capital ofYariba, on the 15th of January, 1826.From hence he proceeded to Wow-wowand Boussa, where he obtained anaccount of the deaths of Park andMartin; and, at the former place, wasdetained some time by the attentions ofa rich African widow, called Zama,who fell in love both with him and hismaster. He describes her as "amovingworld of flesh, puffing and blowing likea blacksmith's bellows, and the verypink and essence of African fashion,"and was by no means desirous of returningher affection. " Independently,"he writes, " of the delicate state of myhealth, which incapacitated me fromcarrying on so curious an amour withthe spirit and gallantry it required, Iwas positively afraid that, from thewarmth and energy of Zama's embraces,I should actually be pressed todeath between her monstrous arms !1 was but a youth, and my shortresidence in the country had certainlyimpaired a constitution originally robustand vigorous ; by reason of which Iwas sadly apprehensive that one of herBrobdignagian hugs would send meinto the other world, with very littleceremony." From Wow-wow he proceededto Colfou, where he witnessed asingular custom of the females' dyingtheir hair blue, and their teeth red", toattract the admiration of their lovers;and he relates the fact of " a girl sighingand sobbing, because her admirer hadtold her, that her teeth were not quiteof so bright a red as those of her femalecompanion."On his arrival at Bullabulla, he wasattacked with a dysentery, which continuedto afflict him till he reachedKano. " On the road to that city," herelates, " my sufferings were too acuteto be described; often, in the agony ofthe moment, would I roll myself in thedust, and lie panting on the earth, tillmy master, alarmed by my long absence,would light large fires, by thesmoke of which I was directed to hisresting-place. On entering his tent,it was my custom, without uttering aword, to fling myself on a mat, andembracing my pillow, to sleep, orrather, endeavour to sleep, till morning.By this means I acquired a habit ofgroaning in my slumbers, of which Icould not completely divest myself, evenfor some months after my return toEngland." At Kano he remained inasick state for three or four months,and was on the point of expiring, onhis way to join his master at Saccatoo,where he arrived the beginning of 1827 ;in the April of which year CaptainClapperton died. His grief at thisevent he thus describes: "I thenunclasped my arms, and held the handof my dear master in mine ; but it wascold and dead ; and, instead of returningthe warmth with which I used topress it, imparted some of its own unearthlychillness to my frame, and fellheavily from my grasp. O God ! whatwas my distress in that agonizing moment? Shedding floods of tears, Iflung myself along the bed of death, andprayed that heaven would in mercytake my life !"On the 4th of May he set out on hisreturn to Kano ; and, in passing theGorber Bush," on his way thither, heRICHARD LEMON LANDER.dropped from his horse in a state ofexhaustion, and but for the accidentalassistance of a young Felatah, wouldhave perished of fatigue and thirst.From Kano he travelled to Aurora,with the intention of proceeding toFundah, in the hope of ascertaining thetermination of the Niger in that direction; when, at' the former place, he wasstopped by some troops of the King ofZeg zeg, and compelled to return toCuttup, whence, after a few days' detention,he proceeded, through Ragada andWow-wow, to Khiama, having narrowlyescaped drowning in crossing a rivernear Gorkie. On his arrival at Katunga,the monarch of the place offered him thesituations of prime minister, and commanderof the forces, and also to makehim his son-in-law, if he would remainin the city. On reaching Badagry, hewas much disgusted at the traffic of theEuropeans in slaves, particularly thePortuguese, who treated him with greatsuspicion and incivility, on his expressinghis abhorrence of the practice, anddeclining to sell them his own men atany price. " I breakfasted," he observes,after an interview with one ofthese merchants, " more contentedlyon a little boiled Indian corn, mixedwith palm oil and water, my usual fare,than if I had enjoyed all the luxuries inthe world by wounding my conscience,and doing violence to the best feelingsof my nature." Alluding to the mannerof embarking slaves at Badagry,he says, " I saw four hundred of thesepoor creatures crammed into a smallschooner of eighty tons; and the appearanceof these unhappy beings wassqualid and miserable in the extreme.They were fastened by the neck inpairs, only a quarter of a yard of chainbeing allowed for each, and driven tothe beach by a party of hired scoundrels,whilst their associates in cruelty werein front of the party, pulling them alongby a narrow band, their only apparel,which encircled their waist." Beforeleaving Badagry, the calumnies of thePortuguese had raised against him thesuspicions of the King Adolee, whocommanded him to undergo the ordealof drinking a cup of poisonous water,which he was compelled to do, and wasa solitary instance of escaping its fataleffects. At length, after many dangersand disasters, he heard of a vessel, commandedby Captain Laing, arriving atBadagry, by which he departed, ingreat joy, from that city, and arrived athis native town in the summer of 1828.In the December of the followingLear, he, in conjunction with his brotherjohn, made an offer, which was acceptedby government, of proceedingto Africa, to ascertain the course of theNiger. The only recompense he wasto receive for this hazardous undertaking,was a gratuity of 100 on hisreturn, and whatever profits might arisefrom the publication of the account ofhis journey. He left England on the9th of January, 1830 ; and, on the 22ndof the following month, arrived at CapeCoast Castle ; whence he sailed toBadagry, and reached that place on the22nd of March. Here he was detaineduntil the end of the month ; when, afterhaving been deprived of almost all hisgoods by the avarice of the chief,Adolee, he was permitted to embarkon the river, down which he sailed toWow ; and, on the 3rd of April, enteredthe large and populous town of Bidjie,where he met with a most kind receptionfrom the chief and inhabitants.From hence he proceeded to Latoo ; inhis way whither, he relates that, in theevening, " the glow-worms were so luminous,that one could almost see toread by their golden splendour." Hespeaks of the surrounding scenery inthe most enthusiastic language, andcompares it to " those eternal shades,where, in ancient time, the souls ofgood men were supposed to wander."He next visited, successively, the townsof Varro and Senna ; and, at the latter,he was witness to a custom of thewidow's poisoning herself after thedeath of her husband, and was informedthat the governor would be compelledto suffer death on the demise of hisprince. He thus speaks of a tornadothat happened during his residence atthis place: " Our thatched hut affordedbut an insecure and uncertainasylum against its fury ; part of theroof was swept away, and the rain admittedfreely upon our beds, whencethe most awful lightning flashes couldbe seen. The roof of our dwelling,"he continues, " had long been infestedwith numbers of rats and mice ; andthese vermin being dislodged fromtheir haunts by the violence of theVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.wind and rain, sought immediate shelterbetween our bed-clothes ; and to thisvery serious inconvenience was addedanother still greater, viz., the companyof lizards, ants, and mosquitoes, besidesworms and centipedes, and other crawling,creeping, and noxious things, whichthe tempest seemed to renovate withfresh life and motion."After passing through Eggs, Jadoo,Engua, Coosoo, Bohoo, and other towns,he arrived at Katunga, the capital ofYariba, where he remained about aweek, and then proceeded throughLessee (of the women of which townhe speaks very favourably) and Moussato Kama, which he reached the latterend of May. On the 5th of June hecontinued his journey, and, on the 17th,he came in sight of the city of Boussa ;but what was our astonishment," hesays in his journal, " on a nearer approach,to find Boussa standing on themain land, and not an island in theNiger, as represented by Captain Clapperton."At the conclusion of theGeorgian era, Mr. Lander and hisbrother had arrived at Yaodie, wherethey were shown a book which had belongedto Mungo Park, but were unableto find any of his papers.The person of tins enterprising traveller,the only modern one who hashitherto escaped the fatal effects of theAfrican climate, is extremely prepossessing.He is about five feet fiveinches in height, upright and bold in hisgait, with a fair complexion, large blueeyes, and light brown hair, giving to hiscountenance a handsome though somewhateffeminate appearance. His mindis of an elevated cast, and completelyabsorbed in the object of his pursuit, tothe attainments of which he is lessurged by the hope of remunerationthan the desire of present fame. Hehas received but an ordinary education,and is even said to make use of cockneysin his expressions ; but his intellectualcapacities are of a high order,cis may be gathered from various partsof his journal. These were, however,principally edited by his brother ; andthat portion of them relating to theirjoint expedition to Africa has undergonethe revision of Lieutenant Beecher.SCIENCESCIENCE.SIR ISAAC NEWTON.ISAAC NEWTON was born after thedeath of his father, at the manor-houseof Oglethorpe, near Grantham, in Lincolnshire,on Christmas-day, Ois., 1642.He was so little, when he was born,that his mother used to say he mighthave been put into a quart mug, andshe expected that he would scarcelysurvive the first hour of his birth. Inconsequenceof the second marriageof Mrs. Newton, he was, at the ageof three years, committed by his survivingparent, to the care of his maternalgrandmother, by whom he was sent,in the year 1654, to the grammar-schoolat Grantham, having previouslyreceived the rudiments of educationat a day-school at Wellington, andat Stoke. Although no particular instancesare recorded of the energyof his mind prior to this period, henow began to distinguish himself fromother boys, by applying himself tooccupations in which few, of his ownage, took an interest He providedhimself with a small set of carpenter'stools, and was constantly employed,when out of school, in mechanical contrivances,and in making models ofvarious kinds, in which he appears tohave evinced much intelligence andconsiderable dexterity. It is worthy ofremark, that he took great interest ineverything around him that relatedto the measure of time : he made awooden clock ; drove nails into the wallsof the house in which he lodged, inorder to ascertain the hours by thepassing shadow ; made hour-glasses,acting by the descent of water ; and asun-dial, of his own construction, isstill to be seen at Oglethorpe. Aboutthe same time, he also formed a perfectmodel of a windmill, of the constructionof which he obtained a complete idea,by paying a few visits to a mill in theneighbourhood. He likewise displayedconsiderable skill in drawing ; althoughhis knowledge of the art was acquiredwithout the assistance of a master. Hefilled his room with drawings by hisown hand ; and the following versesunder one of them, a picture of Charlesthe First, are said to have been his composition,which is the more remarkable,as he had been heard to express a contemptfor poetry :A secret art my soul requires to try,If prayers can give me what the wars deny :Three crowns distinguished here in order doPresent their objects to my knowing view.Earth's crown, thus at my feet, I can disdain,Which heavy is, and, at the best, but vain ;But now a crown of thorns I gladly greet,Sharp is the crown, but not so sharp as sweet.The ITOWII of glory that I yonder see,Is full of bliss, and of eternity.In proof of his early bias towards calculationand philosophical subjects, itis related, that he used to measure theforce of the wind blowing against him,by observing how much further he couldleap in the direction of the wind, orwith it blowing on his back, than hecould leap the contrary way, or inopposition to the wind. By thus followingthe bent of his genius, he wasgenerally to be found at the bottom ofhis class ; and it was not until stimulatedto exertion by a quarrel with oneof his schoolfellows, that he put forthpowers that afterwards gained him ahigh position in the school.After few years, passed at Grantham,Newton, in Consequence of the death ofhis step-father, was recalls d to Wools-thorpe,in order that he might take anactive part in the management of theestate. The pursuit of farming, how-science.ever, was too unsuited to his mind toreceive from him more than a partial andunwilling attention ; and his fondness formathematical study, at length attractingthe notice of his uncle, he was, at hisrecommendation, sent again to schoolat Grantham, and afterwards to TrinityCollege, Cambridge, of which he becamea member, on the 5th of June, 1660.Here he had the good fortune to gainthe approbation and friendship of Dr.Barrow, Lucasian professor of mathematicsto the university ; under whomhe developed such a facility of acquirement,that, it is said, the propositionsof Euclid became a mere alphabetin his hands ; many of them beingimmediately understood by him froma mere enunciation of the problem.He soon passed on to the more refinedand abstruse geometry of DesCartes, which he studied with muchcare and diligence. He, however, inhis riper years, expressed his regret, toDr. Pemberton, for his "mistake, at thebeginning of his mathematical studies,in applying himself to the works of DesCartes, and other algebraical writers, beforehe had considered the elements ofEuclid with that attention which so excellenta writer deserves." Saunderson'sLogic, Kepler's Optics, ana Schouten'sMiscellanies, were also read, or ratherinvestigated, by him ; as, in each ofthese works, he made, according to hisusual practice, numerous marginalnotes, containing valuable additions toscience.The next book that fell into hishands was Wallis's Arithmetic of In-finites ; and, in following up the investigationsof that author, in connexionwith what had been done by DesCartes and Pascal, he struck out hisfamous binomial theorem. The gradations,by which he passed on to theimmortal discovery of fluxions, canonly be understood or appreciated bythe mathematical reader, who will havefar better sources than a biographicalmemoir to satisfy his desire of knowledgeon the subject. These analyticaldiscoveries he collected and arranged inamanuscript, entitled Analysis perequations Numero Terminus In-finite, which he completed in 1664$and, in the same year, took the degreeof B.A. It is remarkable, that he neitherpublished this important manuscript,nor made its existence known to anyone,until four years afterwards ; whenhe was compelled to do so in consequenceof a book, brought out by Mercator,entitled Logarithmotechnia. Inthis work, Newton recognized the fundamentalidea of his own discovery, andpresented his manuscript to Mr. Barrow;who, equally delighted and astonishedwith the novelty of its matter,communicated the nature of its contentsto Collins, a celebrated mathematicianof that day Whilst the workremained in his possession, he, fortunatelyfor the reputation of Newton,took a copy of it ; as it will presentlybe seen, that it became a disputed questionwhether its author was entitled tothe honour of being the discoverer ofthe fluxionary calculus : a discoveryof such magnitude, that the most difficultinvestigations of former mathematicianswere henceforth performed withperfect facility ; and which, in fact,came upon the man of science, like theaccession of an additional sense.He now began to direct his attentionmore closely to objects of natural philosophy; and, amongst others, to thecelebrated phenomena of colours, discoveredby Grimaldi. For this purpose,he procured a glass prism, and, exposingit to the reception of the rays of light,was particularly struck with their figure,which, instead of being of an orbicularform, was remarkably elongated. Havingsatisfied himself, by experiment,that neither the thickness of the glass,nor the hole through which the ray oflight was admitted into the room, hadany effect in producing this enormousdisproportion, he arrived at length atthe important discovery, that light isnot homogeneous, but is composed ofrays of different degrees of refrangibility;and hence was founded his newtheory of light and colours. Amidstthese speculations, he was forced fromCambridge, by the great plague of 1665,when he retired to'Woolsthorpe, wherehe remained two years, devoting himselfentirely to philosophic meditations.It was here he received the hintwhich gave rise to his system of theworld. Sitting, one day, in the garden,near a tree, which is still shewn, hisattention was attracted by the falling ofan apple. His active mind immediatelybegan to reflect upon the nature andSIR ISAAC NEWTON.possible limits of the power by whichall bodies are drawn towards the earth'scentre. Aware that there was no sensiblediminution of this power at thegreatest heights which could be attained,he made, at once, a daring stretch, andsaid, '' Why may it not extend to themoon ? and then what more would benecessary to retain her in her orbitabout the earth ?" He further consideredthat, if the moon really wereretained in her orbit by the force ofgravity, the planets ought similarly tobe retained in their orbits about thesun, by their gravity towards that body.It does not fall in with the object of thismemoir to go into the deep considerationsand subtle analysis by which heestablished this glorious doctrine. Manydifficulties at first occurred in the investigation; difficulties which, from thewant of books, and the inaccuracy ofcertain existing data r he was not enabledto surmount until long after he hadquitted his retirement at Oglethorpe.In the latter part of 1666, he returnedto Cambridge, and resumed, with activity,his optical inquiries. Havingalready concluded that optical instrumentsmight be brought to any requireddegree of perfection, if a reflecting substancecould be found capable of receivingan adequate polish, he accomplishedthe invention of a new reflecting telescope,which is designated by his name.His time was now almost wholly employedin perfecting his theory of lightand colours; which he effected by amost brilliant series of experiments.These were subsequently embodied,without any admixture of hypothesis,in a treatise, which formed the textbookof the lectures, delivered by him,on his being appointed to a professorshipin the university, which took placein 1669 ; Dr. Barrow having generouslyretired, in order to make way for him.In the previous year, he had graduatedM.A. He attended to the dunes of hisprofessorship with considerable zeal ;pursuing, contemporaneously with hisoptical lectures, further experiments inprivate, arid pushing the science of opticseven beyond the extended bounds towhich he had himself taken it. On thellth of January, 1672, he was elected afellow of the Royal Society, his proposerbeing the Bishop of Sarum ; and, twomonths afterwards, appeared in ThePhilosophical Transactions, an accountof his magnificent discovery of the differentrefrangibility of the rays of light,which he unostentatiously described asthe oddest, if not' the most considerable,detection which had hitherto beenmade in the operations of nature." Itis a remarkable circumstance in thehistory of so great a man, that, shortlyafter his election, although two of hisgreat discoveries were completed, hewas so poor as to be compelled to applyto the council for a dispensation fromthe regular contribution to the funds ofthe Royal Society, which was accordinglygranted.In 1675, Newton received permission,from King Charles the Second,to retain his fellowship without takingorders He continued until the year1676, to furnish a variety of importantarticles, which were printed in thePhilosophical Transactions. The principleslaid down in many of thembeing either disputed by one party, orclaimed as the property of another, involvedthe author of them in severalcontroversies, and particularly in onewith Mr. Hook, respecting his Theoryof Light. The interruption which theyoccasioned to him in his high pursuitsso disgusted him, that he at length declaredhe would " no more commit himselfwith the public ;" and, in a letter,which he afterwards wrote to Leibnitz,he observes, " I was so persecuted withdiscussions, arising from the publicationof my Theory of Light, that I blamedmy own imprudence for parting withso substantial a blessing as my quiet, torun after a shadow."In the year last-mentioned, he explainedhis* invention of infinite series,at the request of Leibnitz, who was engagedin similar speculations, and who,about this period, arrived at the sameconclusions with the subject of ourmemoir. The mutual discovery, thepriority of which may be fairly assignedto Newton, ultimately led to a virulentand disgraceful controversy between thetwo philosophers, in which each insistedon the exclusiveness of his claim, andaccused the one of borrowing from theoilier. The dispute was at length referredto the Royal Society, of whichNewton was, at the time, president ;and an opinion was pronounced unfavourableto Leibnitz.SCIENCE,He now directed his attention tosubjects bearing more particularly uponhis system of the world; and, in thelatter part of the year, he investigatedthe grand proposition, that, by a centripetalforce, acting reciprocally as thesquare of the distance, a planet mustrevolve in an ellipsis about the centreof force placed in its lower focus, and,with a radius drawn to that centre,describe areas proportional to thetimes. In 1680, he made several astronomicalobservations upon the cometwhich then appeared ; and, about thesame time, proceeded to continue hisinquiries respecting the laws of motionof the primary planets. To pursue hisinvestigation with precision, it wasnecessary to know the exact measureof the earth's dimensions ; but, at thattime, no such measure being knownsufficiently accurate for so delicate apurpose, Newton's calculation failed inthe desired result. Taking advantage,however, of Picard's measurement ofthe length of a degree, he resumed hisold calculation with new data, andfinding, as he went on, the tendency ofthese numbers to produce a result inaccordance with his original idea, hisfeelings became so excited that he wascompelled to request a friend to completethe calculation. The agreementbetween the computed and observedresults was no longer doubtful ; andNewton, at length, became the demonstratorof these splendid truths :that all the parts of matter gravitatetowards one another, with a force directlyproportional to their masses, andreciprocally proportional to the squaresof their mutual distances ; that thisforce retains the planets and the cometsround the sun, and the satellites aroundtheir primary planets ; and that, bythe universally communicated influencewhich it establishes between the materialparticles of all these bodies, itdetermines the nature of their orbits,the forms of their masses, the oscillationsin the fluids which cover them,and, in fine, their smallest movements,either in space or in rotation upon theirown axes, and all conformably to theiractually observed laws." He devotedhimself entirely to the development ofthe consequences flowing from thisgreat discovery, and became so absorbedin these delightful meditations,that it was said of him, " he only livedto calculate and "to think."It is, however, possible, that an accountof this magnificent discoverymight have been withheld from theworld, but for a visit paid by the celebratedHalley to Newton, for the expresspurpose of consulting him on the samesubject, when Newton put into hishands his manuscript treatise. Halley,delighted at finding here the solutionhe had himself vainly attempted to arriveat, persuaded the subject of ourmemoir, after some difficulty, to presentit to the Royal Society ; at whose expenseit was ultimately published, in 1687,under the title of Philosophise NaturalisPrincipia Mathematica ; a work,of which it has been observed, thatit may be looked upon as the productionof a celestial intelligence, ratherthan of a man." Highly as the Principiawas extolled by a few learnedindividuals, the work, in consequenceof the conciseness and judgment withwhich it was written, did not, at first,meet with the general applause to whichit was entitled ; but, says Fontenelle,when its worth became sufficientlyknown, nothing was heard from allquarters but a shout of general admiration." Does Mr. Newton eat, or drink,or sleep like other men 1" the Marquessde 1'Hopital is reported to have said tothe English, who visited him : " I representhim to myself," he added, " asacelestial genius, entirely disengagedfrom matter."In 1687, Newton was chosen oneof the delegates sent to King Jamesthe Second, to protest against his invasionof certain privileges of the university,and conducted himself withsuch firmness and independence on theoccasion, that, in the following year,he was elected one of its representativesin the convention parliament, inwhich he sat till its dissolution. Aboutthis time, he became acquainted withthe Earl of Halifax, who, in 1696, appointedhim warden of the Mint; inwhich situation he rendered signalservice to the nation. In 1699, he waselected master of the Mint, and a memberof the Royal Academy of Sciences,at Paris ; and, in the same year, heappointed Mr. Whiston his deputy inthe mathematical professorship at Cambridge.In 1701, he was again re-SIR ISAAC NEWTON.turned to parliament for the university ;and, in 1703, on becoming president ofthe Royal Society, he resigned hisprofessorship altogether.It may be inquired how it was thatNewton, whose penetration was soacute, and whose perseverance so remarkable,never made any importantaddition to science after he was fortyfiveyears old, although he lived to thegreat age of eighty-four. The fact, accordingto Biot, Newton's biographer, inthe Biographic Universelle, may be accountedfor by the melancholy circumstance,that, about the meridian of hislife, he became, for awhile, deranged inhis intellect. If this were so, it is notdifficult to conceive that the mightymovements of so powerful a mind becomingthus obstructed, would neverreturn to their former vigorous action.The origin of this calamity is thus stated:He had a favourite little dog, calledDiamond. One morning, while attendingearly service, he inadvertently leftthis dog shut up in his room ; and, onreturning from chapel, he found thatthe animal, by upsetting a taper on hisdesk, had set fire to the papers whichcontained the whole of his unpublishedexperiments, and thus he saw beforehim the labours of many years reducedto ashes. It is said, that. on first perceivingthis great loss, he contentedhimself by exclaiming, " Oh ! Diamond,Diamond ! thou little knowest the mischiefthou hast done." This fact occurredin the year 1C92, and has beenmentioned by all his biographers ; but,whether it was followed by aberrationof intellect on the part of Newton, isdoubtful ; and Dr. Brewster refutes thenotion of Biot, on the subject. Thereis, however, said to be still existing atCambridge, a manuscript, dated Februarythe 3rd, 1692, in which, after therelation of the papers being set fire toitis stated, that "when Mr. Newtoncame from chapel, and had seen whatwas done, every one thought he wouldhave run mad ; he was so troubledthereat, that he was not himself for amonth after."In 1704, he published his Optics, oraTreatise on the Reflections, Refractions,Inflections, and Colours of Light,which passed through many editions,and was translated into a variety of languages.Yet it was not till a few yearssince, that the full merit of this extraordinarywork began to be appreciated.Others before him had givendistant hints concerning infinite seriesand fluxions, and the power and rule ofgravity in preserving the solar system ;but he was absolutely the first personwho conceived the idea, and engagedin the subtle and delicate study, of theanatomy of light; who dissected a rayinto its primary constituent particles,which then admitted of no further separation; who discovered the differentrefrangibility of the particles thus separated,and that these constituent rayshad each its own colour inherent in it ;that rays falling in the same angle ofincidence, have alternate fits of refractionand reflection ; that bodies are renderedtransparent by the minutenessof their pores, and become opaque byhaving them large , and that the mosttransparent body, by having a greatthinness, will become less pervious tothe light.In 1705, he was knighted by QueenAnne; and, .in 1707, appeared his algebraicallectures, published, with the permissionof Newton, by Dr. Whiston,under the title of Arithmetic Universals,&c. They were succeeded, in 1711,by his Methodus Differentiated, and hisAnalysis per Equations Numero Ter-minorinfinite. On the accession ofGeorge the First, he was in high reputeat court, and became a great favouritewith the Princess oi Wales (afterwardsconsort of George the Second), whotook great delight in his society. At herrequest, he drew up an abstract of atreatise on Ancient Chronology, whichfirst appeared in France, but was eventuallypublished in England. In 1715,Leibnitz, who still entertained a rancorousjealousy of the fame of Newton,endeavoured to foil his mathematicalskill, by proposing to him the famousproblem of the Trajectories, which hesolved on the same evening he hadreceived it, though he had been muchfatigued by business at the Mint in theearly part of the day. The latter yearsof his life were attended with much suffering,produced by a calculous disease,of which he died, on the 20th of March,1727, in the eighty-fourth year of hisage. His body lay in state in the Jeru- 'salem Chamber, and was buried, withgreat magnificence, in WestminsterSCIENCEAbbey ; the pall been supported bythe ford high-chancellor; the Dukesof Roxburgh and Montrose; and theEarls of Pembroke, Suffolk, and Macclesfield;A monument was erected tohiirt in the abbey and his statue byRoubiliac, has been placed in the collegeof which he was a merhberj at Cambridge.He left property to the amountof about 30,000 ; which, as he madeno will; was divided amongst his legalheirs.In Newton," says the historianHume; "this island may boast of havingproduced the greatest and rarest geniusthat ever arose for the ornament andinstruction of the species ill philosophical;astronomical, and mathematicalknowledge; cautious in admitting noprinciples bit such as were founded ohexperiment, but resolute toaJopteverysuch principle, however new or unusual;from modesty, ignorant of his superiorityabove ; he rest of mankind; andthence; less careful to accommodate hi<>reasonings to timon apprehensions,more anxious to merit than acquirefame." HiS moral character' was upona par with his intellectual one : bf anieek and gentle disposition, he possesseda temper which few accidentschild distitr'b; and, with tile exceptionof his quarrel with Leibnitz, he appeareddisposed rather to sacrifice thefane which he could at all time* command,than to have the calm of liferuffled by the pretensions and bickeringof inferior mortals. Numerousinstances are recorded of his generosityand liberality, particularly towards hisrelations, during his life; it being amaxim with him that " a legacy is nogift;" When Dr; Samuel Clarke completedhis Latin edition of Newton'sOptics, he presented each Of the editor'sfive children with lQQ i; and whenMaclaurin was in expectation of the mathematicalprofessorship of the EdinburghUniversity; he made an offer Of^20 a-year towards his support, till theoff"? became vacant and he should beappointed to it. When, in the exercisedf his public functions, there was Occasionfor shew, he was magnificent withoutcomplaining of the expense ; but,bn all other occasions; he pursued thestrictest economy. Both in the ordinaryIntercourse of social life.; and inHis "more general communications withsociety, there was nothing in his mannersto distinguish him from other men.It however a peculiar feature in thecharacter of one so perfectly unostentatious,that he should have been veryanxious to trace an honourable descentfor himself, and actually wrote to a SirJohn Newton, in Scotland, in the hopeof being acknowledged by him as a relation.But whilst he was thus solicitousabout the successive elaborationsof matter which had produced his body,nothing could exceed the modesty withwhich he, at all times, spoke of hisintellectual efforts. "I do not know,"said he, " what I may appear to theworld ; but to myself, I seem to havebeen only like a buy playing on thesea shore, and diverting myself in nowand then finding a smoother pebble, oraprettier shell, than ordinary, whilstthe great ocean of truth lay all undiscoveredbefore me." During the lastten years of his life, lie would reply,when consulted about arty passage inits works, t! Ask Mr. De Moivre; heknows better than I do." With respectto his religions sentiments, he was aslim believer in divine revelation, andemployed his discoveries concerningthe frame and system df the Universe,td demonstrate, against atheism of allkinds, the being; wisdom, and power ofa God.It is said of him, that when he hadany mathematical problems or solutionsin His mind; he would never quit thesubject on any account. Whilst gettingup in a morning; he would sometimessit down on his bed; with one leg in hisbreeches, and remain there for hoursbe; ore he had got all his clothes on.Upon this temporary abstraction wasprobably founded the'story of his sitting,on one occasion, so near a large fire, thathe was nearly roasted ; and that, whenthe intense neat brought him back tohis personal identity, he rang for theservant to put out the fire, by whom hewas respectfully reminded that the samepurpose might be answered if he re-mOved his chair a little farther from thegrate; " Ay," said Newton, " so itwill." The following anecdote givenunder the authority of his intimatefriend, Dr. Surely, is undoubtedlytrue: The doctor called, one day,xvhen Newton's dinner . was alreadyserved up, but beTdre he had appearedJOHN FLAMSTEKD.lointhe dining-room. Having waitedsome time, he became impatient, andremoved the cover from a chicken,which he presently ate, putting thehones back into the dish and replacingthe cover. After a short interval,Newton came into the room, and, withthe usual compliments, sat down todinner ; but, on taking up the cover,and seeing only the bones of the birdleft, he observed, with some little sur-rise," 1 thought I had not dined, butnow find I have."It is said of him, that he did once inhis life go ''a wooing;" and, as was tohe expected, had the greatest attentionand indulgence paid to the little peculiaritieswhich ever accompany greatgenius. Knowing he was fond ofsmoking, the lady assiduously provided-himwith a pipe, and they were thenseated, as if to open the business ofC in>id. Sir Isaac smoked a few whiffsseemed at a loss for somethingwhiffed again and, at last, drew hischair nearer the lady. Sir Isaac gothold of her hand now her palpitationsbegan he will kiss it. no doubt, thought.-he, and then the matter is ended. SirIsaac whiffed with redoubled fury, anddrew the captive hand nearer to hishead already the expected salute hadvibrated forti the hand to the heartone finger was gently separated fromthe others when 10 ! the succeed ngnjutiun converted it into a tobaccosUr.ip r !"During t!u- latter half of his life,he devoted much of his time to theologicalliterature, and left a vast massof unpublished manuscripts relatingto chronology and church history,which were examined by a committeeof the Koyal Society ; but none werethought worth printing, except his Observationsupon the Prophecies ofDaniel and the Apocalypse, which appearedin 1733, quarto. Besides theforeign edition of his principal publications,all his works were publishedby Dr. S. Horsey, London, 1779, fivevolumes, quarto. The best edition ofthe Principia is that of Lesser andJacqnit-r, four volumes, quarto, Geneva,1739-42; four volumes, octavo, Glasgow,1822. In person, this intellectualColossus was of a middle stature, inclining,latterly, to corpulence. Hiseye was lively and piercing ; and hisaspect, in itself mild and gracious, wasrendered doubly so by a fine head, ofhair, which was as white as silver. Tothe time of his last illness, lie had uponhis countenance the bloom, colour, andcheerfulness of youth. His sight wasso good, that he never resorted to spectacles5 and he never lost but one toothin his life.To sum up our account of Newton, itmay be said of him. that if all the philosophersthat ever lived were dividedinto two classes, all but himself wouldbe one, and he the other ; nor did Popeever more happily combine poetry withtruth, than when he said,Nature and Natures laws lay hid in night,God Mid " Li Newton be," aud all was light.JOHN FLAMSTEED.I HIS eminent astronomer was bornat Deny, in Derbyshire, on the 19thof August, 1646, and received his educationat the free-school of Derby,where he remained until the year 1662,when ill-health prevented him frommaking further academical progress.On his return home, Sacrobosco's book,De Sphere, falling into his hands, heimmediately conceived a fondness forastronomical studies; and, in a shorttime afterwards, the perusal of Pale'sArt of Dialing enabled him to constructa quadrant, which he performedwithout help, and before he had heardof any artificial tables. His studies,though discountenanced by his father,he continued to pursue with equalardour and success; and, with the assistanceonly of such books as fell inhis hands by chance, he performed,with great rapidity, several importantastronomical calculations. At length,one which he had made of an eclipse ofthe sun,, which was to happen on the22nd of June, 1666, having been shewnSCIENCE.to Mr. Hal ton, that gentleman senthim Ricciolus's Almagest, Kepler'sGodolphin Tables, and other mathematicalworks, to which he was beforea stranger. After an attentive perusalof them, and particularly of Ricciolus,in whom he detected many errors, heattempted the discovery of a demonstrableequation ; but, in endeavouringto establish his first opinion, " that thenatural days were always equal, andthat there needed no equation of time,"he proved the contrary : first, that theeccentricity of the earth's orbit fromthe sun's centre caused an inequality ;and, afterwards, that the ecliptic's obliquitycaused another inequality of theapparent day, which two causes, appliedtogether, would make the absoluteequation of time.At the end of the year 1669, he wrotean almanac for the following year ;in which he inserted an eclipse' thatwas omitted in the Ephemerides, andfive impulses of the moon to fixedstars. " But this," says he, in a manuscript,entitled Self Inspections, " beingrejected, as beyond the capacity of thevulgar, and returned to me, I excerptthe eclipse and impulses, andaddressed them, with some astronomicalspeculations, to the Royal Society,suppressing my name under my antrim."His communication was mostfavourably received by the Society, andprocured him letters of thanks fromMr. Oldenburg, the secretary, and Mr.John Collins, one of the members ; inhis correspondence with whom will befound a number of interesting detailsrespecting the progress ol his futurestudies.'In June, 1670, Mr. Flamsteed proceededto London, where he was introducedto some of the first mathematiciansof the day, from whom hereceived both attention and assistance ;and he, shortly afterwards, enteredhimself of Jesus' College, Cambridge,where he became acquainted withBarrow and Newton. In the spring of1672, he translated into Latin severalof Mr. Gascoigne's letters ; and fromsome of them, showing how the imagesof remote objects were formed in thedistinct base of a convex object glass,he got his dioptrics in a few hours,having previously read those of DesCartes without gaining much instruction.In 1673, he wrote a small tractconcerning the true diameters of allthe planets, which he lent to Newton,who made use of it in the fourth bookof his Principia. In 1674, he wrotean ephemeris, shewing the futility ofastrology ; and, at the request of SirJonas Moore, made a table of themoon's true soothing for that year ;from which, and Mr. Philip's theory ofthe tides, the high waters being computed,he found that they shewed-thetimes of the turn of the tides very near ;whereas the ordinary seamen's coarserules would err sometimes two or threehours. In this year, he made a pair ofbarometers, which were presented, bySir Jonas Moore, to the king, who,about the same time, appointed Mr.Flamsteed to the new office of ,with a salary of 100a-year; and he, accordingly, took uphis residence at the observatory atGreenwich, which was shortly afterwardserected.In 1681, appeared his Doctrine ofthe Sphere, a most excellent and usefulwork ; in which he found how theparallaxes of altitude, longitude, andlatitude, were made and given by construction; and how the times of anyappearance of a solar eclipse, the partthen darkened, with the inclination ofthe cusps, might be determined withoutany calculation of them, by thehelp of projection. He followed .upthis discovery by the construction of aneclipse he had observed at Derby, onthe 2,5th of October, 1668 ; which, witha brief description of the method, waslaid before the Royal Society, when SirChristopher Wren, who was present,satisfactorily proved that he had adoptedthe same plan sixteen years before. In1684, having previously graduatedM. A., and taken orders, he was presentedto the living of Bestow, nearBlechingley, in Surrey, which he continuedto hold till December, 1719, inwhich month and year he died, leavingbehind him a widow, by whom he hadno children.In addition to the works alreadymentioned, he communicated severalother papers to the PhilosophicalTransactions ; but his most importantwork, Historia Ccelestis Britannica, wasnot ready for publication until 1725,when it appeared in three volumes,ABRAHAM SHARP.folio, and was justly pronounced " anoble and lasting monument to hismemory." The first volume contains theobservations of Mr. William Gascoigne(the inventor of the method of measuringangles in a telescope, by means ofscrews) with those of Flamsteed himself,taken at Derby, between 1675 and1689, together with a number of curiousobservations, and necessary tables to beused with them at the Royal Observatory.The second volume contains hisobservations, made with a mural archof near seven feet radius, and one hundredand forty degrees on the limb, ofthe meridional zenith distances of thefixed stars, sun, moon, and planets,with their transits over the meridian ;also observations of the diameters of thesun and moon, with their eclipses, andthose of Jupiter's satellites, and variationsof the compass, from 1689 to 1719 ;with tables, shewing how to renderthe calculation of the places of thestars and planets easy and expeditious:to which are added, the moon's place ather oppositions, quadratures, &c. ; also,the planets' places, derived from the observations.In the third volume willbe found a catalogue of the rightascensions, polar distances, longitudes,and magnitudes, of near three thousandfixed stars, with the corresponding variationsof the same. One of the mostvaluable parts of this volume is thepreface, which contains an account ofall the astronomical observations madebefore his time, with a description ofthe instruments employed ; as also ofhis own observations and instruments ;a new Latin version of Ptolemy's catalogueof one thousand fixed stars, andUlegh-Beigh's places annexed on theLatin page, with corrections; a smallcatalogue of the Arabs ; Tycho Brahe's,of about seven hundred and eightyfixed stars ; the Landgrave of Hesse's,of three hundred and eighty-six ; Hevelius's,of one thousand five hundred andthirty-four ; and a catalogue of someof the southern fixed stars, not visiblein our hemisphere, calculated from observationsmade by Dr. Halley, at St.Helena, and adapted to the year 1726.Flamsteed was held in great esteemby his illustrious contemporaries, bothnative and foreign ; and among hisgreatest admirers may be ranked Newton,Halley, and Cassini, to some ofwhose doctrines he was occasionallyopposed. He is represented to havespent the latter, as he had done theformer, part of his life, in promotingtrue and useful knowledge, bythe constant exercise of his own greatabilities, and by talking all possiblemethods to obtain whatever lights thediscoveries of others might afford him.In private life he was cheerful and convivial,and the facetious Tom Brownwas occasionally to be found among theguests at his table.ABRAHAM SHARP.ABRAHAM SHARP, descended froman ancient family at Little Horton, nearBradford, in the West Riding of Yorkshire,was born there about the year1651. After he had completed hiseducation, lie was apprenticed to a merchant,at Manchester, but his attachmentto mathematics was too strong toallow him to follow the business forwhich he was designed. He accordinglyremoved to Liverpool, and appliedhimself, without restraint, to mathematicaland astronomical studies ; opening,at the same time, a school for writingand accounts, as a means of procuringa subsistence. For the purpose ofbecoming acquainted with Mr. Flamsteed,the celebrated astronomer, hethen engaged himself as clerk to a merchantin London, in whose house theformer lodged. He had no reason toregret this step, which led to his employmentin the dock-yard at Chatham,under Mr. Flamsteed, who, subsequently,invited him to be his assistantin fitting up the observatory at Greenwich,which had been erected about theyear 1676. A catalogue of three thousandfixed stars was here formed, inwhich he had a considerable share ;but his nightly observations brought onan illness which compelled him to desistSCIENCE.from his operations, and retire to hishouse at Horton. Here, on the recoveryof his health, he built an observatory,fitted up with instruments all of his ownmaking, and some of nis own invention.Resuming his employment at Greenwich,he was employed chiefly in theconstruction of the mural arc whichhe completed, in a very masterly manner,in the course of fourteen months.Mr. Smeaton observes, that this muralarc may be considered as the first goodand valid instrument of the kind, andthat Mr. Sharp was the first who cutaccurate and delicate divisions uponastronomical instruments. Sharp alsorendered Flamsteed valuable assistancein the second volume of his HistoriaCcelestis, and made some curious drawingsof the constellations, which aresaid to have exceeded the engravings ofthem in beauty.In 1699, he undertook the quadratureof the circle, deduced from twodifferent series, by which the truth ofit was proved to seventy-two places offigures, as appears in the introductionto Sher win's Tables of Logarithms. In1718, he published a book, entitledGeometry Improved, in which not onlythe geometrical lines on the plates, butthe whole engraving of the letters andfigures was done by himself. At thesame time, observes his biographer,this elaborate treatise affords an honourableproof of the author's greatabilities, as a mathematician ; and containsthings well worthy of attention :First, a large and accurate table of segmentsof circles, with the method of itsconstruction, and various uses in thesolution of several difficult problems.Secondly, a concise treatise of polydra,or solid bodies, of many bases, both theregular one and others ; to which areadded, twelve new ones, with variousmethods of forming them; and theirexact dimensions in curds or species,and in numbers." Mr. Sharp passed thelatter years of his life at his native place,and died there n the 18th of July,1742, in the ninety-first year of his age.This eminent man "had as mucheccentricity as genius; though the one,probably, was the cause of the other.He kept four or five apartments in hishouse, into which he permitted none ofhis family to enter, without special permission.He receive;! but a few favouredvisitors, and these were admitted, onmaking a signal, by rubbing a stoneagainst a certain part of the wall of thehouse. He was remarkably abstemious,and, instead of taking his meals withhis family, had them placed, from without,behind a small sliding panel, in thewall of his study, where they oftenremained, untouched for several hours.He was never married ; and, indeed,the ceremony of courtship to such a manas Sharp would have been an absoluteimpossibility. To his scientific talents,Newton, Halley, and Flamsteed haveborne testimony ; and such is said tohave been the accuracy of his computations,that there was scarcely an eminentmathematician of the day who did notapply to him in all troublesome anddelicate calculations. The executionof his hand was equally ready to aidthe contrivance of his 'head, in mechanics; and few, or none, it is said, ofthe mathematical instrument makers,could exceed him in exactly graduatingor neatly engraving any mathematicalor astronomical instrument.EDMUND HALLEY.EDMUND HALLEY, son of a soap-boiler,was born at Palmerston, in theparish of St. Leonard, Shoreditch, onthe 29th of October, 1656. He was ayouth of the most promising genius;and nis lather having acquired an ampletot tune, spared no expense in his education,which he, in the first instance,received at Su Paul's School, where hebecame captain at the age of fifteen.In 1673, he was entered a commoner ofQueen's College, Oxford, at which timehe was not only skilled in every branchof classical learning, hut also in planeand spherical trigonometry, navigation,and astronomy. These sciences hepursued at the university with unremittingindustry, of which he gave aEDMUND H ALLEY.Illproof by publishing, in 1675, when hewas only nineteen years of age, ADirect and Geometrical Method ofFinding the Aphelia and Eccentricityof the Planets, which gave to the Kep-hermantheory of planetary motion itsfirst geometrical foundation, and wasspoken of, by M. Mairan, as a workwhich might justly excite the envy ofthe most skilful astronomers of the time.On the 17th of June, 1675, he madesome observations on an eclipse of themoon ; and, in the July and August ofthe following year, upon a spot in thesun, by means of which he absolutelydetermined the motion of the sun roundits own axis, a phenomenon until thennot fully ascertained. In the lattermonth, lie also observed an occupationot Mars by the moon, which subsequentlyenabled him to settle the longitudeof the Cape of Good Hope, againstthe objections of the French astronomers.He likewise made severalcorrections, in the best astronomicaltables then extant, of the planets ofSaturn and Jupiter; and, previous toleaving Oxford, had discovered the method,now well known, of constructingsolar eclipses, in which, however, hewas preceded by Sir Christopher Wren,and followed by Flamsteed, as will beseen in our memoir of the latter.About this time, he formed the resolutionof perfecting the whole schemeof the heavens, by the addition of suchstars as lay too near the south pole tohave come within the observation ofFlamsteed and Hevelius, For this purpose,he made a voyage to St. Helen. t,where he arrived in February, 1677 ;and after passing about eighteen monthsin making astronomical observations,he returned to England in November,1678, and presented a planisphere tothe king, who gave him a mandamusto the University of Oxford for the degreeof M. A., and he was shortly afterwardschosen a fellow of the RoyalSociety. " To these honours," observesone of his biographers, " he was justlyentitled; for though there were twoaccounts of the southern stars then extant,yet both of them were so veryimperfect and inaccurate, that Mr.Halley's catalogue was an acquisitionto the astronomical world entirely new,and gave him an indisputable claim tothe title which Mr. Fainted, notlong afterwards, conferred upon him, ofthe Southern Tycho." In 167i>, he publishedhis Catalogus Stellar Australian,sive Supplemented CatalogTychonici, &c., which was succeededby two other treatises, entitled Modiquidam pen Geometric pro parallaxLuna investigate, and Quidam Lu-parisTheories emendation sptctnn-tia. Immediately after the publicationof these works, he was selected, bythe Royal Society, to go to Antic,for the purpose of settling a disputebetween Mr. Hooke and Hevelius,respecting the preference of plain orglass sights in astronomical instruments,which he decided in favour pfthe latter. In 1680, he set out on acontinental tour, in company with Mr.Robert Nelson, and, in his way toParis, he was the first who saw the remarkablecomet which appeared thatyear. During his stay in the Frenchcapital, he visited the celebrated Cassini,and endeavoured to settle a Friendlycorrespondence between the two royalastronomers of Greenwich and Paris.He passed the greater part of the year1681 in Italy; and upon his marriage,in the following year, with Mary,daughter of Mr. Tooke, auditor of theexchequer, he took a house at Islington,where he fitted up an observatoryfor his astronomical researches.In 1683, he published his Theory ofthe Variation of the Magnetical Compass,wherein he supposes the wholeglobe of the earth to be one great magnet,having four magnetical poles, bywhich, in those parts of the world adjacentto any of them, the needle isgoverned ; the nearest pole, or point ofattraction, being always predominantover the most remote ; an hypothesiswhich, with some amendments, it willbe seen that he subsequently established.In the same year he commenced, andpursued for sixteen months, a series oflunar observations, with a view to findingthe longitude at sea, by the motionof the moon; and, during that period,he detected several important errors inthe tables of the Arctic period, whichhe ultimately restored to its ancientreputation. In 1684, he turned his attentionto Kepler's sesquialterate proportion; but being unable to demonstratein any geometrical way, his conclusion,that the centripetal force must de-science.crease, in proportion to the squares of thedistances, reciprocally," he, after in vainseeking information from Hooke, andSir Christopher Wren, applied to Newton,who satisfied all his inquiries, byshewing him the manuscript of hisPrincipia, which, as we have related inour memoir of Sir Isaac, was afterwardspublished at the suggestion of Halley,and under his special superintendence.In 1685, he was appointed assistant-secretaryto the Royal Society; and, inthe following year, he satisfactorilyaccounted for a natural phenomenon,which till then had baffled the researchesof the ablest geographers. This wasthe discovery of the reason why theMediterranean never swells in the least,although there is no visible dischargeof the immense quantity of water thatruns into it from nine large rivers, besidesseveral small ones, and the constantsetting in of the current at themouth of the streight. Mr. Halleysolved this difficulty, by finding thatthis vast accession of water was carriedoff in vapours, raised by the action ofthe sun and wind upon its surface, andreturned again to the sea by the windsdriving these vapours to the mountains,where, being collected, they formsprings, the streams from which uniting,become rivulets or brooks ; and manyof these again meeting in the vallies,grow into large rivers, which againempty themselves into the sea.In 1691, he became an unsuccessfulcandidate for the Savilian professorshipof astronomy, at Oxford ; an officewhich, according to Whiston, he lost,in consequence of being " a sceptic,and a banterer of religion," though thewriter of his life, in The BiographiaBritannica, ascribes it principally to themachinations of Flamsteed. In 1692,he published his Tables, shewing thevalue of Annuities for Lives, calculatedfrom the bills of mortality at Breslau,in Silesia, one of the most known anduseful tracts that ever came from hispen. In the same year, he resignedhis appointment of assistant-secretaryto the Royal Society; but continued,for several years, to be one of the mostvaluable contributors to their Transactions.In 1696, on the establishmentof five mints for the silver re-coinage,he was appointed comptroller of theone at Chester, where he resided fortwo years. In 1698, having in viewthe substantiation of his theory respectingthe variation of the compass, heobtained, from William the Third, thecommand of a vessel, called the ParamourPink, with express orders to seek,by observation, the discovery of the ruleof the variation. The insubordinationof his officers, compelled him to putback home, just as he had crossed theline ; but, in the September of the followingyear, he again set out, and afterhaving traversed both hemispheres, asfar as the ice would permit him, hereturned, by way of St. Helena, toEngland, in the autumn of 1700. Thespot, where he made his astronomicalobservations in the former island, hasbeen since marked out by the erectionof a telegraph, and the appellation ofHalley's Mount. In 1701, he published,as the result of his researches,A General Chart, shewing, at one view,the variation of the compass in all thoseseas where the English navigators wereacquainted; by which he was the firstto lay the true foundation of a discovery,which his biographer deservedly calls"one of the most useful benefactionsthat mankind ever received from afellow-creature."He was shortly afterwards commissionedto observe the course of thetides in the British channel, and to takethe longitude and latitude of the principalheadlands, which he executedwith great skill ; and, on his return, in1702, published a large map of the Britishchannel. In 1703, lie was engaged,by the Emperor of Germany, to surveythe coast of Dalmatia, and on his return,in November, he was appointed Savilianprofessor of geometry, at Oxford, onthe decease of Dr. Wallis ; and at thesame time was presented with the degreeof LL.D. His next employmentwas in the translation, from Arabic intoLatin, of Apollonius de section rationis ;a task which had been given up by Dr.Bernard, as too difficult to complete.Halley, however, although at the timehe was perfectly ignorant of the Arabic,accomplished his undertaking in sucha manner, as to call forth the approbationand astonishment of the firstoriental scholars. He then turnedhis attention to the Conic Sections ofApollonius, in which he assisted hiscolleague, Dr. David Gregory ; andEDMUND HALLE Y.the eighth book of the original beinglost, the whole of it was supplied byHalley.In November, 1713, he succeededSloane in the post of secretary to theRoyal Society ; and, in 1715, he had,with regard to the syzigies, or conjunctions,so far perfected his theory of themoon's motion, that he not only predicted,within a very few minutes, thecentral eclipse of the sun, which happenedin that year, but also drew amap, in which he represented theextent of the moon's shadow, withsurprising exactness. This at once confirmedhim in the reputation of a first-rateastronomer, especially on a calculationof the same eclipse, by Whistonand Flamsteed, on whose death, in1719, the subject of our memoir succeededto his post of astronomer-royal.On his removal to Greenwich, he resumed,with indefatigable zeal, his lunarobservations ; and, for eighteen years,he is said to have scarce lost a meridianview of the moon, whether by day orby night, as often as the heavens wouldpermit. In order to devote himselfmore uninterruptedly to his favouritepursuit, he, in 1721, resigned his secretaryshipto the Royal Society ; and,for' the same reason, he subsequentlydeclined becoming mathematical preceptorto the Duke of Cumberland. Onthe accession of George the Second, hewas visited, at Greenwich, by QueenCaroline, who procured him half-pay,as a captain in the navy ; and, in 1729,he was admitted as a foreign memberof the Academy of Sciences, at Paris.He continued to prosecute, his tediousand difficult researches respecting themoon's theory, until the period of hisdeath, which took place on the 14ih ofJanuary, 1741-2.In person, Mr. Halley is describedof a middle stature, inclining totallness ; of a thin habit of body, and afair complexion." His elope was pronounced,in the French Academy, byM. Mairan, who gave an oratorical accountof the universality of his genius,and the boldness of his philosophicalhypotheses. Among others, he supposedthe age of the world to be greaterthan is usually inferred from the Mosaichistory, and that the length of the sixdays of the creation extended, each ofthem, to a thousand years ; being ofopinion that such a duration was notinconsistent with anything delivered byMoses. Mr. Halley made an importantimprovement in Davis's quadrant;and, in addition to the worksalready mentioned, he published MiscellaneaCuriosa, in three volumes,octavo; and, in 17c2, appeared hisAstronomical Tables, with precepts,both in English and Latin, for computingthe places of the sun, moon,planets, and comets. His papers were,for many years, the chief ornamentand support of tie PhilosophicalTransactions, being about twenty-fiveor thirty dissertations, all aboundingwith ideas, new, singular, and useful.They relate chiefly to the quantity ofvapour which the sun raises from thesea ; the circulation of vapours ; theorigin of fountains; questions on thenature of light, and transparent bodies;a determination of the degrees of mortality; and many other works in astronomy,geometry, algebra; optics anddioptrics ; ballistics and artillery ; speculativeand experimental philosophy ; naturalhistory, antiquities, philology,~andcriticism. The character of Mr. Halleyappears to have been estimable ; he w asof an ardent and generous disposition,pleasing and affable in his manners,punctual and open in his dealings,candid in his judgment, and no lessready to communicate, than he wasdiligent to acquire knowledge. He wascheerful and animated to the last ; andit is said that the palsy itself, whichattacked him some years before hisdeath, could not impair his naturalvein of gaiety and good-humour. Withrespect to his unbelief in matters of religion," it is not now possible," saysone of his biographers, " to ascertainthe cause ; whether to his dissatisfaction,as a geometrician, with the subtletiesof scholastic systems of faith, withwhich the pure doctrines of the Christianreligion are too often confounded ;or, as is no uncommon case for men ofletters and science, his being so deeplyengaged in his favourite speculations, asto disregard and despise inquiries notimmediately connected with objectsof his researches." He lived in thereigns of six British monarchs, fromeach of whom he received markedfavour ; and when Peter the Great,Emperor of Russia, visited England,Sci Oncehe was invited to his table, and becameboth his friend and his guest.He was also highly respected andesteemed by Newton ; and he mostably repelled the attacks of Hooke andSociety on that illustrious philosopher,who speaks of him, in the preface to apaper ot Halley's, upon the subject ofgunnery, as ' virum in omni generedoctrina eruditissimum"WILLIAM Shepard.THE proper name of this " prince andMaecenas of botany," as he is called byseveral writers, was Sherwood, and hewas born at Bushy, in Leicestershire,in 1659. He received his education atMerchant Tailor's School, and at theUniversity of Oxford, where he becamea fellow of St. John's College, andgraduated B.A., in 16*83. About thistime, being appointed travelling tutor toCharles (afterwards Viscount) Townshend,he accompanied that noblemanon a continental tour, which he subsequentlyrepeated with his second pupil,Lord Howland (afterwards second Dukeot Bedford). Holland, France, Switzerland,and Italy, were the scene of histravels, and, in each of these countries,he not only carried on his botanicalresearches with ardour and ability, butformed an acquaintance with the mosteminent foreigners of science, amongwhom were Boerhaave, Vaillant, ,Hermann, and Michele. In hisown country he had already gained thefriendship of the illustrious Kay, having,previously to his departure fromEngland, enriched the pub. ica ions otthat celebrated botanist by some valuableadditions, and to whose SyilogeStirpium Europuaarum, he contributed,on his return, a catalogue of plantsgathered in the neighbourhood otGeneva. In the years 1686, 1687, and1(588, he attended the lectures otTournefort, at Paris, as appears fromthe preface to a work, entitled ScholaBotanical, published anonymously, atAmsterdam, in 1689, but of which Rayappears ti have been the author. Itcontained a systematic catalogue of theplants in the royal garden at Paris,and was reprinted'iri 1691, and 1699.Soon after his arrival in Englandfrom his last tour, the subject ot' ourmemoir became one of the commissionersfor sick and wounded-ea.nenat Portsmouth ; and, about the year1702, he* was sent out as British consulto Smyrna. He remained in this capacitysixteen years, in the course ofwhich he diligently studied variousbranches of science and literature ;visited the seven churches of Asia ; andcommunicated to the Royal Society anaccount of a new volcanic island, nearSantorini, which rose out of the sea, onthe 12th of May, 1707. Botany, however,continuing to be the favourite objectof his pursuit, he purchased a villaand garden, at Sedekio, where he passedthe greater portion of his time, occupiedin the contemplation of plants, andin the cultivation of such as he hadobtained from the neighbouring countries.In this spot, which Hasselquist,in the course of his travels, is said tohave visited, with the devotion of apilgrim, Sherard began his Herbarium,and he also made some progress in thearduous undertaking of continuingBauhin's Pinax IJotanicus. He returnedhome in 1718; and, after havingreceived, at Oxford, the degree ofLL.D again repaired to the continent,where he assisted in editing, and negotiatedthe sale of, Vaillant's BotanicalParisians, to Boerhaave, and came backto England, in 1721. with the celebratedDillenius, whom he had taken underhis patronage and friendship. In 1724,he paid another visit to Boerhaave, inGermany ; and, whilst pursuing hisbotanical researches in that country, issaid to have been. " like Linnaeus, inNorway, Li danger of being shot for awolf or a thief."From the moment of his associationwith Dillenius, whose taste in thisrespect was similar with his own,Sherard renewed i. with increased ardour,his investigations concerning thoseindicate tribes ot' vegetables, termedCi \ ptogii^iic ; and to their mir . u >a-SIR HANS SLOANEhours is owing the cultivation whichthis line of botanical study has sincereceived in England and Germany.Whilst pursuing his own researches, hewas not uiiinindml of the labours of01 hers ; and, having acquired a tolerablefortune, was ever ready to give b thmoney and information to those bywhom they were needed. In this mannerhe as sted Catesbyby, in his NaturalHistory of Carolina, and Dillenius inhis hortus Llthamensis ; although neitherworks appeared until some timeafter his death, which took place on the12th of August, 1728.Dr. Sherard seems to have pursuedhis botanical researches out of pure loveof the science, unmixed with any otherambition than that of extending itslimits, and of witnessing its improvements.At his death he left 3,000 tofound and support a botanical professorshipat Oxford, with a proviso, forwhich he has been blamed, that noclergyman should be elected to thechair. He also bequeathed to the universityhis very valuable library, themanuscript of his Pinax, and his Herbarium,which is, perhaps, except thatof Linnaeus, the most ample, authentic,and valuable botanical record in theworld.The name of Sherard has been commemoratedby Vaillant, in some plantsreferred, by Linnaeus, to Verbena ; andDillenius established a Sherardia, inhonour of his munificent and learnedpatron.SIR HANS SLOANE.HANS, the son of Alexander Sloane,a Scotchman, who, with a colony of hiscountrymen, had settled, during thereign of James the First, in the northof Ireland, was born at Killaleagh, inthe county of Down, on the 16th ofApril, 1660. He displayed, from hisboyhood, a strong predilection for naturalhistory, and adopted the medicalprofession principally on account of thefacilities it would afford him for followinghis favourite pursuits. He appearsto have commenced the study ofphysic under Dr. Strafford, in London ;whence, after having attended variouslectures on botany, anatomy, and chemistry,and formed a close intimacywith Boyle and Ray, he proceeded toParis, where he became a pupil of DuVarney and Tournefort. At the Universityof Montpellier, according tosome writers, he took his medical degrees,while others assert that he obtainedthem at Orange. Be this as itmay, it appears certain that he passedsome lime at the former place ; and,while there, made a large collection ofplants ; in the arrangement of which,lie was materially assisted by thelearned Magnolia1684, he returned to London, andwas, soon after, elected a member ofthe Royal Society. In April, 1687, hebecame a fellow of the College of Physicians;and, on the 12th of the followingSeptember, proceeded to the WestIndies, in the capacity of physician tothe Duke of Albemarle, Governor ofJamaica. Here, in about fifteen months,he made an enormous collection ofplants and other objects of naturalhistory : of the former, he broughthome no less than eight hundredspecies ; " a number," says Dr. Pul-tenet,in his Sketches of Botany,very far beyond what had been imported,by any individual in England,before."In May, 1689, Dr. Sloane returnedto London, and resumed the duties ofhis profession ; in which he becair.e soeminent, that-in 1694, he was choituphysician to Christ's Hospital ; and itis stated, by Mr. Hutchinson, that heapplied the money he received fromthis appointment, which he held forthirty-six years, to the relief of thepoor in the hospital. In the previousyear, he had been appointedsecretary to the Royal Society ; and,having revived the publication of thePhilosophical Transactions, he continuedto edit them until 1712.In 1696, he published the prodromusto his History of Jamaica plants, underthe title of Catalogus Plantarum qua; inSCIENCE.Insula Jamaica sponte proveniiint velvulgo counter, &e. ; a worK, of whichit is impossible to speak too highly.For indefatigable labour, and accurateresearch, it may be pronounced unequalled,though it is an objectionagainst the author, that he has adheredtoo much to popularly-received generaof plants ; taking, as his guides of arrangement,habit and general resemblance,rather than the structure of thefructification. In 1701, he was createdM. D. at Oxford ; and he was afterwardsmade a member of the RoyalAcademy of Sciences, at Paris, and ofseveral other foreign academies. In1707, appeared the first volume of hisgreat work upon Jamaica, consisting ofa general account of the discovery ofthe West Indies, and of the island ofJamaica in particular, and dedicated toQueen Anne, in whose last illness hewas one of the physicians consulted.It was entitled A Voyage to the Islandsof Madeira, Barbadoes, Nevis, St. Christopher's,and Jamaica ; with the NaturalHistory of the Herbs and Trees,Four-footed Beasts, Fishes, Birds, Insects,Reptiles, &c. ; to which is prefixedan introduction, wherein is anaccount of the inhabitants, air, water,diseases, trade, &c. of that place ; withsome relations concerning the neighbouringcontinent and islands of America,folio, with two hundred and fifty-sixplates. The second volume did notappear until seventeen years afterwards,when it was published, dedicated to theking.In 1716, Dr. Sloane was created abaronet by George the First ; being, itis said, the first physician .on whomthat honour was conferred. Duringthe reign of the same monarch, he wasphysician-general to the army ; and, onthe accession of George the Second, hewas appointed the king's physician inordinary. In 1719, he was electedpresident of the College of Physicians ;and, on the death of Sir Isaac Newton,in 1727, he succeeded him as presidentof the Royal Society ; to which bodyhe presented one hundred guineas, anda bust of their founder, Charles theSecond. He presided over this institutionuntil 1740, enjoying, in the meantime,the highest reputation as a naturalist,and one scarcely inferior as aphysician. In 1741, he retired to hisabode at the manor-house of Chelsea,where the infirmities of age assailedhim, and he died, on the llih ofJanuary, 1752, in the ninety-secondyear of his age. He had been a widowersince 1724 ; having married, in 1695,Elizabeth, daughter of Alderman Langley,by whom he had issue one son andthree daughters.In person, Sir Hans was tall andwell made ; in his manners, easy, polite,and engaging ; and, in his conversation,sprightly and entertaining. Hischarity and liberality were extensive ;and, besides being governor of almostevery hospital in London, he foundeda dispensary for the poor ; his exertionsfor the establishment of which, and theopposition he met with, are recorded inDr. Garth's poem of The Dispensary.He was also, says Dr. Pulteney, " zealousin promoting the colony of Georgia,in 1732 ; and formed, himself, the planfor bringing up the children in theFoundling Hospital, in 1739. Hisprincipal claim, however, to the gratitudeof his countrymen, is the share hehad in the formation of the BritishMuseum; of which his bequest to thepublic, at the price of 20,000, of thewhole of his collection in natural history,with his valuable library andmanuscripts, &c., laid the foundation.Accordingly, parliament complying withthe terms, an act was passed," in 1753,for the purchase of the museum orcollection of Sir Hans Sloane, Bart.,and of the Harleian collection of manuscripts,and for procuring one generalrepository for the better reception andmore convenient use of the said collection,and of the Cottonian library,and additions thereto." Sir Hans occupiedthe greater part of his life inamassing this splendid collection, whichhe took great delight in exhibiting tostrangers, particularly if they wereforeigners.He wrote several papers in thePhilosophical Transactions, besides hisNatural History of Jamaica, which Dr.Feint calls "an elaborate work, greatlytending to the honour of our country,and the enriching of the Materia Medica."It is, however, to be regretted,that a man of such practical benevolenceas Sir Hans Sloane, should, in thiswork, which redounds so highly to hishonour as a man of science, have ex-johnKill.pressed himself with reference to thecruelties practised towards the slaves inJamaica, in a manner equally unworthyof the philanthropist and of the philosopher.Speaking of the hacks, hesays, " After they are whipped till theyare raw, some put on their skins pepperand salt, to make them smart ; at othertimes, their masters will drop meltedwax on Their skins, and use severalvery exquisite torments. These punishmentsare sometimes merited by theblacks, who are a very perverse generationof people; and though they appearharsh, yet are scarce equal to someof their crimes, and inferior to whatpunishments other European nationsinflict on their slaves in the EastIndies."With all his abilities as a naturalist,Sir Hans Sloane is to be consideredrather as a diligent and discriminatingcollector, than as a man of profoundscience, original ideas, or philosophicalinvestigation. As a medical practitioner,the suavity and politeness of hismanners greatly conduced to his employment.He was the first in Englandwho introduced into general practicethe use of the bark ; and he greatlyaccelerated the progress of inoculation,by performing that operation on severalof the royal family. His portrait hangsin the British Museum ; and in thecentre of the Botanical Garden, atChelsea, which he gave to the Apothecaries'Company, a statue of him iserected, by Rysbrach, the execution ofwhich is admirable, and the likenessstriking.JOHN Kill.JOHN Kill was born at Edinburgh,in the year 1671, and educatedin the university of that city, where hegraduated M. A. His tutor in mathematics,in which he early excelled, wasDr. David Gregory ; from whom Keilllearnt the principles of the Newtonianphilosophy, and imbibed them withgreat ardour. In 1694, he accompaniedhis tutor to the University ofOxford, where he became a member ofBaliol College, and obtained one of theScotch exhibitions in that society. Hewas not long in preparing himself toread lectures upon natural philosophy;and he is said to have been the firstwho taught the doctrines of the principiathe experiments on which theyare founded. His lectures were attendedby numerous students, and procuredhim high reputation, which wasfurther increased by his Examinationof Burnet's Theory of the Earth ; inwhich work he is generally allowed tohave completely refuted the absurdsystem which was the object of his attack.In his Examination, he alsomade some remarks upon Winston'stheory on the same subject ; and it,consequently, drew from that eccentricdivine, as well as from Dr. Burnet,a printed reply. Our philosopheranswered both in the same volume, in1699; and so satisfactorily exposed thefalse reasoning and ignorance of sciencein Burnet, that his theory of the eachis now no longer read but as an ingeniousromance.In 1700, on the appointment of Dr.Millington, Bodleian professor of naturalphilosophy at Oxford, to be physicianin ordinary to King William. Mr. Keillwas left as his deputy, and added considerablyto his tame by his lectures.About the same time, the term of hisScotch exhibition being nearly out, heremoved from Baliol to ChristchurchCollege, by the invitation of its dean,Dr. Aldrich. In 1702, he publishedthe substance of his lectures in a treatise,entitled Imroductio ad veraPhysical. This work met with greatapplause, both at home and abroad,particularly in France, where it wasconsidered the best introduction toThe Principia, when the Newtonianphilosophy began to obtain in thatcountry. A second edition of it appearedin 1705, with two additionallectures ; and a third was published,some years after the author's death, atthe instance of M. Maupertuis.Mr. Keill was elected a fellow of theRoyal Society, some time previous toSCIENCE.1708 ; in which year he communicated Ito their Transactions a paper On theLaws of Attraction, and its PhysicalPrinciples. This was in support of someof Newton's doctrines on optics ; and,about the same time, he vindicated SirIsaac from the charge of-leibnitz, thatthe former had no claim to the inventionof fluxions. In the famous, butdisgraceful controversy, which tookplace between these two eminent philosophers,Leibnitz was not withoutpartisans; and Keill, therefore, did noinconsiderable service to Sir Is ae, inproving, what has since been allowed,that from him Leibnitz had taken thismethod, only changing the name andnotation. This enraged Leibnitz, whoaddressed a letter to Sir Hans Sloane,president of the Royal Society, insistingthat Mr. Keill should be made todisown his assertion, for that he wasabsolutely ignorant of the name of themethod of fluxions till they appearedin the mathematical works of Dr.Wallis. Keill replied, by maintaininghis former opinions ; and Leibnitz, stillmore incensed, wrote another letter tothe president, affecting to consider thesubject of our memoir as an upstartbeneath his dignity to answer, and repeatinghis desire that he might besilenced. Upon this, a committeewas appointed, which crime to a conclusionin favour of Mr. Keill. Thecontroversy, however, was carried on forsome time : and one of Keill's latestpublications was a Latin epistle to thecelebrated John Bernouilli, in defenceof Newton, with the arms of Scotlandin the title p.ige. and the motto " Nemome impune lacessit."In 1709, the subject of our memoirwent out to Vew England as treasurerto the German exiles from the Palatinate; and, on his return, in the followingyear, he was elected Savilianprofessor of astronomy at Oxford. In711, he communicated to the philosophicalTransactions a paper On theCharity of Mutter and the Tenuity ofits Composition ; wherein he pointedout some phenomena which were inexplicableupon the supposition of aplenum ; in support of which, the cartesianhad made some attacks uponNewton. He was, shortly afterwards,made decipherer to Queen Anne ; andhe held that office, for two years, underGeorge the First. In 1713, he wascreated M. D. by the University of Oxford; and. in 1715, published an editionof Commanding's Euclid, withthe addition of two tracts by himself,entitled Trigonometry plantae etSpherical Elementa, and De Natura etArithmetic Logarithmorum. He issaid to have esteemed these beyond allhis other performances, and they arecertainly remarkable for their eleganceand perspicuity. In 1718, he publishedhis Introduction ad vera Astronoiuiam ;and afterwards, at the request of theDuchess of Chances, translated it intoEnglish. It was entitled An Introductionto the true Astronomy, orAstronomical Lectures, &c., and appearedbut a few months before hisdeath, which took place on the 1st ofSeptember, 1721.His merits, as a philosopher, havebeen sufficiently shown in the precedingmemoir to warrant us in assigning hima very high rank among men of science.If he struck out no new path, he followedthe best that was discovered ;and certainly, in advocating the truths,and detecting the errors, of philosophy,few have been more zealous or successful.To comprehend Newton's Principiaon the first promulgation of them,displayed no common genius ; to teachand vindicate them, a very superiororder of mind.JOHN Hutchinson.JOHN HUTCHINSON, the son of aperson of small landed property, wasborn at Spennythorn, in Yorkshire, in1674. A gentleman, who boarded athis father's house, instructed him in theclassics and mathematics, in order toqualify him for the office of a stewardto some nobleman or gentleman, andin this capacity, he entered the serviceof Mr. Bathurst, about the wear 1683.JOHN HUTCHINSON.He afterwards filled the same situation*successively, under the harl of Scarboroughand the Duke of Somerset, onwhose business going to London, in1700, he became acquainted with thecelebrated physician and naturalist,Dr. Woodward. Having communicatedhis ideas to Hutchinson, respectingthe Mosaic account of the creation, thelatter, in the course of some subsequentjournies into England and Wales, madecollections of fossils; and. in 1706', publishedsome Observations, which metthe approbation of Woodward, who encouragedhim to persevere. Hutchinsonnow gave up his fossils to the doctor,who undertook to arrange them in asystematic order, and to digest thescattered observations which accompaniedthem, into a regular work, toprove the truth of the Mosaic accountof the formation of the earth. Hisdelay, however, irritated Hutchinson,who resolved to draw up the work himself;and, that he might the betterprosecute his design, he quitted the serviceof the Duke of Somerset, who, beingmaster of the horse, appointed him hisriding purveyor, a sinecure, worth .'200per annum, with a good house in theKing's Mews.in 1724, he presented to the worldthe fruits of his early studies, in a workentitled Moses' Principia, includingthe first part, in which he not onlyridiculed Dr. Woodward's Natural Historyof the Earth, but attempted to refutethe principle of gravitation. Aftercommencing a law-suit tor the recoveryof his fossils, which was put an end tobyWoodward's death, the subject ofour memoir published the second partot' his IVmcipia; in which, in oppositionto the vacuum and gravity of Newton,he asserts that a plenum and the air arethe principles of the Scripture philosophy.The air he supposes to exist inthree conditions fire, light, and spirit.The light and spirit are the finer andgrosser parts of the air in motion ; Ironthe earth to the sun, the air is finer andfiner, till it becomes pure light near theconfines of the sun, and tire in the orbof the sun, or solar focus. From theearth, towards the circumference of thissystem, in which he includes the fixedstars, the air becomes grosser andgrosser, until it becomes torpid andstagnate, in which condition it is at theutmost verge of this system; fromwhence the idea or expression ofouter darkness and blackness of darkness,"used in the New Testament,seems to be taken. In the introductionto this second part, he also hints thatthe idea of the Trinity is to be takenfrom the three grand agents abovementioned,fire, light, and spirit; thesethree conditions of one and the samesubstance answering wonderfully in atypical, or symbolical manner, he observes,to the three persons f one andthe same essence. From this time, hecontinued publishing a volume everyyear or two, till his death, which wasprobably hastened by want of exercise,and too intense an application to hisstudies, and took place on the 27th ofAugust, 1737. His works were publishedin the year 1748. in twelve volumes,by the Rev. Mr. Julius Bate, agreat favourite of the author, and astrenuous advocate for his doctrines.Hutchinson, who was a man of greatsagacity, but of violent temper, possessed also considerable knowledge ofmechanics: and invented chronometer,for the discovery of the longitude atsea, which obtained the approbation ofSir Isaac Newton. Ambiguous andfanciful as were the philosophical doctrinesof Hutchinson, they obtainedmany admirers ; and, among others.Dr. Samuel Clarke and Bishop HomeHis leading notion," says Aikin, "was.that all knowledge, natural as well astheological, is contained in the HebrewScriptures ; and, in order to supponthis, he had recourse to the most fancifuletymologies, contrary to the genius andusage o 1 the Hebrew tongue, as well asto the most extravagant and whimsicalpropositions. He taught, that everyHebrew hoot has some important meaning,or represents some obvious idea ofaction or condition, raised by the sensibleobject which it expresses, andfurther designed to signify spiritual aridmental things."The following anecdote is told of him.in his last illness : His regular physician,Dr. Mead, being out of town," lierefuse-ed to be bled by the physician whoattended in Mead's stead. On hearingthis, the doctor, when he called, blamedhim ; but said, to console him, he wo.iidsoon send him to " Moses," meaninghis studies. Taking the doctor's wordsSCIENCE.in another sense, however, he answered,in a muttering tone, " I believe, doctor,you will ;" and from this, and someother circumstances, he conceived sucha disgust against the doctor, that hedismissed him from further attendance,called in another physician, and neverafter suffered his presence.WILLIAM JONES.WILLIAM JONES, the son of asmall farmer, in the parish of Llan-fihangel-the-Bard, in Anglesey, NorthWales, was born there in the year1680. He received an ordinary education,of which arithmetic was hisfavourite branch ; he afterwards proceededto the mathematics of his ownaccord, and commenced his career inlife, as a teacher of this science onboarda man-of-war, in the fleet underLord Anson. He was present at thecapture of Vigo, and during the pillageby which it was followed, is said to havefixed upon a bookseller's shop, as theobject of his plunder ; but finding in itno books worth seizing, contentedhimself with bringing away a pair ofscissors, as a trophy of his military success.Previously to this event, whichhappened in his twenty-second year,he had published A New Compendiumof the whole Art of Navigation ; and,on his return from abroad, he immediatelyestablished himself as a mathematicalteacher in London. In 1706,he published his Synopsis PalmariorumMatheseos, or a New Introduction tothe Mathematics, &c., containing aperspicuous and useful compendium ofall the mathematical sciences.The above works procured theirauthor considerable reputation in thescientific world, whilst his respectablecharacter and inviting manners gainedhim some noble and substantial friends.Among these was the great Lord Hard-wicked,who, on his accession to thechancellorship, conferred upon Jonesthe office of secretary for the peace.Sir Isaac Newton was also one of hisintimate friends ; and when Jones afterwardsfound among some papers ofCollins, which fell into his hands, atract of Newton's, entitled Analysis perQuantitative Series Fluxions, ac differential: cum Enumeration Line-arumtertii ordines, Sir Isaac assistedhim in the publication of it in 1711,accompanied by other pieces on analyticalsubjects. This tract secured toNewton the honour of having appliedthe method of infinite series to all sortsof curves, previous to the publication ofMercator's Quadrature of the Hyperbola,and contributed to the decisionof the question in dispute betweenLeibnitz and Newton, respecting theinvention of fluxions, in favour of thelatter.After Mr. Jones had been elected amember of the Royal Society, of whichhe became also a vice-president, he tookup his residence at Sherborne Castle,the seat of Lord Macclesfield, to whomhe gave instructions in the sciences.Whilst in this situation, the failure ofhis banker deprived him of almost thewhole of his property ; for which LordMacclesfield compensated by procuringfor him a sinecure place of considerableemolument. He, shortly afterwards,married a Miss Nix ; and after havinghad three children by her, the youngestof whom was the celebrated Sir WilliamJones, died of a polypus in theheart, in July, 1749.The history of men of letters," saysLord Teignmouth, in his Life of SirWilliam Jones, " is too often a melancholydetail of human misery, exhibitingthe unavailing struggles of genius andlearning against penury, and life consumedin fruitless expectation of patronageand reward. We contemplate,with satisfaction, the reverse of thispicture in the history of Mr. Jones ; aswe trace him in his progress from obscurityto distinction, and in his participationof the friendship and beneficenceof the first characters of thetimes." Mr. Jones's papers in thePhilosophical Transactions are, A CompendiousDisposition of Equations forexhibiting the Relations of GeometricalLines ; A Tract on Logarithms ;NICHOLAS Sanderson.An Account of the Person killed bylightning in Tottenham Court Chapel ;and Properties of the Conic Sections,deduced by a compendious method ;all of which are to be found in theforty fcwrfti, sixty-first, sixty-second,and" sixty-third volumes, respectively.Nichols, in his Anecdotes of Bowyer,says that Mr. Jones had also completed,and sent to press, the first sheet of ageneral introduction to the mathematicaland philosophical works of Newton,when illness put an end to hisfurther progress in the design. Heleft the manuscripts, at his death, tothe care of Lord Macclesfield, andthat nobleman undertook to publishthem, but died without performing hispromise, after which they were neverfound.NICHOLAS Sanderson.THIS illustrious mathematician, theson of a person who had a place in theExcise, and a small estate at Thurlston,near Penniston, in Yorkshire, was bornthere, in 1682. He was but a twelvemonthold when he lost, not only hissight, but also his eye-balls, which cameaway in abscesses, from an attack of thesmall pox. It was, however, soonapparent, that his blindness had notretarded the development of his intellects,which displayed themselves in amanner that 'induced his parents tosend him, when yet very young, to thegrammar-school at Penniston. In whatmode instruction was conveyed to himwe have no account, but his progress inthe classics, aided by his own subsequentapplication, was such, that heeventually became able to follow, aseasily as his own language, the worksof Euclid, Archimedes, and Diophantus,as they were read to him in their originalGreek. On leaving school, hestudied arithmetic under his father,and the rapidity with which he madevery long calculations, discovered inhim the germ of that mathematicalgenius which he afterwards so brilliantlydisplayed. His talents in thisline having attracted the attention ofRichard West Underhand, Esq., thatgentleman undertook to be his instructorin the principles of algebra and geometry; and, about the same time, hegained the friendship and assistanceof Dr. Littleton. Under these voluntarypreceptors, he made rapid improvement,and, in a short time, wasfitter to be the teacher, than the pupil,of his masters. He was in his nineteenthyear, when his father, anxiousto afford every possible encouragementto his growing talents, sent him to anacademy at Afterlife, near Sheffield;but his stay here was short, and, on returninghome, he prosecuted his studies,in his own way, with greater advantage.His education had, hitherto, been atthe expense of his father, who had alarge family, and was not in very flourishingcircumstances. His friends,therefore, in order to relieve him fromfurther burden, and to give youngSaunderson an opportunity of gaininghis own living, resolved to send him toCambridge, not as a scholar, but as atutor. Accordingly, in 1707, he tookup his residence 'in Christ's College ;and, without being admitted a member,was allotted a chamber, by the society,with the use of the library, and otherassistances. He had not long commencedlecturer, before his fame filledthe university, and drew towards himthe attention and admiration cf thewhole scientific world. Philosophers,as well as students, formed part of hisaudience; and numbers came from allparts to hear a blind man discourse onthe nature of light and colours, and explainthe theory of vision, the effects ofglasses, the phenomenon of the rainbow,&c. &c. The other topics of hislectures, besides optics, were, universalarithmetic, and Newton's Principia, theillustrious author of which came toCambridge to visit Saunderson, andfrequently conversed with him on themost difficult part of his works.At the same time that the subject ofour memoir was delivering his lectures,the Lucasian professorship was held bythe celebrated Whiston, upon whose1-2-2SCIENCE.ejection from his fellowship, Sauuuersimwas proposed as his buieessor. Toqualify him for thi* situation, a mandamusfor conferring upon him Medegree of M. A. was procured fromQueen Anne, and he was elected to thechair in 1711. He opened his dutieswith an inaugural speech, in elegantand truly Ciceronian Latin, and appliedhimself to his lectures, and the instructionof his pupils, with increased ardour.In 1723, he quitted his apartments inChrist's College, took a house in Cambridge,and soon afterwards marriedthe daughter of a neighbouring clergyman,by whom he had a son and adaughter. When George the Secondvisited the university, in 1728, he desiredan interview with the professor,who attended the king in the senate,and was there created LL.D., by theroyal favour. The sedentary pursuitsot Dr. Sanderson had considerably impaireda constitution naturally strongand healthy, and he became ultimatelya valetudinarian. He was seized witha numbness of the limbs in the earlypart of 1739, which terminated in amortification in one of his feet, andproved fatal to him on the 19th ofApril, in that year.The character of Dr. Saunderson wasthat of an honest, free-speaking man ;who displayed also much wit and vivacityin conversation, and was esteemedan excellent companion. His sinceritycreated him many enemies, but he hadalso many warm friends. As a mathematician,he was skilled in every branchof that science, and composed" variouspapers for the use of his pupils, none ofwhich, however, were published tillafter his death. His Elements of Algebra,in ten books, appeared in 1740, intwo volumes, quarto ; and, in 1756.was printed his Treatise on Fluxions,at the end of which are some valuableLatin comments on Newton's Principia,which explain, and often improveupon, the doctrines. His method ofperforming arithmetical calculationswas on a calculating table, of a peculiarconstruction, by the sense ot feelingonly, for which reason it was called hispalpable arithmetic. The table was asmooth, thin board, of something morethan a foot square, raised upon a frameso as to lie hollow, and divided into onehundred little squares, by lines intersectingone another perpendicularly, andparallel to the sides of the table. Theboard was perforated, at every point ofintersection, by small holes, in whichhe stuck two sorts of pins, a larger anda smaller; and in tins manner performedall his calculations. The writerof his life prefixed to his Algebra, says,he could place and displace his pinswith incredible nimbleness and facility,much to the pleasure and surprise of allthe beholders. He could even breakoff in the middle of a calculation, andresume it when he pleased, and couldpresently know the condition of it, byonly drawing his fingers gently overthe table."That a blind man should become anexpert mathematician, seems, at first,surprising ; and the few instances ofsuch a phenomenon in ancient times,were looked upon with wonder, almostamounting to adoration and awe. "But,if we consider," says the biographer ofSaunderson, in Dr. Aikin's collection,that the ideas of extended quantity,which are the chief objects of mathematics,may as well be acquired by thesense of feeling as that of sight ; that afixed and steady attention is the principalqualification for this study ; andthat the blind are, by necessity, moreabstracted than others (for which reason,it is said, that Democritus put outhis eyes, that he might think more intensely)we shall, perhaps, find reasonto suppose that there is no branch ofscience so much adapted to their circumstances."Dr. Saunderson appears to have possessedthe sense, both of feeling andhearing, in a very refined degree. Experimenthad taught him that it wasimpossible to distinguish colours by theformer sense, but his nicety of touchwas such, with regard to smooth andrough surfaces, that in a set of Romanmedals, he once pointed out the genuinefrom the false, though they had beencounterfeited with such exactness as todeceive the eye of a connoisseur. Hissense of feeling also enabled him totake notice of every cloud that interruptedthe sun, when walking in a garden,and he could even ten when anytiling was held near his tac ', or whenhe passed by a tree at no great distance,merely by the different impuis of theair on his face. His ear was so exact,BROOK TAYLOR.that he could distinguish the fifth partot a note ; could judge of the size of aroom by the same sense ; and, if evenhe walked over a pavement, in courtsor piazzas, which reflected a sound, andwas afterwards conducted thither again,could tell in what part of it he stood,merely by the note it sounded.BROOK TAYLOR.BROOK, son of John Taylor, Esq. ofBarons House, in Kent, was born atEdmonton, in 1685. After having madeconsiderable progress in the languagesand mathematics, under a private tutor,he was, in 1701, entered a fellow-commonerof St. John's College, Cambridge.Pursuing his mathematical studies withardour and success, he wrote, in 1708,his Treatise on the Centre of Oscillation,which was subsequently published inthe Philosophical Transactions ; and, inthe following year, he graduated B.A.In 1712, he was elected a fellow of theRoyal Society, having previously givena solution of 'Kepler's famous problem,in the course of a correspondence betweenhimself and Professor Keill. In1714, he was elected secretary of theRoyal Society, whose reputation heconsiderably augmented by his knowledgeof those branches of science,which, at this time, engaged their particularattention, and involved them incontroversies with several foreign academies.In the same year, he took hisdegree of LL.D. ; and, in 1715, held acorrespondence with Count Raymondde Montfort, respecting the tenets ofMalebranche, in which he displayed somuch ability, as to come in for a shareof praise in the elope pronounced beforethe French Academy, on the death ofthat eminent mathematician. Whilstvisiting Paris, in 1716, the greatest attentionand respect were paid to himby the most distinguished characters,and, among others, he was introducedto Lord Bolingbroke, Count de Callus,and the celebrated Bossuet.Shortly after his return to London,in February, 1717, he composed, andcommunicated to the Royal Society,three admirable treatises, entitled, respectively,An Attempt towards an Improvementof the Method of Approximatingin the Extraction of Roots inEquations in Numbers ; A Solution ofDemoivre's Fifteenth Problem, with theassistance of Combinations and InfiniteSeries ; and A Solution of the Problemof G. G. Leibnitz, proposed to theEnglish. The injury his health hadreceived in consequence of his intensestudy, compelled him to make a secondtour to the continent, where he resided,for some months, at Aix-la-chapelle.On his return, he devoted hirnseltchiefly to the completion of a treatise,which his taste for drawing had inducedhim to write, on Linear Perspective, awork in much reputation with artists,as improved and published by Mr.Kirby, under the title of Brook Taylor'sPerspective made Easy. The originalwas characterized, by Joseph Bernoulli!,in the Acta of Leipsic, as " abstruse toall, and unintelligible to artists;" anassertion which produced an irreconcilablequarrel between him and thesubject of our memoir. It must be confessed,that the work is ill calculatedfor practitioners, though, unquestionablyof great merit, and one which,among mathematicians, is deservedlyheld in high repute. Dr. Taylor's answerto Bernoulli's objections, may beseen in the Thirtieth Volume of thePhilosophical Transactions, to which hecommunicated his last paper that hepublished there, in 1721, entitled AnExperiment made to ascertain the Proportionof Expansion of Liquor in theThermometer, with regard to the degreeof Heat The author died, of a decline,which was undoubtedly hastened by hisintense study, in December, 1731, inthe forty-sixth year of his age. He wastwice married, and survived both hiswives, the last dying in child-bed, in1730.Dr. Taylor appears to have been avery accomplished man, and to haveextended his inquiries into a variety ofsubjects, besides those of which we havealready spoken. Among his post-science.humour papers, were found detachedparts of a treatise on the Jewish sacrifices,and a dissertation, of great length,on the lawfulness of eating blood.He is said to have drawn figures withextraordinary precision and beauty ofpencil, and to have painted landscapeswith admirable force of colour, andfreedom of touch. He was also atolerable proficient in music, and, butfor his attention to other pursuits, promisedto become eminent, both in thetheory and practice of that art. Withrespect to his private character, hisbiographer and grandson, Sir WilliamYoung, observes : " in the best acceptationof duties relative to each situationof life in which he was engaged, hisown writings, and the writings of thosewho best knew him, prove him to havebeen the finished Christian, gentleman,and scholar."Besides the works before-mentioned,Dr. Taylor was the author of an essay,entitled Contemplation Philosophical, avery masterly performance, publishedby Sir William Young, in 1793. Hisother papers, in the PhilosophicalTransactions, are, On the Ascent ofWater between Two Glass Planes ; Onthe Motion of a Stretched String; MethodusIncrementorum ; An Accountof an Experiment for the Discovery ofthe Law of Magnetic Attraction ; andhis Treatise on the Principles of LinearPerspective.ROBERT Simon.ROBERT Simon 1 was born of arespectable family, in the county oiLanark, in 1G87. He was educated atthe University of Glasgow, where someof his relations were professors; andmade great progress in every branch oflearning, particularly philosophy andtheology. He was accounted one ofthe best botanists of his years ; and suchwas his proficiency in the oriental languages,that he was enabled to supplythe place of a sick relation, who taughtin that class. He studied divinity, witha view of entering into the church ; buthis fondness for mathematics, which,as he pursued them, increased almostto adoration, ended in his determinationto devote himself to that sciencealtogether. In 1711, his reputationcaused him to be elected regius professorof mathematics in the Universityof Glasgow ; and, about the same time,he went to London, where he formedan acquaintance with Halley, and othereminent men of that period. On hisreturn, he applied himself to the dutiesof his professorship, with equal zealfor the interest of science and the advancementof his pupils.Dr. Simson had, for some time,deeply studied the works of the ancientgeometers ; and, satisfied with demonstratingtruth on the pure principleslaid down in them, had paid, comparatively,little attention to the moderninventions of fluxions and logarithms.With these, however, some of his posthumouspapers show him to have beenfully acquainted ; but as the ancientgeometrical analysis was but imperfectlyknown to many", he determined to attemptthe entire recovery of this method.He first undertook the restorationof Euclid's Porisms, from the scantyand mutilated account of that work inasingle passage of Pappus, a copy ofwhose mathematical collections hadbeen given him by Dr. Halley, enrichedwith his own notes. Of this discovery,which he effected as early as 1718, hecommunicated an account to the RoyalSociety, in 1723, in which year it wasprinted in the Philosophical Transactions.He next engaged upon theLoci Plan of Apollonius, and completedit about 1738 ; though, in his ownestimation, so imperfectly, that he withheldthe impression for some yearsafter it was printed, and only consentedto its publication, in 1746, at the earnestsolicitation of his friends. He, however,recalled as many copies as possible,for the purpose of recollectingthe work ; and even then was loth toconsider it a perfect restoration ofApollonius. About the same time, appearedhis Treatise on Conic Sections ;which, together with his restoration ofMARTIN FOLKES.The Loci, was received with unanimousapprobation, and stamped the authoras one of the first and most elegantgeometers of the age. Science, however,is, perhaps, less indebted to himfor these works, than for his restitutionof the Elements and Data of Euclid ;an edition of which he published aboutthe year 1758. This was a great desideratumin geometry; for although otherauthors had attempted a restoration ofthe data of Euclid, it was but partial, incomparison with the ample restitutioneffected by Dr. Simson. Few incidentsvaried the life of one so much devotedto study as the subject of our memoir,who died, after a long course of almostuninterrupted health, in 1768, at the ageof eighty-one.Dr. Simson was tall and dignified instature, with a fine expressive countenance,and a gracefulness of manner,which he retained till his latest moments.He was never married ; and,instead of living in a commodious house,allotted to him as professor, took somechambers, spacious enough for his accommodation,with scarcely any otherfurniture than his small but valuablelibrary, which he left to the university.His official servant acted as valet, footman,and bed-maker ; and when heentertained company, it was at a neighbouringhouse, where an apartment wasspecially kept for himself and his guests.Besides the works before-mentioned,he restored The Section Determinate ofApollonius, which was published afterhis death, along with the work on thePorisms of Euclid, at the expense ofthe Earl of Stanhope. A very interestingaccount of Dr. Simson's life andwritings has been published by Dr.Trail, in one quarto volume.MARTIN FOLKES.THIS gentleman, one of the most distinguishedpromoters of scientific knowledge,of his day, was the son of a barrister,and born in Westminster, in theyear 1690. He received the first partof his education under the privatetuition of Mr. Capped, nephew of thecelebrated Lewis Capped. In his seventeenthyear, he was entered of ClareHall, Cambridge, where he distinguishedhimself in his pursuit of mathematicaland philosophical studies. As early ashis twenty-third year, he was elected afellow of the Royal Society, of whichSir Isaac Newton was then at the head.The subject of our memoir was frequentlyelected into the council of theSociety; and, in 1723, he was nominated,by Sir Isaac, who entertained ahigh opinion of his abilities, one of thevice-presidents. On the death of Newton,in 1727, Mr. Folkes was a candidatefor the presidentship, which was,however, obtained by Sir Hans Sloane,but he still continued a member of thecouncil, and was re-appointed vice-president,in 1733.He passed the greater part of thisand the two following years, in Italy,where he devoted the principal portionof his time to the study of classicalantiquities. The weight and value ofancient coins, formed the chief object ofhis researches, with a view to which,he inspected various cabinets ; and, onhis return, he presented the Society ofAntiquaries, of which he was a member,a dissertation on the subject. Beforethe same body, he also read a paperupon the measurements of Trajan's andAntoine's pillars; and, at their request,subsequently printed a table ofall the English gold coins with whichhe had presented them. Among otherpapers, which he communicated to theRoyal Society, were, Remarks on theStandard Measure, preserved in thecapitol of Rome; and a Model of anAncient Sphere, preserved in the CartesianPalace : a draught of the latterwas published in Dr. Bentley's editionof Manilius.In 1739, Mr. Folkes visited Paris,where he was treated with markedrespect by all the literary and scientificsavant of that metropolis. On the resignationof Sir Hans Sloane, in 1741,he was chosen president of the RoyalSociety ; and shortly afterwards wasenrolled, in the room of Dr. Halley, asSCIENCE,one of the eight foreign members of theRoyal Academy of Sciences at Paris.In 1745, appeared his valuable work,entitled A Table of English SilverCoins, from the Norman Conquest tothe Present Time, with their weights,intrinsic values, and some remarksupon the several pieces At the sametime, he reprinted his Table of GoldCoins, and intended to have illustratedboth with plates, but his death preventedtheir publication by himself.They were subsequently purchased,and published, in a new edition of thework, by the Antiquarian Society. Ofthis. body Mr. Folks became president,and he was also honoured withthe degree of LL.D., by both universities,some time previous to his decease,which took place in 1754^ Thecause of it was palsy, repeated attacksof which, had. a short time previous tohis death, deprived him of the use ofhis mental faculties.Mr. Koikes appears to have attaineda very unusual degree of eminence inthe scientific world, considering that hebenefitted it by no new discovery. Hewas principally skilled in the elucidationof the intrinsic subjects of weights,coins, and measures; but was an activepromoter of every species of curiousand usi ful knowledge. He left a largeand valuable cabinet and library, whichwas sold by public auction. Besidesthe works before mentioned, he communicateda variety of papers to thePhilosophical Transactions, displayingconsiderable elegance Of style and extentof information. His private characteris said to have been extremelyestimable.JAMES BRADLEY.I HIS eminent astronomer was bornat Shi.-eborn, in Gloucestershire, in theyear 1692. His life, devoted almostentirely to science, affords but few incidents'for the biographer. He receivedthe first part of his education at aboarding-school in N'orthleach, andbeing intended for the church, was sentto Baliol College, Oxford, of which hewas admitted a commoner, on the lothof March, 1710. He graduated HA.in 1714> M A. in 1717, and receivedordination as deacon, from the Bishopof London, on the 24th of May, 1719.Shortly afterwards, he obtained priest'sorders from the Bishop of Hereford,who made him his chaplain, and, at thesame time, presented him to the vicarageof Bristol, in Herefordshire.Bradley would, in all probability, haverisen to eminence in the church, by hisown talents, and the patronage of hisfriends, had not his early predilectionfor the science of astronomy given hismind a different turn; To enable himto pursue this uninterruptedly, Mr.Molyneux, then secretary to the Princeof Wales, and distinguished for his successfulcultivation of optics and astronomy,procured for him the sinecurerectory of Landed Belfry, in Pembrokeshire,to which he was admitteda few months after he had taken priest'sorders.It was during his residence at wanted,in Essex, with his uncle, Dr.Pound, to whom he sometimes officiatedas curate, that Bradley commencedthese observations, which afterwardsconducted him to some of thefinest discoveries of which the scienceof astronomy can boast. He soon beganto attract the notice of some of the mosteminent members of the Royal Society;and Lord Macclesfield, Sir Isaac Newton,Dr. Halley, and others, were amongstthose who particularly encouraged him.On the 31st of October, 1721, he wasappointed to succeed Dr. Keill, asSavilian professor of astronomy ; and,on his acceptance of this office, resignedhis livings, both of Bristol andLanded. In 1724, he communicatedto the Royal Society his observations onthe comet of 1723; ands in 1726', hisobservations on some eclipses of Jupiter'ssatellites ; neither papers possessingany other merit than the accuracywith which the observations weremade.He was, however, not long in makinga very important discovery, that ofJAMES BRADLEY.the auenaiion of the celestial bodies.His theory upon this subject was publishedin the Philosophical Transactionstor 1728, and extended thefame of the author all over Europe,as an accurate observer, and profoundphilosopher. A very brief account ofit must suffice merci Having determinedthe law of the variation in themotion of the fixed stars, Dr. Bradleywas at first inclined to attribute it tothe tuitaiioi; of the earth's axis ; butimmediately abandoned this hypothesis,upon seeing that stars which, from theequality of their polar distances, oughtto have had tue saule nutation, sustainedvery different changes of declination,lie had been some timemaking observations with Graham'sinstrument, without the desired effect,,when the discovery of Roemer, concerningthe successive propagation of light,came into his mind. He then instantlysaw, that all the phenomena which hehad observed, might be occasioned bythe motion of the earth in its orbit,combined with the successive propagationof lightIn 1730, he was appointed to succeedMr.VVhiteside, as lecturer in astronomyand experimental philosophy, in theUniversity of Oxford ; and, in 1737, hepublished his Observations on the Cometwhich appeared at the beginning ofthat year. 1 (alley, who was the at Greenwich, and nowgrowing old, offered to resign his situationin favour of the subject of our memoir, but his death took place beforethe arrangement could be effected. Onthat event, however, which occurred inFebruary, 1742, Bradley was appointedhis successor, through the influence ofthe Earl of Macclesfield, and in thesame year he was created D. D. by theUniversity of Oxford. He had not longentered upon the duels of his new appointment,before he made such observationsas enabled him to arrive at hisimportant discovery of .the nutation ofthe earth's axis. This he communicatedto the Royal Society, in 1745, in aletter addressed to the Earl of Macclesfield,which is said td be equally remarkablefor its philosophical precision,and for the simplicity and modesty withwhich it is written. His discovery wasrewarded by the Royal Society's annualgold medal.He now turned his attention towardsthe improvement of the instruments inthe Royal Observatory at Greenwich,it being his opinion that, " as we advancein the means of making morenice inquiries, new points generallyoffer themselves, that demand our attention.'In consequence of his representation, a sum of 1,000 was granted,in 1748, to be expended on astronomicalapparatus, which, under his superintendence,with the assistance of Mr.John Bird, and Mr. Graham, soon becameone of the most perfect in Europe.Among other instruments which wereset up at the observatory, was the newnaval quadrant, of which he afterwardsmade such important use. In 1748, hewas chosen a foreign member of theRoyal Academy of Sciences at Paris ;and, about the same time, he becameentitled to Bishop Crew's benefactionof 30 a-year to the lecturer in experimentalphilosophy at Oxford. In1751, he was offered* the valuable livingof Greenwich, but he conscientiouslydeclined it ; alleging, that the duty oafa pastor was incompatible with hisother studies and engagements. Theking was so pleased with this instanceof his integrity, that he immediatelygranted him a pension of 250 a-year,which has since been regularly paid tothe astronomer-royal. In 1752, he waselected one of the council of the RoyalSociety; in 1754, a member of theAcademy of Sciences at Petersburghh,by diploma, from the whole body ; and,in 1757, admitted a member of theAcademy of Sciences at Bologna. Hewas subsequently chosen into the PrussianAcademy of Science and BellesLettres at Berlin. He pursued hisstudies with such unabated vigour, that,towards the close of his life, he beganto fear that he should survive his rationalfaculties. He died however,without having experienced this calamity,on the 13th of July, 1762, atCrawford, in Gloucestershire. He wasa widower at the time of his death,having left one daughter by his wife,whom he married in 1744.The public character of Dr. Bradley,"says one of his biographers; " asaman of science and discernment, iswell established by his works. Hisprivate character was in every respectestimable. Temperate in hies enjoy-science.ments, mild and benevolent in his disposition,indifferent to the calls ofwealth, distinction, and even of fame ;he was indebted to his uncommonmerit alone for the friendship and regardof the most eminent men of his time.His manner was engaging and communicative; and his language, in conversation,clear, impressive, and fluent,though he was rather more disposed tolisten than to speak. That he publishedso little, may, perhaps, be ascribedto his scrupulous accuracy, which renderedhim diffident, or, more probably,to the calm and placid temper of hismind, which did not strongly urge himto solicit that attention he could atpleasure command." Dr. Bradley leftbehind him no less than thirteen folio,and two quarto, volumes, in manuscript,of observations made by him atthe Royal Observatory. These, afterhaving been for some time detainedby his representatives, were presentedto Lord North, and, by him, to theUniversity of Oxford, of which he waschancellor, on condition of their printingand publishing them. It was not,however, till 1798, that any part of thework appeared, when the first volumewas published, under the title of AstronomicalObservations made at the RoyalObservatory at Greenwich, from theyear 1756 to the year 1762. The tablescontained in it are, observed transits ofthe sun, planets, and fixed stars, fromthe zenith southward ; meridional distancesof the fixed stars, from the zenithnorthward ; with zenith sector, aridlikewise apparent right ascensions : thewhole comprising seven hundred andfifty-seven pages.GEORGE EDWARDS.THIS eminent naturalist was born atWest Ham, in Essex, in 1693 ; andbeing destined for a commercial life,was placed with a tradesman in London.His master happening to be a manof learning, young Edwards derivedmuch benefit from his society ; whichcircumstance, together with that of hisapartment being made the repositoryof the library of a deceased physician,gave him an inclination for literature,and a turn for scientific inquiry. Histastes were, probably, encouraged byhis parents, as, upon his expressing adetermination to quit trade, he wasfurnished with the means of travellingabroad, and of otherwise improving hisgrowing partiality for the beauties of natureand art. On his return to England,he applied himself, with great assiduity,to the study of natural history, particularlyornithology, the subjects of whichhe drew with singular correctness. Hisperformances were universally admired,and by the prices which they obtained,he was enabled to obtain a more thandecent subsistence. His acquaintancewas now sought by many eminent menof science; and, in 1733, the recommendationof Sir Hans Sloane procuredhim the place of librarian to the Collegeof Physicians. Here he had comfortableapartments, and access to alarge collection of books,. by consultingwhich, he was enabled to make considerableimprovement in his favouritepursuit. The result of his labours appearedin 1743, when he published thefirst volume of his History of Birds, inquarto, with fifty-two coloured plates,from original drawings, and full descriptionsin French and English. Threemore volumes of this magnificent work,which the author dedicated to God,with all the usual formularies, appearedsuccessively, in 1747, 1750, and 1751.The last was not confined to birds, butcontained also sixteen plates of serpents,fishes, and insects. In 1758,1760, and 1763, he published, in successiveparts, as supplementary to theabove work, his Gleanings of NaturalHistory, consisting of coloured plates ofbirds, fishes, insects, and plants, most ofthem nondescript. His labours altogethercomprise .upwards of six hundredsubjects in natural history, firstdelineated and described by himself.These publications extended his reputationamong the votaries of naturalhistory in all parts of the civilizedworld ; and, among others to whom heJOHN HARRISON.became known, the illustrious Linnaeusnot only corresponded with him, butcompleted the general index to hisworks, according to Edwards's system.The Coleman medal was awarded to himby the Royal Society, in 1750, for hisHistory of Birds ; and, in 1757, he waselected a member of that body. He wasalso aggregated to several of the learnedsocieties in different parts of Europe.In 1769, having previously disposed ofhis immense collection of drawings toLord Bute, he resigned his office oflibrarian at the College of Physicians,and retired to Plaistow, in Essex. Hislast publication, which consisted ofmiscellaneous pieces, chiefly collectedfrom the prefaces and introductions tohis books, appeared in 1770, under thetitle of Essays. During the latter partof his life, he was severely afflicted,having, at the same time, to endure theagonies of the stone, and of a cancer,which deprived him of the sight of oneeye. He bore, with great fortitude andresignation, his sufferings, which wereterminated by his death, in July, 1773.Books and conversation formed hischief amusement in his later years. Inmixed company, his diffidence andhumility prevented him from shining,but with his intimate friends few couldbe more entertaining or communicative.Besides the works before-mentioned, hecontributed several papers to the PhilosophicalTransactions.JOHN HARRISON.THIS celebrated mechanic was the sonof a carpenter, at Foully, near Pontefract,in Yorkshire, where he was born, in theyear 1693. He received but a very limitededucation, and as soon as he was able,assisted his father in his business, whichcomprehended the occasional survey ofland, and repairing of clocks and watches.For this latter department he evinced aparticular predilection ; and, as early asIns sixth year, when he lay sick of thesmall-pox, is said to have amused himselfin bed, for hours, by watching themovement of a small time-piece, whichwas placed open upon his pillow. In1700, he removed, with his father, toBarrow, near Barton-upon-Humber, inLincolnshire, where his thirst after informationdeveloped itself in a verystriking manner. He frequently sat upwhole nights, employed in writing ordrawing ; and having been lent a manuscriptcopy of Professor Saunderson'slectures, he carefully and neatly transcribedthem, together with all the diagrams.With a mind so inquiring, anda genius totally unfettered, Harrisonfound his energies rather invigorated,than weakened, by the want of education.In 1726, he had attained to suchskill in zoology, as to be able to constructtwo wooden clocks, with anescapement and compound pendulumof his own invention : they surpassedeverything of the kind then made,and scarcely erred a second in a month.This success probably induced Mr.Harrison to attempt to gain the rewardof 20,000, which government wereempowered, by an act of parliament,passed in the fourteenth of Queen Anne,to offer for discovering the longitude.He, accordingly, made drawings of a machinehe had planned for this purpose ;and, in 1728, came to London, and presentedthem to Dr. Halley, then .Dr. Halley referred himto Mr. George Graham, by whose advicehue returned home, completed, andmade trial of, his machine, during verybad weather, upon the river Humber,and, in 1735, came back with it to themetropolis. It was examined by theRoyal Society, who subscribed a favourablecertificate of its properties ; in consequenceof which, it was put on boardof a man-of-war, in 1736, and sent, withthe maker, on a voyage to Lisbon andback, to make trial of its exactness.He was enabled to correct the dead-reckoningnearly a degree and a half,and received, in the following year, a rewardof 500 from the commissionersof the longitude, who recommended himto proceed with the improvement of histime-piece. He completed a second in1739, of simpler construction and greateraccuracy : qualities which were still moreSCIENCE.predominant in his third machine, whicherred only three or four seconds in aweek. It procured him the Royal Society'sannual gold medal, and he consideredit the ne his ultra of his art ;but further experiments convinced himthat it was possible to achieve stillgreater perfection. This he attempted inafourth time-keeper, which he finishedin 1759, in the form of a pocket-watch,about six inches in diameter. A trialof its accuracy was made in two voyages,which his son took with it, to the WestIndies ; and as it corrected, in bothvoyages, the longitude within the limitsrequired by Queen Anne's act, Mr.Harrison applied to parliament for thereward of 20,000. Half of it was paidto him in 1765, and he subsequentlyreceived the remainder, but not withoutsome trouble and repeated applications.This delay," says his biographer, "inissuing to him his full reward, originatedin the anxiety of the commissioners ofthe longitude to do justice to the public,at the same time that they encouragedmerit in an individual; by obtainingfrom the inventor a full and clear discoveryof the principles on which histime-piece was constructed, and by havingit satisfactorily ascertained that theywere such as rendered it of general use,by enabling other artificers, with reasonableskill, in reasonable time, and ata reasonable expense, to make similarmachines."Mr. Harrison received altogether thesum of 24,000 from the board of longitude,besides several hundred poundsfrom the East India Company. Theaccuracy of his fourth machine, whichis emphatically called Harrison's timekeeper,was further proved by a duplicateof it, constructed by Mr. Kendal,which, during a three years' circumnavigationof the globe, by Captain Cook,answered as well as the original. Thesubject of our memoir employed thelatter part of his life in making a fifthtime-keeper, which was tried for tenweeks, at the King's Observatory atRichmond, in 1772, and found to erronly four seconds and a half in thattime. Its ingenious constructor died atLondon, in 1776, in the eighty-secondyear of his age.Mr. Harrison never became a man ofthe world, and possessed little knowledgeof other subjects besides mechanics,on which he conversed with clearness,precision, and modesty. From thepeculiar and uncouth phraseology, however,in his Description concerning suchMechanism as will afford a nice ortrue Mensuration of Time, &c., it is apparentthat he found some difficulty inexpressing his ideas in writing. Thiswork includes an account of his newmusical scale, or mechanical division ofthe octave, according to the proportionwhich the radius and diameter of a circlehave respectively to the circumference.Mr. Harrison had a delicate musical ear,and, in his youth, was the leader of adistinguished band of church singers.Some experiments which he made onsound, and a curious monochord of hisown improvement, are said to have beenequally accurate with those in which hewas engaged for the mensuration of time.FRANCIS Hutchison.FRANCIS Hutchison, son of adissenting minister, was born in thenorth of Ireland, in 1694. After a previouscourse of education, he, in 1710,entered a student of the University ofGlasgow, where he studied the classics,philosophy, and divinity, for six years.On his return to his native country, hewas licensed to preach among the dissenters,and was about to accept thepastorship of a congregation, when hereceived an invitation to set up an academyat Dublin. Here his accomplishmentssoon procured him the acquaintanceand friendship of many personsdistinguished for their rank and learning,and, in particular, of Lord Moles-worth.This nobleman is said to haveassisted him in his Inquiry into theIdeas of Beauty and Virtue, which appearedin 1725, without the author'sname. The work created a great sensationin the literary world, and LordGranville, then lord-lieutenant, was sostruck with its merits, that he sent tohis bookseller to inquire who the writerFRANCIS Hutchison.was, and left a letter to be conveyed tohim. Mr. Hutcheson was shortly afterwardsintroduced to his lordship, who,during the whole period of his viceroyalty,treated him with particularmarks of familiarity and esteem. Eitherthe talents, however, or the reputationof the subject of our memoir, raised himenemies as well as friends, and ,he wastwice prosecuted in the Archiepiscopalcourt, for undertaking the instruction ofyouth, without having subscribed to theecclesiastical canons, or obtained a licensefrom the bishop. Both attemptsfailed, in consequence of the friendshipof Archbishop King towards Hutcheson.He was also much esteemed by the primate,Dr. Boulter, from whom he procuredthe donation of a yearly fund, foran exhibitioner, to be educated to anyof the learned professions at Glasgow.In 1728, he published his Treatise ofthe Passions, &c., a work which wasscarcely less admired than his formerone, even by those who were opposedto his philosophy. In the same year,some letters, signed Hilarious, appearedin The London Journal, calling in questionsome parts of the doctrine of hisInquiry, &c., which, together with ourauthor's answers, were afterwards publishedin a separate pamphlet. In 1729,he received an invitation to fill the chairof moral philosophy in the University ofGlasgow, which he accepted, and, aboutthe same time, was admitted to the degreeof LL.D. Had he remained inIreland, it is probable that his friendsmight have obtained him preferment,as they had neither want of inclinationnor power to serve him ; but " he hadprivate reasons," says his biographer,Dr. Leechman, " which determined himneither to seek promotion, nor to encouragethe most probable schemes proposedto him for obtaining it."As a lecturer, Dr. Hutcheson amplysustained his own reputation, andrealized the expectations that had beenformed of him. Pupils flocked to himfrom all parts of England and Ireland;and the credit of the university wasgreatly increased by the admirable mannerin which he performed his duties.He died, universally respected and lamented,in 1747, in the fifty-third yearof his age.One of Dr. Hutcheson's most celebratedworks did not appear till 1775,when his son, Dr. Francis Hutcheson,published, in two volumes, quarto, hisSystem of Moral Philosophy. The workis divided into three parts : in the first ofwhich, the author endeavours to developedthe several principles the human mind,as united in a moral constitution, andfrom thence to point out the origin ofour ideas of moral good and evil, and ofour sense of duty, or moral obligation.This leads him to the inquiry of whatmust be the supreme happiness of mankind;and, in the second and third part,he goes on to deduce the particular lawsof nature, or rules necessary to be observedfor promoting the general good,m our common intercourse with oneanother as members of society. Hisleading philosophical doctrine is, thatwe have a moral sense implanted in ournatures, or an instinct, like that of self-preservation,which, independently ofany arguments taken from the reasonablenessand advantages of any action,leads us to perform it ourselves, or toapprove it when performed by others.The various abilities and talents ofDr. Hutcheson were united with thehighest integrity of mind, and the mostamiable and engaging disposition. Hisconversation has been called, by one ofhis biographers, a school of virtue tothose who had the happiness to enjoyit. " A remarkable vivacity," adds thesame authority, " of thought and expression,a perpetual flow of cheerfulnessand good-will, and a visible air ofinward happiness, made him the lifeand genius of society, and spread anenlivening influence everywhere aroundhim."EDMUND STONE.THIS distinguished and ingeniousself-taught mathematician, is supposedto have been a native of Argyleshire,but the precise place of his birth is notknown. He is said to have reached anadvanced age in 1760, and would seemSCIENCE.to have been born, therefore, sometimeprevious to the commencement ofthe seventeenth century. A very interestingaccount of his early life is tobe found in a letter prefixed to a Frenchtranslation of one of his works, fromthe Chevalier Ramsay, author of theTravels of Cyrus to Father Castel, aJesuit, at Paris, and published in theMemoires de Trevor. From this, itappears that Stone's father was gardenerto the Duke of Arygle, and his souwas, probably, one of his assistants inthe service of that nobleman.The subject of our memoir had arrivedat the age of eighteen, when theduke, walking, one day, in his garden,saw lying upon the grass a Latin copyof Newton's Principia, and, concludingit belonged to his own library, directedit to be carried back and placed there.This was about to be done, whenStone, stepping forward, claimed thebook as his own. " Yours ?" repliedthe duke ; " do you understandgeometry, Latin, and Newton?" "1know a little of them," answered Stone,modestly. The duke then entered intoparticular conversation with him, andrequested to know how he had obtainedhis present knowledge. " Aservant," said Stone, " taught me, tenyears since, to read. Does one need toknow any thing more than the twenty-fourletters, in order to know everythingelse that one wishes ?" Theduke's curiosity was redoubled, andsitting down on a bank with Stone,the latter, at his request, thus proceededin his account of himself:I first learned to read : die masonswere then at work upon your house.I approached them, one day, and observedthat the architect used a ruleand compasses, and that he madecalculations. I inquired what mightbe the meaning and use of these things,and I was informed that there was ascience called arithmetic. I purchaseda book of arithmetic, and I learned it.I was told there was another science,called geometry: I bought the necessarybooks, and I learned geometry.By reading, I found that there weregood books in these two sciences inLatin : I bought a dictionary, and Ilearned Latin. I understood, also, thatthere were general books of the samekind in French : I bought a dictionary,and I learned French. And this, mylord, is what 1 have done : it seems tome,that we may learn every thing whenwe know the twenty-four letters oi thealphabet."The duke now determined to drawStone from his obscurity, and immediatelyprovided him with an employmentwhich left him in possession ofample time to follow his favourite pursuits.He, shortly afterwards, came toLondon, and published there, in 1723,his first work, A Treatise on MathematicalInstruments, chiefly translatedfrom the French. In 1725, he waschosen a fellow of the Royal Society ;and, in the following year, appearedhis Mathematical Dictionary. In 1730,he published A Treatise on Fluxions;the direct method is a translation fromthe French of the Marquis de 1' hospital'sAn ilyse des Refinements Petits;and the inverse method was suppliedby Stone himself. In 1731, he gave aneat and useful edition of the Elementsof Euclid, with an account of the lifeand writings of Euclid, and a defenceof his Elements against modern objectors.Some smaller works camefrom his pen, which he communicated,together with an account of twospecies of the third order, not mentionedby Sir Isaac Newton or Mr.Stirling, to the Transactions of theRoyal Society. After the year 1742,his" name was omitted in the list ofthis body, in consequence, it is supposed,of his inability to pay the usualannual contribution. Of the manner inwhich he passed his latter days, wehave no precise account ; but he wouldseem to have died in neglect andpoverty, as a writer in The CriticalReview for 1760, describes him, notwithstandinghis universally acknowledgedabilities, and his uncontestedservices to the public, as " living, at anadvanced age, unrewarded, except by amean employment that reflects dishonouron the donors." His deathtook place in 1768.Stone possessed a simple, ingenuous,and upright character, and an ardentand disinterested attachment to science,though his knowledge was somewhatsuperficial, and his principal work containsmany errors. His want of depthand solidity was, probably, owing tothe rapid and unassisted manner inJOHN BEVIS.which he pursued his studies, by whichhe contracted a habit of precipitateprocedure, and vague and philosophicthinking, in all his speculations.His style was altogether such as mighthave been expected from a self-taughtgenius. In the second edition of hisbook on Mathematical Instruments,published in 1760, he has the followingpassage : " The plants and trees of thegarden of the arts and sciences, cultivatedby the dung of ambition, andnourished with the waters of interest,are very subject to be blasted by thewinds of error, and sometimes stuntedby the weeds of imposition." Uponthe whole, says a writer in The Libraryof E entertaining Knowledge, Stone seemsto have had rather a quick and active,than either a very profound or avery acute understanding;" and, as aproof of the unphilosophical nature ofsome of his speculations, the same authoritynotices that contained in the lastwork he gave to the world, " in whichhe attempts to expose the insufficiencyof the proofs on which the sphericalform of the earth has been assumed,arguing, with incredible absurdity, thatit is just as likely to be an angularfigure j as if the waters of the sea, forexample, could any where maintainthemselves in a position like that of therafters of a house."JOHN BEVIS.JOHN BEVIS, the son of a gentlemanwho expended great part of his fortunein the service of King William, at thetime of the revolution, was born nearOld Sarum, in Wiltshire, in 1695. Hewas sent to complete his education atChrist's College, Oxford, where he studiedmedicine (for which profession hewas intended), astronomy, and optics.Having taken his degree" of M.D., heleft the university for the continent ;and, after making a tour through Franceand Italy, returned to England, andcommenced the practice of his professionin London. Astronomy, however,still continued to occupy much of histime; and after his removal to StokeNewington, where he had built an observatory,it may be said to haveformed his chief pursuit. Here hecarried on his researches with indefatigablezeal; and, from the volume hepublished, containing an account ofthem, it appears that, in the course ofa night, he frequently observed thetransits of one hundred and sixty stars.In 1745, he undertook to arrange andpublish, by subscription, a work, entitledUranographia Britannica, or anExact View of the Heavens, on fifty-twoplates, similar to that of Bayer, representingthe constellations and all thefixed stars that had been observed byastronomers, together with a considerablenumber that had been observedonly by himself. For the engraving ofthese plates, to each of which he wrotea particular explanation, he engagedone John Nealee, who became bankrupt,after he had received several hundredpounds of the subscription money. Theplates consequently fell into the" handsof Nealee's creditors, and afterwardswere placed under the care of the courtof Chancery, so that the author was deprivedof the fruits of his labour, andthe world of a most valuable additionto astronomical science. To increasethe mortification of Dr. Bevis, the publicimputed to him some connexion withNealee in his misconduct; indeed, thewhole transaction produced an effectupon him which he ever afterwardsfelt.He was more fortunate in his exertionsto give to the world the astronomicaltables of Dr. Halley, which hadbeen left in the hands of the printersince 1725. Dr. Bevis published themin 1749, having himself supplied theauxiliary tables and precepts necessaryin the use of them. The practical rulesfor finding the aberration of the starsin Mr. Thomas Simpson's Essays, weredrawn up by the subject of our memoir,who, as Mr. Simpson remarks, proved,before any other person, that the phenomenaare universally as conformablein right ascension, as Dr. Bradley foundthem to be in declination.13-1SCIENCE,In September, 1764, he was appointed,by the board of longitude, conjointlywith Mr. Mitchell and CaptainCampbell, to compute the observationsmade at Greenwich, and compare themwith those made at Portsmouth, andother places, for the purpose of ascertainingthe accuracy of Harrison's timekeepers.To the Philosophical Transactionshe contributed twenty-sevenvaluable papers, containing chiefly astronomicalobservations, besides severalarticles to The Mathematical Magazine,particularly a curious paper on thesatellite of Venus. His separate publicationswere two pamphlets, one entitledThe Satellite Sliding Rule, fordetermining the immersions and emersionsof the four satellites of Jupiter;and the other, An Experimental Inquiryconcerning the Contents, Qualities,"and Medicinal Virtues, of the TwoMineral Waters discovered at BagniggeWells, &c., with directions for drinkingthem, and some account of theirsuccess in very obstinate cases; whichwent tli rough two editions. He alsoprepared, but never printed, a translationof Lalande's Astronomy ; and suchwas his reputation among "mathematicians,that Mr. Crakell dedicated to himhis translations of Mauduit's AstronomySpherique. It was he who gave thename of achromatic to Dollond's improvedtelescope ; an invention whichinduced Dr. Bevis to make somecurious experiments on the refractivepower of glass, in the composition ofwhich he had used a quantity of borax,and he found the refrangibility tobe about as great as that of Englishcrystal. A few years before his death,he removed from Stoke Newington tothe Temple, and died there in November,1771.Dr. Bevis was a member of theprincipal foreign academies, and thenames of few astronomers were morecelebrated, both at home and abroad,at the time of his decease. He had,in the course of his researches, discoveredthat the wire micrometer, theinvention of which had been 'alwaysclaimed by the French, for Auzouf, wasdue to Mr. Gascony, who had inventedit in 1641, whereas Auzout's letter toMr. Oldenburg, which only mentionshis having used it to measure the sun'sdiameter, bears date the 2&th of December,1666.COLIN MACLAURIN.THIS distinguished mathematician,descended from an ancient family inArgyleshire, and the son of a clergyman,who was minister of Glendale,was born at Kilmoddan, in Scotland,in February, 1698. He lost both hisparents at a very early age, but wascarefully educated by his uncle, Mr.Daniel Maclaurin, minister of KillingIn 1709, he was sent to theUniversity of Glasgow, where his applicationwas so remarkable, that itintroduced him to the society andfriendship of many persons of highliterary character, who afforded himunrestricted access to their libraries. Hewas directed to the study of mathematicsby an accident ; for having takenup a copy of Euclid's Elements, in afriend's chamber, though he had neveryet looked into a mathematical work,he, in a few days, made himself masterof the first six books without the leastassistance. He became enraptured withthe science, and soon engaged himselfin solving the most difficult problems.At the age of fifteen, he took the degreeof M. A. ; delivered publicly, uponthe occasion, a thesis On the Powerof Gravity ; and, by the following year,he had invented many of the propositionswhich were afterwards publishedunder the title of Geometrical Organic.He remained another twelvemonth inthe university, chiefly occupied in thestudy of divinity, when he quittedGlasgow, and, returning to his uncle,devoted himself, with ardour, to hisclassical, and particularly his mathematical,studies.At the end of 1717, he was elected,though only nineteen years of age, professorof mathematics in the MarischalCollege, at Aberdeen, and raised theCOLIN MACLAURIN.taste for the science he taught, to aheight that it had never before attainedin the university. In the vacationof 1719, lie visited London, wherehe became acquainted with severaleminent men, obtained the friendshipof Sir Isaac Newton, and was admitteda member of the Royal Society. Aboutthe same time, he published his treatise,entitled Geometric Organic, in whichlie treats of the description of curvelines, by continued motion, and furnishesthe mathematical student withmany curious theorems. He againvisited London in 1721 ; and, in thefollowing year, became tutor to LordPolwarth's eldest son, Mr. Hume, whowas about to proceed upon his travels.He accompanied his pupil to Paris,and from thence to Lorraine, wherehe wrote a paper On the Percussionof Bodies, which, in 1724, gained theprize of the Royal Academy of Sciences,and of which the substance is insertedin his Treatise of Fluxions. FromLorraine they proceeded to Montpelier,where Mr. Hume being seized with afever that terminated fatally, Mr.Maclaurin returned to Aberdeen, andresumed his professorship. Not longafterwards, he was pre-elected to succeedMr. James Gregory, as mathematicalprofessor in the University ofEdinburgh, principally through the recommendationof Sir Isaac Newton,who offered to contribute 20 a-yeartowards a provision for Mr. Maclaurintill the chair became vacant. In November,1725, he entered upon theduties of his office, which he dischargedso ably, that the mathematical classesbecame unusually numerous. Morethan a hundred students attended hislectures annually; and, as these wereof different standings, he was obliged todivide them into four or five classes, andto dedicate a full hour every day to eachclass, from the 1st of November to the1st of June. In the first, or lowest class,he taught the first six books of Euclid'sElements, plain trigonometry, practicalgeometry, &c. ; in the second, algebra,the eleventh and twelfth books ofEuclid, spherical trigonometry, conicsections, and the general principles ofastronomy ; in the third, astronomyand perspective, and a part of Newton'sPrincipia; and in the fourth, the systemof fluxions, the doctrine of chances, andthe remainder of the Principia. Hislectures on these different subjectswere delivered," says his biographer,with such perspicuity of method andlanguage, that he seldom was underany necessity of repeating his demonstrations; but, so great was his anxietyfor the improvement of his pupils, thatif, at any time, they seemed not fully tocomprehend his meaning, he would resumethe demonstration in some othermethod, to try if, by laying it beforethem in a different light, he could givethem a better view of it."Notwithstanding the close applicationrequired in his public avocations,his private studies were pursued withsuch constancy and ardour, as to makea considerable inroad upon his health.In 1728, he wrote a history of the progresswhich philosophy had made priorto the time of Newton ; and to this heafterwards added proofs and examplesgiven by himself and others, and thewhole was published, after his death,under the title of An Account of SirIsaac Newton's Philosophical Discoveries.In 1733, he married Anne,daughter of Walter Stuart, solicitor-generalin Scotland, by whom he hadseven children ; of whom, two sons andthree daughters, together with his wife,survived him. In 1734, Dr. Berkeleyendeavoured, in his Analyst, to explodethe doctrine concerning the nature offluxions, and brought against mathematiciansgenerally, the charge of infidelityin religion. Maclaurin undertook areply, but the performance grew so extensivelyin his hands, that, instead ofa vindicatory pamphlet, he produced, in1742, an entire Treatise on Fluxions,in two volumes, quarto ; being themost profound and elaborate work everpublished upon the subject. Duringthe period he was employed in thisproduction, he was also engaged asoint secretary, with Dr. Plummer, to asociety in Edinburgh, for the improvementof medical knowledge, and producedmany highly interesting papers,which were published in .the MedicalAssays and Philosophical Transactions,le likewise prepared, at the request ofhe Earl of Morton, a statement of theinstruments and operations requisite insurvey of the Orkney and Shetlandstands ;" which, at his recommendation,^as conducted by Mr. Short, the op-science.titian. In 1740, he received a secondprize from the Royal Academy ofSciences, at Paris ; his paper being AResolution of the Problem relating tothe Motion of the Tides from theTheory of Gravity ; a question whichhad been given in the preceding yearwithout receiving any solution.One of Mr. Maclaurin's schemes forthe improvement of geography andnavigation, was the discovery of a passagefrom Greenland to the South Sea,by the north pole, of rhe existence ofwhich he was so fully persuaded, as todeclare that, if his situation would admitof such adventures, he would undertakethe voyage, even at his own expense.He was preparing some memorials togovernment on the subject, but beforehe could finish them, the premium,offered by parliament, in 1744, waslimited to the discovery of a north-westDuring the rebellion, in 1745, heexerted himself with remarkable energyto place the Scottish capital in a stateof defence against the rebel army ; andwhen the city was taken, an orderbeing issued for all those who had defendedit to swear allegiance to thePretender, privately withdrew to England; but, previous to his escape, foundmeans to convey a good telescope intothe castle, and concerted a method ofsupplying its defenders with provisions.Dr. Herring (then Archbishop of York),hearing that Maclaurin was in England,sent an invitation to reside withhim, which he readily accepted, andexperienced from his host the greatesthospitality and kindness. In a letterto a friend, he says, " Here I live ashappily as a man can do who is ignorantof the state of his family, and who seesthe ruin of his country."A fall from his horse, whilst he wasescaping from Edinburgh, and thevicissitudes of weather to which he exposedhimself on that occasion, had abaneful influence upon his constitution,which he never recovered. On hisarrival in the Scottish metropolis, hisdisease was discovered to be dropsy inthe abdomen ; of which, after havingseveral times submitted to the operationof tapping, he died, on the 14th of June,1746.Maclaurin was both a great and agood man. The vigour of his mindwas equalled by the benevolence of hisheart; and it was justly said of him,that he strictly obeyed the commandmentsof God, and conformed to thelaws of man. As a teacher, he waspatient and persuasive ; clear in hisown ideas, and happy in his mode ofcommunicating them to others. Hishighest merit, as a philosopher, consistedin his accommodating his studiesto general utility ; in applying histheories, in every possible case, to thebeneficial operations of practice. Wheneverany difficulty occurred in the executionof a public work, Mr. Maclaurinwas always called upon to resolve it ;and he determined some disputes ofimportance at Glasgow, respecting thegauging of vessels, by laying downrules on which the officers have eversince acted. His fondness for sciencewas not only evinced in his communicationof instruction to his pupils, buthe often supplied them with moneyfrom his private purse, to further theutility of his advice and recommendations.In private life, he was remarkablefor his benevolence, and for thewarmth and constancy of his friendships,as well as for his sincere andardent piety, which was strongly evincedin the calm resignation of his latestmoments.Mr. Maclaurin's communications tothe Philosophical Transactions will befound in the different volumes of thosecollections, from Number Thirty toNumber Forty-two, both inclusive.They are on the following subjects :on the construction and measure ofcurves; anew method of describing allkinds of curves ; on equations with impossibleroots ; on the description ofcurves, with an account of farther improvements,&c. ; an account of theannular eclipse of the sun, at Edinburgh,on the 27th of January, 1742-3;a rule for finding the meridional partsof a period with the same exactness asof a sphere ; and of the bases of the cellswherein the bees deposit their honey.His Treatise of Algebra, and Accountof Sir Isaac Newton's philosophicalDiscoveries, were published after hisdeath, by the friends to whose judgmenthe had submitted the disposal ofhis manuscripts.JOHN Martin.JOHN Martin.THIS learned botanical writer, wasthe son of Thomas Martyn, an eminentmerchant of London, where he wasborn, on the 12th of September, 1699.He was educated with a view to a commercialoccupation ; but exchanged itfor medicine, in consequence of theearly fondness he displayed for thepursuit of natural philosophy, and botanyin particular. With such ardourdid he pursue these studies, that evenwhilst engaged in the business of hisfather's counting-house, he is said tohave constantly devoted much of thenight to reading, allowing himself, formany years, no more than four out ofthe twenty-four hours for sleep.On the 26th of May, 1730, he entereda student of Emmanuel College, Cambridge,having, in the meantime, beenelected a fellow of the Royal Society inLondon, and acquired a high reputationby his botanical lectures in the metropolis.They were greatly admired bySir Hans Sloane and Mr. Sherard, onwhose recommendation he was employedto repeat them at Cambridge,and by this means paved the way to hisappointment of professor, to which hewas elected, on the death of Dr. Bradleyin 1733. He also appears to haveread lectures on the materia medica,both in London and at the university,though he did not take any medicaldegree at the latter. The want of abotanical garden at Cambridge, andhis increasing business in London,induced him to discontinue his lectureson botany some time previous to 1752,in which year he removed to Chelsea,on account of an asthmatic complaint,and there practised his profession.On the 30th of January, 1761, heresigned his professorship, which wasconferred on his son, the Rev. Dr.Thomas Martyn ; and, in gratitude forthis favour, the subject of our memoirpresented to the university his botanicallibrary, his hortus siccus, many drawingsof fungi, and some other collections.He died on the 29th of January, 1768 ;having been twice married.He was a man of very considerablelearning, and was one of the most distinguishedfollowers of Ray, the celebratedCambridge naturalist. He wasacquainted with Miller, Peering, Dale,and Dillenius; and, in conjunction withthese eminent botanists, established abotanical society, of which Dilleniuswas president, and Martyn secretary.His principal professional publicationsare, Tabula Synoptical ad MethodusRomanum Disposition, folio, 1726 ; MethodusPlantarum circa CantabrigiamNascentium, duodecimo, 1727 ; beingRay's catalogue reduced to the orderof his system, with the addition ofhis general character, and those ofother botanists; Historia PlantarumVariorum, Decades quinque, folio,1728-32 : a splendid work, intended toexhibit, in their natural colours andsize, such curious plants as had not yetbeen figured, but the further progressof which was prevented by the expense; and Tournefort's History of'lands growing about Paris, translatedinto English, with additions, two volumes,octavo.He also published Virgil's Georgicand Bucolics, translated into Englishprose, with notes, quarto and octavo, inwhich his union of classical learningwith botanical science has enabled himto elucidate many passages of his author,and the work met with great applause,both abroad and at home.His other works are, an abridgmentof the Philosophical Transactions, inwhich production he was assisted byJ. Eames ; a translation of Boerhaave'sTreatise on the History of Physic; atranslation of Dr. Hare's Treatise onthe Acute Diseases of Infants ; and anabridgment of the Memoirs of theAcademy of Paris, in five volumes, inwhich he was assisted by EphraimChambers. He also contributed severalpapers to the Philosophical Transactions,including Observations relating to NaturalHistory, made at the Peak, inDerbyshire ; of a new Purging Spring,discovered at Dulwich, in Surrey, &c.S C 1 E K C E .WILLIAM EMERSON.WILLIAM EMERSON, the eiderson of a. schoolmaster, was born at Hurtnear Darlington, in the countyof Durham, on the 10th of June, 1701,and received the rudiments of educationfrom his father, by whom he wastaught reading, writing, and arithmetic,and a little Latin. He appears to havebeen remarkably careless and indolent ;and, according to his own statement,to have principally employed his timein seeking birds' nests, and in otherfrivolous occupations. From Hurworthhe was sent to Newcastle, and fromthence to York ; where he seems tohave felt the powers of his mind developingthemselves, and to have appliedhimself diligently to study.Having quitted the school at York,he returned to Hurworth, where hepassed his time in the ordinary amusementsof a country life, and in prosecutingmathematical inquiries; to whichhe had now become much attached.He also attempted, occasionally, theinstruction of a few pupils ; but, finding,his capabilities more adapted to learningthan to teaching, soon gave over theemployment, and betook himself to thelearned languages; in which, however,his progress was not very considerable.In 1733, he married the niece of aclergyman, an event which led to thefull development of his extraordinarymental energies. The uncle of his wifehaving promised him a portion of 500,he applied to him for it, but receivingan insolent and contemptuous refusal,Emerson returned home, packed up allthe clothes his wife had brought withher from her uncle's, and sent themback, with a message, that " he wouldscorn to be beholden to such a fellowfor a rag." He then declared, with anoath, that he would have his revenge,by proving himself the better man ofthe two ; and, thus stimulated .to exertion,he was not long in fulfilling hisvow.He now devoted himself zealously tomathematics, and in 1736, he made hisfirst essay in The Ladies' Diary, as ananswerer* of the prize question for thatyear. To this publication, under thesignature ofMerones, he made frequentsubsequent contributions, displayingprofound skill in his solutions, and considerableenergy of thought in severalscientific controversies. After leavingthe Diaries, he assisted his friend andcorrespondent, Holliday, in the MiscellaneaCuriosa Mathematica, a workpublished in quarterly numbers. Hissolutions still bore the signature ofHeroes, and, occasionally, the morewhimsical one of Philofluentimechanal-gegeomastrolongo. This mode of signaturewas frequently practised byeminent mathematicians. Simpsonaffixed to his questions Timothy Doodle,Anthony Shallow, Esq., and other ludicrouscognomina ; Landen signed hiscommunications Sir Stately Stiff; andDr. Nevil Maskelyne, who afterwardsbecame astronomer-royal, was, for thepresent, simply Terricola.In 1743, he published his Doctrine ofFluxions ; a work which at once placedhim in the highest rank of mathematicians.The preface contains an excellentdisquisition on the nature of afluxion, which, at that time, did notappear to be clearly understood, andwhich had been much cavilled at byBerkeley and other metaphysical writers.The book did not meet withimmediate encouragement, nor werethe works, by which they were succeeded,his Projection of the Sphere,Elements of Trigonometry, Principlesof Mechanics, and a Treatise of Navigation,more successful than the first.Being introduced, however, by Mr.Edward Montague, who afterwards becameDuke of Manchester, to the noticeof Mr. Course, an eminent booksellerin the Strand, he was engaged by thatgentleman, upon most liberal terms,to furnish a regular course of mathematics.Upon this Emerson removedto London ; and, shortly afterwards,he published his Arithmetic, Geometry,Method of Increments, and Algebra.In 17G4, came out his Arithmetic ofInfinite and Conic Sections ; and, insuccession, his Elements of Optics andWILLIAM EMERSON.Perspective, Astronomy, Mechanics,in octavo; and Comment on the Principia,and Defence of Newton. His lastwork was a volume of tracts, publishedin 1776, when he was at the advancedage of seventy-five. During the greaterpart of his life, he had enjoyed uninterruptedhealth ; although he frequentlyindulged in excesses, which have a perniciouseffect upon persons of a lessvigorous constitution. As he advancedin years, he became afflicted with stone,and suffered the most excruciatingpains. In the agony of these paroxysms,he would crawl round the room uponhis hands and knees, sometimes prayingand sometimes swearing, and devoutlywishing " that the mechanismof the human frame had been so contrived,as to go to wreck," as he termedit, " without all this clitter-my-clatter."The violence of his disorder abated ashegrew weaker, and he died, apparentlywithout much pain, on the 21stof May, 1782. His wife, by whom hehad no children, survived him twoyears.In considering Emerson's characteras a mathematician, it appears remarkablethat he knew so much, and did solittle. Content with what had beenhanded down to him by others, heseemed desirous rather to enjoy his presentpossessions than to enlarge theboundary of his domains. He did everythingin the science of mathematics, butvery little for it. Instead of striking outnew facts, he sat down to record old ones.With a power that could have movedthe universe, he allowed his faculties tolie in rust at Hurworth. With a mind,whose energies fitted him for the highesttemple of philosophy, he was satisfiedwith the approbation to be derived inan ale-house. For these reasons, histreatises, which were once held in veryhigh repute, have been edged out of useby others better arranged, and lessheavily written. No one ever excelledhim " in putting into a book as muchas a book will hold ;" but this condensationof matter renders his works theless fit for elementary instruction ; andthe more accomplished student has nowsuperior sources of information.In person, Emerson was rather belowthe common size, but compact and wellmade ; very active, and strong. He hada good open, expressive countenance,with a ruddy complexion ; a keen and apenetrating eye ; and an ardour andeagerness of look, that was very expressiveof the texture of his mind. He waseither fond of, or had no disinclinationto, low companions ; and his languagewas often in true keeping with his society.He was much accustomed toswearing, abrupt and blunt in his manners,and of an irritable temper. Hisdress was shabby and grotesque. Hewore a dirty wig, half off his head, ashirt buttoned behind, inexpressiblethat disdained the aid of braces, and ahat, which, when the rim had lost itselasticity, was cut by him, with a pair ofshears, into the shape of a jockey's cap.This singularity of dress and figure,together with his character for profoundlearning, caused him to be considered,by ignorant people in the neighbourhood,as a wise or cunning man, orconjuror ; and under this impression,he was often consulted by them. Manyof them, long after his death, continuedin this belief, and would tell wonderfulstories of the feats he performed.Among others, it was related, that byvirtue of a magic spell, he compelled anidle fellow, who had been robbing hisorchard, to sit the whole of a Sunday'sforenoon, in a pear-tree, in full view ofthe congregation going to. and returningfrom, church : but this magic spellconsisted in Emerson's standing at thebottom of the tree, during the wholetime, with a hatchet in his hand, andswearing at the thief, that when hecame down he would " hag his legs off."He was also, by many persons, consideredto be an atheist ; but his friend,the Rev. W. Rowe, states, that Emersonfirmly believed in the being of aGod, and frequently declared, that itappeared to him " certain to a demonstration."Of the eccentricities of his charactermany anecdotes are recorded. Healways went to market for himself, butwas so averse towards riding, either onhorseback or in a carriage, that if hetook a horse with him, he would put hiswallet and provisions on its back, andlead it home, walking by the side.He was very fond of angling, and whenemployed in this sport, he would standup to his waist in the water, for hourstogether, saying, " Wading was serviceableto him, because the waterSCIENCE.sucked the gout out of his legs." Whenasked why lie chose to sell his books.a short time previous to his death, hesaid, "he had none but a pack of foolsto leave them to, and money would beof more service to them." He had anobjection to being admitted a fellow ofthe Royal Society, " because," he said,it was a d d hard thing that a manshould burn so many farthing candlesas he had done, and then have to payso much a-year for the honour of F.R.S.after his name. D n them, and theirF.R.S. too !" It is, however, relatedthat he went, by invitation, to attend ameeting of the society, but his meanappearance was such, that the porterrefused him admission ; when he simplyreplied, " I 's Emerson," and passedon without further interruption.With all his eccentricities, however,Emerson was, upon the whole, a manboth to be esteemed and respected. Hehad an independent mind ; was incapableof a mean or disingenuous action ;detested falsehood with as much constancyas he adhered to truth ; and,under a rough exterior, possessed ahumane heart, that often prompted himto the most generous actions.DAVID HARTLEY.DAVID HARTLEY, the son of aclergyman at Darnley, near Leeds, inYorkshire, was born at Ilingworth, onthe 30th of August, 1705. After receivingthe rudiments of his educationunder the tuition of a Mrs. Brooks -bank, at Halifax, he, in 1720, went toJesus College, Cambridge, of which hesubsequently became a fellow, andwhere he proceeded to the degree ofM. A. He had entered the universitywith the intention of studying for thechurch, but scruples having arisen inhis mind respecting the propriety ofsubscription to the Thirty-nine Articles,he relinquished all thoughts of theclerical profession, and turned his attentionto that of medicine. He continued,however, to the end of his life,in communion with the church of England,approving of its practical doctrines,and conforming to its public worship.He commenced the practice of physic atNewark, in Nottinghamshire, whence heremoved to Bury St. Edmund's ; thenceto London, where he settled for sometime; and, finally, proceeded to Bath.Dr. Hartley is, however, to be consideredless in the character of a physicianthan that of a philosopher. Forthe latter, he was well qualified by hisknowledge of metaphysics, divinity,and ecclesiastical history, optics, statics,and indeed every branch of natural,moral, and religious philosophy. Thecelebrated Professor Saunderson washis mathematical teacher; but it wasfrom Locke and Newton that he tookthe rudiments of his own great work,which appeared in 1749, under thetitle of Observations on Man, hisFrame, his Duty, and his Expectations,in two parts, forming two volumes,octavo. The first volume is dividedinto four chapters, which treat of thedoctrine of vibrations, upon the principleslaid down by Newton. He hascomprised his doctrine under the followingpropositions : that the whitemedullary substance of the brain, spinalmarrow, and the nerves proceedingfrom them, is the immediate instrumentof sensation and motion ; that itis also the immediate instrument bywhich ideas are presented to the mind ;or, in other words, whatever changesare made in this substance, correspondingchanges are made in our ideas, andvice verse ; that the sensations remainin the mind for a short time after thesensible objects are removed ; that externalobjects impressed upon the sensesoccasion, first in the nerves on whichthey are impressed, and then in thebrain, vibrations of the small, and, asmay be said, infinitesimal medullaryparticles ; that these vibrations are excited,propagated, and kept up, partlyby the aether, (i. e., by a very subtleand elastic fluid) and partly by the uniformity,continuity, softness, and activepowers of the medullary substance ofthe brain, spinal marrow, and nerves ;and that the phenomena of sensiblepleasure and pain, and also of sleep,appear to be very suitable to the doc-davidHARTLEY.trine of vibrations. He then proceedsto treat of ideas, their generation andassociations, c. The second chaptercontains the application of the doctrinesof vibration and association to each ofthe sensations and motions in particular;the third, a particular applicationof the foregoing theory to the phenomenaof ideas, or of understanding,affection, memory, and imagination.The fourth chapter treats of the riseand gradual increase of the pleasuresand pains of imagination, ambition,self-interest, sympathy, apathy, andthe moral sense ; and attempts to showhow far those are agreeable to theforegoing theory. The second part ofDr. Hartley's work consists of observationson the duty and expectations ofmankind ; the contemplation of thehuman frame and constitution, fromwhich he attempts to deduce evidencesof revealed religion ; and the anticipationsof mankind here and hereafter,in consequence of their observance orviolation of the rule of life, resultingfrom the dictates of natural religionand the precepts of the Scriptures.The system advocated in the work isso extensive, and was, at the time ofits publication, so entirely novel andoriginal, that it did not experience avery favourable reception in the philosophicalor literary world. Dr. Hartleywas not disappointed in this, but he feltsatisfied that, at some future period, itwould become the adopted system offuture philosophers. He would enterinto no dispute respecting his doctrinesafter he hud once bequeathed themas one compact and undivided system,to the candour and mature judgment oftime and posterity." The only pointon which he evinced any anxiety, waslest the doctrine of corporeal vibrations,being instrumental to sensation, shouldbe deemed unfavourable to the opinionof the immateriality of the soul ; anopinion he therefore took great care toshow that he concurred in. His doctrineof vibrations, which is said to haveoccupied him eighteen years in perfecting,has been disputed by some veryable physiologists as altogether untenable.The celebrated Haller, inparticular, maintains that it attributesproperties to the nerves and to themedullary substance of the brain, &c.,totally incompatible with the nature ofthese substances ; that the nerves arenot irritable, and that no art can producevibrations in them ; and that themedullary substance of the brain, &c.,from its being soft, pulpy, and elastic,is entirely unfitted for being put into avibratory state.Dr. Hartley's principal medical worksconsist of some pamphlets in defenceof inoculation, &c., and two treatises,written to prove the efficacy of a sortof soap medicine for the stone, inventedby Mr. Stephens, for whom he wasmainly instrumental in obtaining arnt, from parliament, of jg5,000. Ithowever, singular, that he shouldhave himself died of the stone afterhaving taken two hundred poundsweight of soap. His death took placeat Hath, on the 28th of August, 1757.In person, our philosopher was ofthe middle size, and well proportioned,with a fair complexion, regular andhandsome features, and a countenanceopen, ingenuous, and animated. Hewas a faithful disciple of his own theory,and thus avoided the tumult ot worldlyvanities and their disquietudes, andpreserved his mind in serenity andvigour. His favourite recreations were,poetry, music, and history ; and inhis most unguarded moments, he appearsto have maintained that sincerityof heart, simplicity of manners, andmanly innocence of mind, by which hiswhole character was uniformly andeminently distinguished. As a physician,says one of his biographers, " hesoon became equally and in the firstdegree eminent for skill, integrity, andcharitable compassion. His mind wasformed to benevolence and universalphilanthropy. He exercised the healingart with anxious and equal fidelityto the poor and to the rich. He visited,with affectionate sympathy, the humblestrecesses of poverty and sickness, as wellas the stately beds of pampered distemperand premature decrepitude.His manners were gentle; his countenanceaffable ; his eloquence moral andpathetic, not harsh or importunate ;yet he was not unmindful that bodilysickness softens the mind to moral sensibilities,which afforded frequent opportunitiesto him of exercising mentalcharities to afflicted minds, while heemployed the power of medical scienceto the restoration of bodily health."SCIENCE.BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.THIS celebrated individual, theyoungest but two of a family of seventeenchildren, was born at Boston, inNorth America, on the 17th of January,1706. His father was at first adyer, and afterwards a soap-boiler andtallow-chandler, and had quitted England,in order to escape the prosecutionagainst non-conformists, under Charlesthe Second. His son Benjamin wassent to a grammar-school at eight yearsof age, with a view of being educatedfor the church, but this design was soonabandoned, and the subject of our memoir,after having made a slight progressin writing and arithmetic, returnedhome, and assisted at his father'strade. This employment was very irksometo Franklin, whose inclinationshad become directed to a sea-faringlife; and it was at length agreed thathe should be apprenticed to his cousin,who was a cutler. An obstacle to this,however, arose in the amount of premiumrequired, and he was eventuallybound, in his twelfth year, to his brotherJames, a printer.He soon made great progress in thisbusiness, and an acquaintance formedwith several booksellers' apprentices,enabled him to indulge his love of reading,by borrowing books, which theyhad facilities to obtain. " It has oftenhappened to me," he says, in a memoirof the early part of his life, " to pass'the greater part of the night in readingby my bed-side, when the book hadbeen lent to me in the evening, andwas to be returned the next morning,lest it might be missed or wanted."This disposition being noticed by a Mr.Matthew Adams, who had a large collectionof books, he offered the use ofthem to Franklin, who soon became anauthor, and composed several littlepieces in verse. Two of these, a ballad,called The Light-house Tragedy, anda song on the noted pirate, Blackboard,were, by the brother's directions,printed : but the most unpoetic part ofthe story remains to be told theirauthor was despatched about the townto sell them. Franklin says, " the firsthad a prodigious run, because the eventwas recent, and had made a greatnoise ;" but " they were wretchedverses in point of style mere blind-man'sditties." His father seems tohave been of the same opinion, for heridiculed the productions ; " and thus,"says their author, " my exultationwas checked, and I escaped the misfortuneof being a very miserable poet."At this period he formed an acquaintancewith a young man of the name ofCollins, who was also a great lover ofbooks. They were frequently together,and were both fond of disputation, whichthey sometimes carried on in writing.This, probably, assisted in bringing outsome of the dormant qualities of Franklin'smind ; but his style was greatlyinferior to that of his rival, to improvewhich he immediately took the followingmethod: " I bought," he says,an odd volume of The Spectator, readit over and over, and was much delightedwith it. F thought the writingexcellent, and wished, if possible, toimitate it. With this view, I took someof the papers, and, making short hintsof the sentiments in each sentence,laid them by a few days ; and then,without looking at the book, tried tocomplete the papers again, by expressingeach hinted sentiment atlength, and as fully as it had been expressedbefore in any suitable wordsthat should occur to me. Then I comparedmy Spectator with the original,discovered some of my faults, and" correctedthem. But I found I wanted astock of words, or a readiness in recollectingand using them, which I thoughtI should have acquired before thattime, if I had gone on making verses ;since the continual search for words ofthe same import, but of differentlength, to suit the measure, or of differentsound, for the rhyme, wouldhave laid me under constant necessityof searching for variety, and also havetended to fix that variety in my mind,and make me master of "it. Therefore1 took some of the tales in The Spectator,and turned them into verse ;BENJAMIN FRANKLIN.and, after a time, when I had prettywell forgotten the prose, turned themback again. I also, sometimes, jumbledmy collection of hints into confusion,and, after some weeks, endeavoured toreduce them into the best order, beforeI began to form the full sentences andcomplete the subject. This was toteach me method in the arrangementof my thoughts. By comparing mywork with the original, I discoveredmany faults, and corrected them ; butsometimes had the pleasure to fancythat, in certain particulars of small consequence,I had been fortunate enoughto improve the method or the language ;and this encouraged me to think that Imight, in time, come to be a tolerableEnglish writer, of which I was extremelyambitious."Franklin added to his habits of industrya self-denial and control overhis passions, even at this early age,which were truly surprising. Whenabout sixteen, a work fell into hishands, which recommended vegetablediet: this he determined to follow,and undertook to provide for himself,upon his brother's allowing him one-halfof the ordinary expense of hisboard, of which half, even, he contrived,by great abstemiousness, to savea considerable portion. Here was anew fund for the purchase of books ;and he accordingly obtained such asenabled him to perfect himself in thoseelementary branches of knowledge inwhich he was deficient, among whichwere arithmetic and geometry.In 1720, his brother established a publicpaper, entitled The New EnglandCourant, the second that had appearedin America. Franklin was employedto distribute the copies, and, occasionally,being present at the meetings whichwere held at his brother's house, by anumber of literary characters, whowere contributors, his love of authorshipwas rekindled, and he sent a communication,in the usual way, but in afeigned hand. It was received, andcommented upon in Franklin's hearing ;who, in his memoir, tells us, he hadthe exquisite pleasure to find that itmet with their approbation, and that,in the various conjectures they maderespecting its author, no one was mentionedwho did not enjoy a high reputationin the country for talents andgenius." Many other articles werewritten, and forwarded in the same manner,and, being equally well received,their author made himself known ; expectingthat the discovery would insurefor him more respect and greaterfraternal indulgence than he hadpreviously experienced. His brother,however, continued to treat him withmuch rigour, and being a man of ungovernablepassions, frequently proceededto the extremity of blow's. " Thissevere and tyrannical treatment," saysFranklin, "contributed, I believe, toimprint on my mind that aversion toarbitrary power, which, during mywhole life, I have ever preserved."The brothers, however, had soon occasionto become reconciled with eachother. James, in consequence of anoffensive article in The Courant, wastaken into custody, and imprisoned foramonth ; and Benjamin, during thatperiod, was intrusted with the managementof the paper, in which he insertedseveral pasquinades against the governorand other persons in authority.James's enlargement was accompaniedwith an arbitrary order, that he shouldno longer print the newspaper calledThe New England Courant." Toevade this order, it was determinedthat his brother's indentures should begiven up, and the paper, in future, beprinted in the name of Benjamin Franklin.A new contract was at the sametime secretly entered into between theparties, by which Benjamin's serviceswere to be secured for the remainder ofthe term of his former apprenticeship :but, a fresh quarrel arising, Franklinthought proper to separate from hisbrother ; " dishonourably," as he candidlyacknowledges, " wailing himselfof the circumstance that the contractcould not safely be produced."Being unable to obtain employmentin Boston, he determined upon goingto New York ; but, apprehending hisfather would object to this resolution,he sold a part of his books to procurea small sum of money, and departedprivately. On his arrival at the latterplace, he applied for employment to aprinter, who, having no occasion for hisservices, recommended himtoextend hisjourney to Philadelphia. Before starting,the perplexing interrogatories whichhad been put to him at every placeSCIENCE.where he stopped, induced him to hitupon an expedient for silencing similarinquiries. As soon as supper was laid,he called his landlord, and the followingdialogue took place between them :Pray are you married ?" " Yes."What family have you got ?" " Twosons and three daughters." " Howmany servants ?" " Two, and a hostler."Have you any objection to my seeingthem?" " None. 1 guess." " Thenbe so good as to desire them all to stephere." This was done; and the wholebeing assembled, Franklin thus addressedthem : " Good people, myname is Benjamin Franklin I am bytrade a printer I came from Boston,and am going to Philadelphia, to seekemployment I am in rather humblecircumstances, and quite indifferent tonews of any kind unconnected withprinting. This is all I know of myself,and all I can possibly inform you;and now I hope you will allow me totake my supper in quiet."His arrival at Philadelphia is thusrecorded by himself: " I was in myworking-dress, my best clothes beingto come from New York, by sea. Iwas covered with dirt ; my pocketswere filled with shirts and stockings ; Iwas unacquainted with a single soul inthe place, and knew not where to seeka lodging. Fatigued with walking androwing, and having passed the nightwithout sleep, I was extremely hungry,and all my money consisted of a Dutchdollar, and about a shilling's worth ofcoppers, which I gave to the boatmenfor my passage. At first they refusedit, on account of my having rowed; butI insisted on their taking it. Man issometimes more generous when he haslittle money than when he has plenty ;perhaps to prevent his being thought tohave but little. I walked towards thetop of the street, gazing about, till, nearMarket Street, where I met a boy withbread. I had often made a meal ofdry bread, and, inquiring where he hadbought it, I went immediately to thebaker's he directed me to. I asked forbiscuits, meaning such as we had atBoston ; that sort, it seems, was notmade in Philadelphia. I then askedfor a threepenny loaf, and was toldthey had none. Not knowing the differentprices, nor the names of the differentsorts of bread, I told him to giveme three pennyworth of any sort. Hegave me, accordingly, three great puffyrolls. I was surprised at the quantity,but took it ; and, having no room inmy pockets, walked off with a roll undereach arm, and eating the other. ThusI went up Market Street, as far asSouth Street, passing by the door ofMr. Read, my future wife's father,when she, standing at the door, sawme, and thought I made, as I certainlydid, a most awkward, ridiculous appearance.Then I turned and wentdown Chestnut Street and part of WalnutStreet, eating my roll all the way ;and, coming round, found myself againat Market Street wharf, near the boatI came in, to which I went for a draughtof the river water; and, being filledwith one of my rolls, gave the othertwo to a woman and her child thatcame down the river in the boat withus, and were waiting to go farther.Thus refreshed, I walked again up thestreet, which, by this time, had manyclean dressed people in it, who were allwalking the same way. I joined them,and thereby was led into the greatmeeting-house of the Quakers, near themarket. I sat down among them, and,after looking round awhile, and hearingnothing said, being very drowsy,through labour and want of rest thepreceding night, I fell fast asleep, andcontinued so till the meeting broke up,when some one was kind enough torouse me. This, therefore, was the firsthouse I was in, or slept in, in Philadelphia."He was not long in obtaining employmentwith a printer of the nameof Keimer; and, during his stay atPhiladelphia, was favourably noticedby the governor, Sir William Keith,who frequently invited him to his table ;and at length promised to advance thefunds requisite to place him in businesson his own account. He had previouslyadvised his young protege to proceedto Boston, and ask assistance from hisfather, who, however, gave no encouragementto the scheme, but dismissedFranklin with his blessing, whoreturned to Philadelphia. Sir Williamnow recommended him to visit England,in order to procure an adequatestock of printing materials, and establisha connexion with some Londonbooksellers; and offered to furnish himBENJAMIN FRANKLIN.with letters of credit and introduction.Upon this recommendation, Franklinset sail for England, but the ship whichbrought him to London, in December,1724, was found to have carried none ofthe promised letters from the governorof Philadelphia.He was now thrown entirely uponhis own resources, and having takenlodgings in Little Britain, at one shillingand nine pence per week, he got intowork at Palmer's printing-house, inBartholomew Close, in which employhe continued for nearly a year. FromPalmer's he removed to Watts's, nearLincoln's Inn Fields, where, by hiscompanions, he was dubbed the Water-american." From my example,"he says, " a great many of them leftoff their muddling breakfast of beer,bread, and cheese, finding they could,with me, be supplied from a neighbouringhouse with a large porringer ofhot water-gruel, sprinkled with pepper,crumbled with bread, and a bit of butterin it, for the price of a pint of beer,viz., three-halfpence." About thisperiod, he fell in with some deisticalcompanions, renounced his religiousprinciples, commenced sceptic, andpublished A Dissertation on Libertyand Necessity, Pleasure and Pain ; inanswer to Wollaston's Religion ofNature. This work introduced himlo the notice of Sir Hans Sloane, Dr.Mandeville, Dr. Pemberton, and othereminent persons, though Franklin acknowledgedthe printing of it as one ofthe errors of his life. After having beenin London eighteen months, he acceptedthe offer of a Mr. Denham, a merchantof Philadelphia, to return with him ashis clerk, at a salary of 50. He arrivedat Philadelphia on the llth ofOctober, 172(5; but, Mr. Denham dyingin the following year, his clerk wascompelled to return to his former occupation,and again entered into the employof Keimer ; acting in the severalcapacities of letter-founder, ink-maker,engraver, and copper-plate-printer. Thepress which he used in the latter callingwas constructed by himself, and wasthe first erected in America. A quarrelwith Keimer, led to a final separationbetween him and Franklin, who nowentered into partnership with a youngman of the name of Meredith. " Wehad scarcely," says Franklin; " openedour letters and put the press in order,before George House, an acquaintanceof ours, brought a countryman to uswhom he had met in the street, inquiringfor a printer. All our cash hadbeen expended in the variety of particularswe had been obliged to procure,and this countryman's five shillings,being our first fruits, and comingso seasonably, gave me more pleasurethan any money I have ever since received."The frugality and industry ofFranklin soon brought their businessinto a thriving condition, and he beganto think of establishing a newspaper,when he was anticipated by Keimer,who started one of his own. He nowwrote, in conjunction with a friend, aseries of papers, called The Busy Body,which so much eclipsed the publicationof his rival, that he was glad to disposeof his paper, at any price, to Franklin.Meredith proving inattentive to business,Franklin was persuaded to dissolvepartnership, and take the concern entirelyinto his own hands, which hewas enabled to accomplish, through theliberal assistance of two acquaintances,who were members of the Junto. Thiswas a club, established by Franklin, forthe discussion of subjects connectedwith morals, politics, and natural philosophy: it eventually became thecentre of thought for the whole people ;and contributed, in a great degree, tothe success of their struggle for independence.In September, 1730, he married afemale to whom he had been previouslyattached, when she was Miss Read, butwho, during his absence, had conceivedherself forgotten, and given her hand toa potter, of the name of Rogers. Thisperson had involved himself in debt,and fled To the West Indies, but Franklin'saffection was not damped by theprobability of the lady's first husbandbeing still alive, and he consented tomake her his spouse.In 1732, he published his celebratedalmanac, under the name of RichardSaunders, more generally known as PoorRichard's Almanac, and which becameso celebrated for its numerous happily-expressedand valuable moral maxims.These were collected, many years afterwards,into a little tract, called TheWay to Wealth ; having for its objectthe extension of industry and economy,SCIENCE.habits which no man ever practisedmore successfully than Franklin himself.Dr. Hard, a Scotchman, residing inPhiladelphia, used to say of him, " Theindustry of this Franklin is superior toany thing of the kind I ever witnessed.1 see him still at work when I returnfrom the club at night, and 1 find he isat it again in the morning, before hisneighbours are out of bed." On oneoccasion, having laid down a rule thathe would compose a sheet a-day, of aparticular work, in folio, he had themisfortune, after his evening's labour,to derange two whole pages. Such,however, was his perseverance, that hedistributed and composed them anewbefore lie retired to bed.In 1736, he commenced his politicalcareer, by being appointed clerk to thegeneral assembly ; and,, in the followingyears entered upon the duties of postmaster.He was also appointed an alderman,and put into the commission of thepeace ; but took no part in the businessof the bench, commonly employinghimself, whilst sitting with his brothermagistrates, " in contriving magicsquares and circles." From this period,till 1744, he was actively and usefullyemployed in instituting fire companies,erecting public buildings, and establishingphilosophical societies. In 1744,during the war between England andFrance, he particularly distinguishedhimself in procuring means of resistanceagainst the enemy, and succeededin bringing over the Quakers to givetheir pecuniary aid. They were, however,particularly scrupulous not to acknowledgethat their grants were connectedwith the principle of warfare.When, therefore, the assembly wasapplied to, for a certain quantity ofgunpowder, the members would notcomply with the request ; but voted3,000 to be placed in the hands of thegovernor, " for the purchase of bread,flour, wheat, or other grain." Thegovernor was advised not to accept thegrant, but he replied" I shall takethe money ; ' other grain' means gunpowder."Franklin, hearing of this,suggested that the insurance companies,which were also well stocked withQuakers, might likewise very properlycontribute their aid, by a grant for thepurchase of fire-engines.In 1745, he published an account ofhis newly-invented fire-place ; and, in1747, was elected a member of thegeneral assembly ; in which he was anactive defender of the rights of thecitizens, iri opposition to the encroachmentsof the proprietaries. He introducedseveral measures relative to thelocal government of Philadelphia; andbusily employed himself in establishingpublic schools and founding hospitals,n 1749, he took one of his workmeninto partnership; and was thus enabledto devote a considerable portion of histime to scientific pursuits, of which itis now time to give some account. Atthis period, our readers need not, perhaps,be told, that electricity was ascience which could hardly be said toconsist of anything more than a collectionof unsystematized and ill-understoodfacts. Franklin's attention seemsto have been first directed to this subjectin 1746, when, being at Boston, hemet with a Dr. Spence, who had latelyarrived from Scotland, and shewed himsome electrical experiments. Theywere not very expertly performed,but being," says Franklin, " on asubject quite new to me, they equallysurprised and pleased me. Soon aftermy return to Philadelphia, our librarycompany received, from Mr. PeterCollinsonon, F. R. S., of London, a presentof a glass tube, with some account ofthe use of it in making experiments. Ieagerly seized the opportunity of repeatingwhat I had seen at Boston ;and, by much practice, acquired greatreadiness in performing those alsowhich we had an account of from England,adding a number of new ones. Isay much practice, for my house wascontinually full, for some time, withpersons who came to see these newwonders. To divide a little of this incumbranceamong my friends, I causeda number of similar tubes to be thrownin our glass-house, with which theyfurnished themselves ; so that we had,at length, several performers."None were now more zealous, inelectrical investigations, than Franklin :he was continually devising new experiments,and falling upon importantresults. He exhibited the power ofpoints in drawing and throwing off theelectrical matter ; and made the granddiscovery of a positive and negativestate of electricity. By means of thisBENJAMIN FRANKLIN.discovery, he satisfactorily explainedthe phenomena of the Leyden phial,which was at that time exciting thewonder of all Europe, and had causedphilosophers so much perplexity. Hishappiest conjecture, however, was thatof the identity between lightning andthe electric fl ad, though it was notuntil 1752, that he was enabled, effectually,to establish this importantfact. He had long entertained the boldidea of ascertaining the truth of thisdoctrine, by actually drawing lightningfrom the clouds ; and at length it occurredto him that he might procurecommunication between them and theearth by means of a common kite.With this simple apparatus, he awaitedthe approach of a thunder-cloud, andthe kite was raised, but no sign of electricityappeared. His suspense andanxiety were almost insupportable ;when suddenly he observed the loosefibres of the string to move ; he presentedhis knuckle to the key by whichit was held, and received a strong spark.On this experiment depended the fateof his theory. Repeated sparks weredrawn from the key a phial wascharged a shock given and this brilliantdiscovery placed upon an immutablebasis.Franklin, from time to time, forwardedaccounts of his experiments toEngland, for the information of theRoyal Society; but they were not admittedinto the printed transactions ofthat learned body. His friend, Mr.Coliinson, gave them to Cave, for insertionin The Gentleman's Magazine; butCave, with great judgment, thoughtproper to publish them separately, in apamphlet, the preface to which waswritten by Dr. Fothergill. By the additionswhich were subsequently madeto this little work, it swelled into aquarto volume, and became the textbookof the science. It was translatedinto French, German, and Latin, andattracted the attention of all the philosophersin Europe. In France, thehighest honours were paid to Franklin'slabours: Buflbn, D'Alibard, and DeLor, repeated and confirmed his experiments;and the king himself, Louisthe Fifteenth, became a spectator ofthem. Russia, even, participated inthis ardour ; and the amiable Richmondfell a martyr to his zeal an unfortunateflash from the conductor putting aperiod to his existence. Eventually,the Royal Society began to reconsiderthe matter ; and Franklin's grand experiment,the object of which had, atfirst, been treated with ridicule, wasverified by Canton, and other members.Franklin was, accordingly, without solicitation,elected a fellow, and had paidto him the unusual honour of beingchosen without payment of the customaryfees. He was also presentedwith the Copley medal for the year1753; and, at a subsequent period, hehad the degree of LL.D. conferred uponhim by the Universities of St. Andrew's,Edinburgh, and Oxford.We now resume our account ofFranklin's political career. In theyear just mentioned, he was presentedwith the degree of M. A., by the Collegeof Cambridge, in New England;and, in the same year, he was appointeddeputy postmaster-general forthe British colonies. The Americanpost-office had never previously madeany returns for the revenue ; but underthe management and improvements ofFranklin, it yielded to the crown threetimes as much as the post-office ofIreland. In 1754, he drew up his celebratedAlbany Plan of Union, as ameans of defence against the depredationsof the Indians. The rejectionof this plan was followed by the introductionof British troops into the colonies;this produced taxation, and wassoon succeeded by the war, whichended in the anal 'loss of-america tothe mother-country.In 1755, when the expedition ofGeneral Braddock, to dispossess theFrench of some of their encroachments,was in preparation, a difficulty arosefor want of wagons, which Franklinsupplied, to the number of one hundredand fifty. The expedition, however,failing, he was in danger of a ruinousloss, but was relieved from his obligationsby the interference of the governor.He was, subsequently, instrumentalin forming a militia bill ;and he was appointed colonel of thePhiladelphia regiment of one thousandtwo hundred men, which he held untilthe troops were disbanded by order ofthe English government.On the 27th of July, 1757, Franklinarrived in London, in the character ofSCIENCE,agent to the general assembly, for thepurpose of advocating the privileges ofthe people against the illiberal and unjustencroachments of the proprietaries.Much prejudice and delusion existedat the time in relation to the affairs ofAmerica; and Franklin, in consequence,published, anonymously, a work, entitledAn Historical Review of the Constitutionand Government of Pennsylvania.During his sojourn in England,he was engaged in a variety of politicalcontroversies, aid was examined beforea committee oi the whole house of commons,relative to the practicability ofenforcing the stamp act, which, in consequenceof the information he afforded,was repealed. He returned to Philadelphiain the summer of 1762 ; andshortly afterwards received the thanksof the'assembly, and a grant of 5,000.In 1764, through the exertions of theproprietaries, he lost his seat in thehouse ; but there still remained in it amajority of his friends, and he was appointedto resume his agency at thecourt of Great Britain.In 1766, he visited Holland and Germany; and, in the following year,France, where Louis the Fifteenthshewed him particular marks of attention.After his return to England, hegot embroiled relative to some politicalpapers which had been clandestinelyfurnished to him, and which he forwardedto America, where they werepublished. He was, in consequence,dismissed from his office of deputy ,after hawing been summonedbefore the privy-council, andseverely censured. He was now lookedupon by government with considerablejealousy, and it was proposed to arresthim upon the charge of fomenting arebellion ; but being apprised of this intention,he contrived to leave Englandsecretly, in March, 1775.On his return to Philadelphia, he waselected a delegate to the congress, andtook an active part in bringing about arevolution. It was at this period hewrote the following memorable letterto his old friend in England, Mr.Strahan, the king's printer :Philadelphia, July 5th, 1775.Mr. Strain, You are a memberof parliament, and one of that majoritywhich has doomed my country todestruction. You have begun to burnour towns, and murder our people.Look upon your hands 1 They aresigned with the blood of your relations.You and 1 were long friends : you arenow my enemy, and I am yours.B. FRANKLIN."In 1776, although in his seventy-firstyear, he was called upon by congress,to proceed to France, for thepurpose of completing the negotiationsbegan by Silas Deane ; and, in 1777,he was appointed plenipotentiary to theFrench court. He had now not onlycreated a host of political enemies inthis country, but was also attacked bycertain philosophical opponents. Mr.Wilson, a fellow of the Royal Society,protested against pointed conductors,and performed several experiments, inorder to prove the superiority of knobs.In consequence of Wilson's declarations,the pointed lightning conductors weretaken down from the queen's palace, acircumstance which gave rise to thefollowing epigram :Whilst you, great George, for safety hunt,And sharp conductors change for blunt,The empire'! nut of joint :Franklin a wiser course pursues ;And all your thunder fearless view*,By keeping to the point.A definitive treaty of peace havingbeen signed between Great Britain andthe United States, on the 3rd of September,1783, Franklin requested to berecalled home. He arrived at Philadelphiain September, 1785, and wasafterwards twice elected president ofthe assembly. His last public act wasthe signing of a memorial, on the 12thof February, 1789, for the abolition ofslavery.He had been, for many years, subjectto attacks of the gout, to which, in 1782,was added a nephritic colic; and, aboutthe same period, he suffered the firstpains of a disease, the most distressingin the list of bodily infirmities. Theywere three things he had alwaysdreaded ; and he used to observe, that,in relation to this complication of disorders,he was " something like thewoman who had always entertained agreat aversion to presbyterians, parsons,and Irishmen, and at last married anIrish presbyterian parson." Thesemaladies confined him to his bed duringBENJAMIN FRANKLIN.the greater part of the last year of hislife ; but, notwithstanding the severepains he laboured under, his naturalcheerfulness never forsook him. Hismental faculties were unimpaired, andhis memory continued unaffected tothe last hour of his existence. He wasoften obliged to take large doses ofopium; but, in his moments of ease, heamused himself with reading, or in affectionateconversation with his family.He died on the 17th of April, 1790,and was buried on the 21st of April, inthe cemetery of Christ's Church, Philadelphia.On the occasion of his funeral,every possible mark of public respectwas shown to his memory : a generalmourning, for one month, was orderedthroughout America ; and the nationalassembly of France paid a like honourin remembrance of his virtues-franklinwas, unquestionably, a greatand extraordinary man; but he becameso, more by the quantity than the qualityof his capabilities. He never displayedany sudden bursts of genius ;but his mind was in constant equableaction. His greatness was an assemblageof littleness. As a statesman,an orator, and a diplomatist, he hasbeen excelled by many, whose namesare nearly forgotten. In the exerciseof his patriotism, he was never requiredto make any severe personal sacrifices;and his scientific discoveries were morethe result of patient observation than ofextraordinary intellectual energy. Perseverancewas his most striking quality,and temperance his highest virtue. Hismorality seems to have been, in a greatdegree, the result of discipline. Hehad conceived what he terms " the boldand arduous project of arriving at moralperfection," and he " wished to livewithout committing any fault at anytime."This must, indeed, have beenan "arduous" undertaking for one whohad previously married another man'swife ; but he proceeded in his plan withgreat earnestness, drew out schemes ofaction, tabulated the virtues, and kepta daily register of his conduct. Hebegan at length to suspect there wassomething in this which partook of " akind of foppery in morals," and he discontinuedthe practice, from a consideration"that a benevolent man shouldallow a few faults in himself, in orderto keep his friends in countenance."Making, however, due allowances forthe infirmity of human nature, he wasan honest man. He was a kind husband,an affectionate father, and a sincerefriend ; a great lover of mankind,and a stern republican. He took, atall times, a great delight in doing good;and his assistance, whether required byindividuals, or by public bodies, wasnever solicited in vain. He gave largesums to different institutions during hislife, and bequeathed, in his will, 2,000for benevolent purposes. With all hissoberness and methodical morality, hepossessed an habitual gaiety, a relishfor humorous incidents, and a happymode of relating them.Franklin's conversation was sprightlyand natural, and his manners were sufficientlybland for one who began life ajourneyman printer, and ended it thefounder of a republic. He was perfectlydestitute of pride, and considered allhonest men tube upon terms of equality.During the time he was in this country,in the dignified station of a politicalagent to the American assembly, hewent to Mr. Watts's printing-office, inWild Court, Lincoln's Inn Fields ; andentering the press-room, proceeded toa particular press where two men wereat work : " Come, my friends," saidhe, " we will drink together ; it is nowforty years since I worked, like you, atthis press, as a journeyman printer."A gallon of porter was sent for, and thethree drank "success to printing." Ata later period, the merchants in Philadelphiabeing desirous to establish anassembly for dancing, they drew upsome rules, among which was one,that no mechanic, or mechanic's wifeor daughter, should be admitted, on anyterms." This rule being submitted toDr. Franklin, he remarked, that "itexcluded God Almighty, who was, unquestionably,the greatest mechanic inthe universe." In his latter years, hebecame immoderately fond of chess,and would sit at that amusement fromsix in the evening, until the followingsunrise. On one occasion, at Pass,whilst engaged in the game with aFrench gentleman, his king becamechecked, at the time he would otherwisehave had an opportunity to give afatal blow to his adversary. Contraryto rule, he neglected his king, andmade another move. " Sir," said theSCIENCE.Frenchman, " you cannot do that, andleave your king in check." " 1 see heis in check," said the doctor; "but Ishall not defend him. If he was a goodking, like yours, he would deserve theprotection of his subjects ; but he is atyrant, and has already cost morethan he is worth: take him if youplease ; I can do without him, and willfight out the rest of the battle, en Re-publican,"An enemy to everything aristocratic,Dr. Franklin, even in literature, didnot attempt to rise above the " middlingclass." He had taught himself Latin,Italian, Spanish, and French ; but hisreading had neither been extensive norselect: he began with The Pilgrim'sProgress, and ended with a newspaper.His early writings were loose and verbose; but his subsequent political essaysand diplomatic communications, madesome approaches to force and elegance.His eloquence was of an unpretendingcharacter ; but he developed his ideaswith clearness and precision. He hadalways at hand an immense stock ofcommon sense, and possessed the veryuseful quality of being "eminentlygreat in little things."JOHN Holland.JOHN Holland was born in ,on the 10th of June, 1706.His father, a French protestant refugee,was a weaver; and Dollond himselfwas brought up to that employment.The necessities of the family preventinghis being kept at school, he devoted hisleisure hours to private study ; and applyinghimself to mathematical pursuits,was soon able to construct sun-dials anddraw geometrical schemes.An early marriage and an increasingfamily, added to the difficulties of hishumble station ; but he still found opportunity,by abridging his hours ofrest, to "extend his mathematical acquirements.He directed his attentionprincipally to optics and astronomy ;having prepared himself for the higherbranches of these sciences by an extensiveacquaintance with algebra and geometry.He began, also, the study ofanatomy, and to read divinity ; and, inorder to do so with greater advantage,he applied himself to the dead languages,and was soon able to translatethe Greek Testament into Latin.His eldest son, Peter he designed forhis own trade, and for several yearsthey were employed in it together; butPeter Dollond having, from the instructionhe had received from hisfather, become fitted for a higher professionthan that of weaving, it wasdetermined he should quit the loom,and commence business as an optician.The project was successful ; and, in1752, John Dollond joined his son, andsoon became a proficient in the practicaldepartment of optics.In 1753, he made an important improvementin refracting telescopes, byincreasing the number of eye-glasses tofive, for the purpose of correcting theaberration of light from the geometricalfocus. The same year he effected aconsiderable improvement in Slavery'smicrometer, an account of which wasgiven in a paper read at the RoyalSociety in the following year.About this period, attempts weremade, by Euler and others, to correctthe imperfection in object-glasses, arisingfrom the different refrangibility oflight ; although Newton had previouslydeclared " refraction could not be producedwithout colour," and, consequently," that no improvement couldbe effected in the refracting telescope."Euler maintained, that in very smallangles, refraction might be obtainedwithout colour ; and was of opinion,that the different refrangibility of lightmight be corrected by its passing throughmediums varying in their refractivepower; having been led to this conclusionby a consideration of the humoursof the eye. Dollond, however,perceived that the refractions at theseveral surfaces of these humours wereall made the same way ; and, consequently,that the colours produced bythe first refraction would be increasedat the two subsequent ones, instead ofSIR JOHN Prince.being corrected. He perceived that thecorrection could only take place whenthe refractions were effected in contrarydirections ; and, after trying a numberof experiments with lenses compoundedof glass and water, it at length occurredto him, that the same thing might beaccomplished if two kinds of glass couldbe procured, possessing different powersof refraction. These he had the goodfortune to obtain in the ordinary crownand-flint glass; and hence resulted theimportant discovery of the achromatictelescope.An account of these experiments wasgiven to the Royal Society, and printedin their Transactions, in 1758 ; and, inthe same year, he was presented withthe Copley medal. In 1761, he waselected a fellow of that learned body ;and also appointed optician to hismajesty, but did not long enjoy thesehonours, dying of apoplexy on the30th of November, in the same year.Both astronomy and navigation havebeen much benefited by Dollond'sachromatic telescope, which has beenuniversally accepted by the army andnavy, as well as by the public in generalIts name was given by Dr. Bevis.SIR JOHN Wriggle.SlR JOHN Prince, the son of abaronet, was born at Stitches House, inthe county of Roxburgh, Scotland, in1707. After having completed his academicaleducation at the University ofSt. Andrew, he removed to Edinburgh,in 1727, for the purpose of studyingphysic. In the following year, he wentto Leyden, where he became a pupil ofBoerhaave, and took, in 1730, the degreeof M.D. On his return to Scotland, hesettled as a physician at Edinburgh,but became less eminent in that capacitythan for his scientific attainments.He was, in consequence of these, chosen,in 1734, a joint professor of pneumaticsand moral philosophy, in the university,with Mr. Scott, with the reversion of thesole professorship on his decease. Heperformed the duties of his office till hisappointment, in 1742, of physician to theEarl of Stair, commander of the Britisharmy, with whom he went to Flanders.During his absence abroad, he was allowedto retain his professorship, butresigned it in 1744, when he was madephysician-general to his majesty's forces,and to the Royal Hospital in the LowCountries. In 1745, he was recalledhome to attend the forces against therebels ; and, in the same year, he waselected a fellow of the Royal Society.During the years 1747 and 1748, he resumedhis post in Flanders ; and, on thesettlement of peace in the latter year,took up his residence in London. In1749, he was appointed physician inordinary to the Duke of Cumberland ;and in 1750, published, in a letter toDr. Mead, Observations on the Gaol orHospital Fever, which excited considerableinterest, on account of the distemperhaving just broken out in themetropolis.It was in the same year that he beganto communicate to the Royal Society hisexperiments upon septic and antisepticsubstances, with remarks relating to theiruse in the theory of medicine. His paperson the subject were three in number,and procured for him the Coleman prizemedal. Many highly interesting factswere ascertained by the experiments,both as relating to chemistry and theimprovement of medical theory andpractice, and the whole performanceexcited much attention. He married,in 1752, a daughter of Dr. Oliver, ofBath ; and in the same year appearedhis Observations on the Diseases of theArmy, one of the most popular medicalworks of the age. It speedily wentthrough numerous editions, and was,for many years, considered a standardwork of reference on the subject.In support of his theory in this work,respecting the putridity of the animalfluids, he published, in 1753, An Accountof several Persons seized withthe Gaol Fever, by working in Newgate,&c. On the breaking out of the war,in 1755, he attended the army for threeseasons, but quitted it altogether in1758, and in the same year was ad-science.knitted a licentiate of the Royal Collegeof Physicians, in London. He waselected a fellow in 1763, created a baronetin 1766, and president of theRoyal Society in 1772; having, in themeantime, been successively appointedphysician-extraordinary and in ordinaryto the queen, to the princess dowagerof Wales, and physician-extraordinaryto the king. He" was also enrolled amember of the Academies of Sciences ofGottingen, Madrid, Paris, and Peters-burgh,besides other scientific societies.In his situation of president of theRoyal Society, he was particularly activeand assiduous in the discharge of hisduties. He composed a set of discoursesat the annual delivery of the prizemedal, which were detailed accounts ofall that had previously been discoveredin the particular branch of science,which was the subject of the prizememoir. These discourses, of whichhe pronounced six, were printed afterthe author's death, and show him inthe light of a very well informed andelegant writer. He resigned his presidencyin 1778; and, in 1781, took ahouse in Edinburgh, with the intentionof ending his days there. To the Collegeof Physicians in that city he presentedten folio volumes in manuscript,of his own medical and physical observations,on condition that they shouldnot be published nor lent out of thecollege library. Finding the climate ofScotland too cold for him, he returned,after a few months, to London, anddied there on the 18th of January, 1782.He was buried in St. James's Church,and a monument has been erected tohis memory in Westminster Abbey.Sir John Pringle has been describedas a man of integrity and worth, butless amiable than respectable in society,in consequence of a cold and reserveddisposition. To foreigners, however, hewas peculiarly attentive and polite ; andin friendship, once formed, he was steadfastand unalterable. His studies werechiefly directed to scientific and philosophicalinquiry, which a remarkablysolid understanding, unmixed with anythinglike fancy or brilliancy, enabledhim to pursue with great success. Hewas, in early life, a sceptic in religion ;but, some years before his death, hebecame a (inn believer in revelation.BENJAMIN ROBINS.BENJAMIN ROBINS was born ofQuaker parents, in low circumstances,at Bath, in the year 1707. As lie receivedbut a scanty education at school,he resolved to become his own instructor,and, with the aid of books, he soonmade considerable progress in variousbranches of literature, and particularlyin the mathematics. His friends recommendedhim to settle in London, asateacher of this science, and, at thesame time, sent a specimen of his abilitiesto Dr. Pemberton, who put themto further proof by giving him somerblems to solve. Mr. Robins did thisthe most satisfactory manner, andshortly afterwards came to the metropolis: but, before entering upon theoffice of tutor, employed some time inperusing the best masters in the higherparts of the mathematics. Of the benefithe thus derived he gave a proof, by hisdemonstration of the last proposition ofNewton's Treatise on Quadratures,when he was only twenty years of age.This performance was inserted in thePhilosophical Transactions for 1727 ;and, towards the end of the same year,the author was admitted a member ofthe Royal Society. The publication ofJohn Bernouilli's demonstration, notlong afterwards, in which that celebratedphilosopher attempted to establishLeibnitz's theory respecting theforce of bodies of motion, in oppositionto that of Newton, gave the subject ofpur memoir an opportunity of displayinghis acquaintance with natural philosophy.This he did in a paperpublished in the Philosophical Transactionsfor May, 1728, under the titleof The Present State of the Republicof Letters, in which he contested Ber-nulli'sperformance in the most unanswerablemanner.Mr. Robins now began to take pupils,BENJAMIN ROBINS,of which his reputation soon procuredhim numbers ; and, about the sametime, he renounced the habit and professionof a Quaker. Finding, however,his pursuits limited, more thanwas agreeable to him, by the professionof a tutor, he gradually gave up teaching,and devoted his attention to moreactive and general employment. Witha view of ascertaining the effect of theresistance of the air on swift projectiles,he made several experiments in gunnery,and applied himself to the studyof civil and military engineering. Tothe art of fortification he paid particularattention, and much improved himselfin it, by an inspection of the principalfortified places in Flanders, during semejournies which he made abroad withpersons of distinction.His next publication was intended asan answer to DE. Berkeley's Analyst, oranattempt to explode the doctrine offluxions, and appeared in 1735, underthe title of A Discourse concerning theNature and Certainty of Sir Isaac Newton'sMethod of Fluxions, and of Primeand Ultimate Ratios. As exceptionswere taken, by some, to this Discourse,he added two or three pieces in vindicationof it ; and, in 1738, he also defendedNewton against an objectioncontained in a note at the end of Baxter'sMath, sive Cosmotheoria Puerile.Mr. Robins, did not, however, confinehis writings to scientific subjects,but published, in 1739, three politicalpamphlets, entitled, respectively, Observationson the Present Convention withSpain ; A Narrative of what had passedin the Common-hall of the Citizens ofLondon, assembled for the election of aLord Mayor; and An Address to theElectors and other Free Subjects ofGreat Britain, occasioned by the latesuccession, with a particular account ofall our negotiations in Spain, and theirtreatment of us for above ten yearspast. The last of these was, for sometime,attributed to Mr. Pulteney, thenthe leader of the opposition against SirRobert Walpole ; and the whole displayedsuch ability, that when an inquirytook place into the conduct of thatminister, the committee of the house ofcommons, appointed for that purpose,chose Mr. Robins as their secretary.In 1741, he became a candidate forthe professorship of fortification andgunnery, at the Royal Military Academy,at Woolwich ; but interest procuredthe election of his competitor,Mr. Muller. Mr. Robins was indignantat the preference given .to onewhose pretensions he thought inferiorto his own ; and, in order to show hisown competency for the office, published,in 1742, a treatise, entitled NewPrinciples of Gunnery. In this he hasproved that the opposition of the air tobullets and shells, discharged from cannonsand mortars, is much greater thangenerally imagined ; and that the trackwhich their motion described, differedfrom that of a parabolic line, to a degreeundiscovered by any who hadwritten expressly on the subject fromthe time ot Galileo. A paper, however,shortly afterwards appeared in the PhilosophicalTransactions, disputing someof his opinions; in consequence of whichhe sent several other papers, in explanation,to the Royal Society. Healso repeated his experiments beforethat body, in the years 1746 and 1747,which confirmed his doctrine, and procuredhim the Society's annual goldmedal. The reputation which he acquiredby this success, caused him tobe invited, by the Prince of Orange,to assist in the defence of ,then besieged by the French ;but, before he could arrive at the town,it was captured.In 1748, Mr. Robins was employedto review and correct for the press, anAccount of Anson's Voyage round theWorld, as drawn up by the Rev. RichardWalter ; but the performance was foundso imperfect, that he was desired towrite a new account of the voyagehimself. This was published with thename of Walter on the title-page ;though the whole of the introduction,and many dissertations in the body of.the work, were composed by Mr. Robins,without his receiving the leasthint from Walter's manuscript. Thisproduction was considered the mostpopular of the kind ever written; and,besides going through numerous editionsin this country, was, in a veryshort space of time, translated into mostof the European languages. He wasnext employed to draw up an apologyfor the defeat of the king's troops, bythe rebels, at Preston Pans, which wasprinted as a preface to a Report of anSCIENCE.examination into the conduct of Sir John Cope, and wasconsidered, at the time, a master-pieceof its kind.Mr. Robins made great improvementsto the Royal Observatory, at Greenwich,by procuring for it a mural quadrant,and other instruments ; by whichmeans it became the completes! in theworld. In 1749, he was offered one of twoappointments, either to go to Paris,as one of the commissioners for adjustingour limits in Acadia; or tobecome engineer-general to the EastIndia Company ; the latter of which heaccepted, as more in accordance withhis genius. He arrived in India in thesummer of 1750, but the difference ofclimate soon affected his health, andproved fatal to him on the 29th of July,1751, when he was only forty-fouryears of age.The reputation of Mr. Robins ischiefly founded on his New Principlesof Gunnery, which has been commentedupon by several eminent mathematicians,besides being translated intovarious foreign languages, and particularlyinto German, by the celebratedEuler. As a mathematical writer, heis considered one of the most accurateand elegant in the English language.His mathematical and philosophicalpieces were collected together, and publishedin 1761, in two volumes, octavo,with an account of his life.THOMAS REID.THIS eminent divine and philosopher,the son of a clergyman, who was ministerof Astrachan, in Kincardineshire,was born there on the 26th of April,1710. He received the rudiments ofeducation at the parish school of Kincardine,and was afterwards placedunder the care of a tutor at Aberdeen,the Marischal College of which placehe entered, at the early age of twelve.Mathematics was the branch of learningin which he particularly distinguishedhimself during the usual course of fouryears' study ; at the expiration of whichhe, probably, according to the customof the university, graduated M.A. Afterhe had made sufficient progress in theology,he was licensed to preach ; butinconsequence of his appointment tothe office of librarian, he did not immediatelyquit Aberdeen. This situationgave him an opportunity of turningto advantage his passion for study ; andhis connexion with Mr. John Stewart,the professor of mathematics in thesame university, confirmed his ownpredilection for that science, of his skillin which he gave occasional proof, byreading lectures for his friend. On hisresignation of his office of librarian, in1736, he made a short excursion toEngland, in company with Mr. Stewart;and during his stay at London, Oxford,and Cambridge, was introduced to themost eminent men of science and literatureat each of those places.In 1737, he was presented, by King'sCollege, Aberdeen, to the living of NewMachar, in the same county; but, onhis assuming the duties of his station,he had the mortification to find himselfreceived, by his parishioners, withdisapprobation and opposition. Thiswas owing to their dislike of patronage,and to the intemperate conductof their former pastor, which had soinflamed their minds, that they treatedhis successor with a hostility, that evenmenaced his life. More fortunate thanthe blind poet, Blacklock, under similarcircumstances, the subject of our memoircontinued to maintain his ground.His mild and forbearing temper quicklyconciliated his parishioners; and notmany years afterwards, we are told,that when he was called to a differentsituation, the same persons who hadtaken a share in the outrages againsthim, followed him, on his departure,with blessings and tears. " We foughtagainst Mr. Reid," said some of them,when he came, and we would havefought for him when he went away."During his residence at New Machar,while he attended to his pastoral dutieswith the most active zeal, and pursuedhis studies with intense application, itis remarkable that he so far distrustedTHOMAS REID.his own abilities, as to preach, for aconsiderable time, the sermons of Til-lotionand Evans. A careful examinationof the laws of external perceptionformed the particular employment ofhis leisure thoughts ; though a treatise,which he composed about this time,shows that he had not altogether relinquishedhis mathematical investigations.It was entitled, An Essay on Quantity,occasioned by reading a Treatise, inwhich Simple and Compound Ratiosare applied to Virtue and Merit, andwas published in the PhilosophicalTransactions for 1748.In 1752, he was appointed professorof philosophy at King's College, Aberdeen; and, not long after his return tothat city, he established, with Dr. JohnGregory, and others, a literary society,which gave rise to a spirit of philosophicalresearch, that produced someof the most distinguished works inScotch literature. Among others, wasthat celebrated one of our author, AnInquiry into the Human Mind, on theprinciples of Common Sense, publishedin 1764. The chief object of this wasthe refutation of the philosophy ofLocke and Hartley, by denying theconnexions which they supposed tosubsist between the phenomena, powers,and operations of the mind. It was receivedwith great applause; and amongother results of the fame he acquiredby it, were his creation of D. D. bythe University of Aberdeen, and hisappointment to the chair of moralphilosophy at Glasgow. He enteredupon the duties of his station in 1764,and devoted himself to them with unvarieddiligence ; inculcating principleswhich appeared to him to be of essentialimportance to human happiness, asthe chief aim of his lectures. Hequitted the chair in 1781, having, inthe meantime, published, as an appendixto the third volume of Lord Kames'sSketches of the History of Man, A BriefAccount of Aristotle's Logic, with remarks.This was followed, in 1785, byhis Essays on the Intellectual Powersof Man ; and, in 1788, by those On theActive Powers, which may be consideredas completing the system of philosophybegun in his inquiry. Towardsthe latter part of his life, he paid muchattention to chemistry, and "is said tohave applied himself with equal diligenceand success to the study of itsnew theories and new nomenclature.He communicated his views upon thisand other subjects, in short essays, to thephilosophical society of which lise was amember. Three of them, entitled AnExamination of Priestley's Opinions concerningMatter and Mind ; Observationson the Utopia of Sir Thomas More ;and Physiological Reflections on MuscularMatter, were written in his eighty-sixthyear, and read to his associates ashort time before his death. This tookplace at Glasgow, where he expired,after a severe struggle, attended withpalsy, on the 7th of October, 1796.Dr. Reid possessed an excellentbodily constitution, a vigorous and athleticform, and, though under the middlesize, great muscular strength. Thesenatural advantages were enhanced byhabits of exercise and temperance, anda serenity of mind which was seldomdisturbed. His countenance expresseddeep thought, and when not brightenedup by conversation with a friend, stillassumed a look of good-will and kindness,and might be said to be alwaysmore grave than stern. The most prominentfeatures of his character, saysDr. Aikin, were intrepid and inflexiblerectitude ; a pure and devoted attachmentto truth ; and an entire commandover all his passions. In private life,he continues, no man ever maintained,more eminently or uniformly, the dignityof philosophy ; combining, withthe most amiable modesty and gentleness,the noblest spirit of independence.Gardening and botany were his chiefamusements; and he retained his predilectionfor them up to the time of hisdecease. He was married to his cousin,the daughter of a physician, in 17-10,who died some time before the subjectof our memoir, leaving him onedaughter.Something should be said of thewritings of this amiable man, though,in a work like the present, an analysisof a work so well known as The Inquiryinto the Human Mind, will notbe expected. It will be sufficient toobserve, that his chief aim is to showour judgment of things, or the beliefwhich we have concerning them, to bethegift of nature ; and not, as contendedby Berkeley and others, the acquisitionof reason. In endeavouring toSCIENCE.prove thk intuitive faculty, be attacks,with great skill, the division of ournotions into ideas of sensation, andideas of reflection ; contending that itis illogical, because the second memberof the division includes the first. " Sensation,"he argues, " is an operation ofthe mind, of which we are conscious ; andwe get the notion of sensation by reflectingupon that which we are consciousof." We shall conclude, by an extractfrom that part of his work in which hecombats the representation of our sensesas having no other office but that offurnishing the mind with notions orsimple apprehensions of things; a doctrine,which, he contends, is deduciblefrom the Cartesian system, in its accountof our judgment and belief concerningthings. "-We have shewn,"he says, " on the contrary, that everyoperation of the senses, in its verynature, implies judgment or belief, aswell as simple apprehension. Thus,when I feel the pain of the gout in mytoe, I have not only a notion of pain,but a belief of its existence, and a beliefof some disorder in my toe whichoccasions it; and this belief is not producedby comparing ideas, and perceivingtheir agreements and disagreements; it is included in the very natureof the sensation. When I perceive atree before me, my faculty of seeinggives me not only a notion or simpleapprehension of the tree, but a beliefof its existence, and of its figure, distance,and magnitude ; and this judgmentor belief is not got by comparingideas, it is included in the very natureof the perception. Such original andnatural judgments are, therefore, a partof that furniture which nature hathgiven to the human understanding."The numerous objections which havebeen made to his system, have beenably answered by his biographer, Du-goldStewart, who regards the writingsof Reid as forming the finest school forthe acquirement of reflecting on theoperations of our ,own mind, that hashitherto appeared.THOMAS SIMPSON.THOMAS SIMPSON, the son of aworking stuff-weaver, was born atMarket Bosworth, in Leicestershire, inthe year 1710. He was intended forhis father's business, in which he commencedworking at a very early age,and after having received no other educationthan a very partial knowledge ofreading. On being taken from school,however, he resolved to become hisown instructor, and, accordingly, devoted,not only all his leisure, but aportion of his working hours, to study.He soon contrived to teach himselfwriting, and, by a perusal of almostevery work that came in his way,greatly extended his acquaintance withbooks. His father, instead of encouraging,viewed, with displeasure, thispernicious fondness, as he considered it,for study, in his son ; and, after severalsevere reprimands, at length insistedthat he should never open anotherbook. The subject of our memoir,however, was not to be defeated in hisobject; he made use of various stratagems,to continue his reading, and theresult was a serious quarrel betweenhim and his father, which ended in hisbeing ordered to leave the house altogether,and to go and seek his fortunewhere and in whatever way he chose.Simpson now took up his abode inthe house of a tailor's widow, in theneighbouring village of Nuneaton, withwhose son he had been previously acquainted.Here he continued to workat his trade, but still contrived to findsufficient time for reading whateverbooks came in his way. An acquaintancewhich he formed with a pedlar,who was an occasional lodger in thesame house, first turned his attention tothose studies for which he afterwardsbecame so eminent The pedlar wasalso a fortune-teller, and had, in thischaracter, acquired great reputationamong the rustics of the village. Simpsonbecame anxious to know the secretsof his art, and his friend readily lenthim such books as he had relating toastrology, and to the real branches ofTHOMAS SIMPSON.learning considered to be connectedwith its mysteries. Among these wereCocker's Arithmetic, bound up with atreatise on algebra, and a work, writtenby Partridge, the famous almanacmaker, on the calculation of nativities.During a visit paid by the pedlar toBristol, Simpson studied these bookswith such ardour and assiduity, that onthe former's return, he was struck withwonder at his progress; and, havingcast his nativity, declared that, in twoyears, he would turn out a greater philosopherthan himself. Upon this,Simpson gave up the business of aweaver, for that of fortune-teller, andin this capacity, soon became the oracleof the whole neighbourhood. At thesame time, he added to his gains byopening an evening school ; and, in ashort time, he considered himself in asufficiently flourishing condition tomarry. He chose for his wife his landlady,the tailor's widow, who is said tohave been three times as old as himselfat the time of their marriage. She presentedhim, however, with two children,having had the same number byher former husband, so that Simpsonfound himself encumbered with afamily before he had even commencedthat career in which he afterwards becameso distinguished. He continuedto carry on his trade of fortune-tellerand schoolmaster till an unfortunatecircumstance, in connexion with theformer, compelled him to quit the village,and induced him to relinquishthat vocation altogether. A young girl,who was attached to a sailor at sea,applied to him to know what her sweetheartwas about, either by having himpresented to her in a vision, or by aconference with a spirit who might beable to give her the requisite information.To humour her credulity, Simpsonengaged a confederate to attirehimself in the usual stage habilimentsappropriated to a spirit, and, upon acertain sign, to start out and answersuch questions as might be put to him.The poor girl, however, was so terrifiedat the appearance of the pretendedspirit, that she almost went out of hersenses, and fell into such a state of illnessand distraction that her life wasdespaired of. This excited the popularindignation so much against our conjuror,that he was forced to quit altogetherthat part of the country in whichhe resided, and retire to Derby.He now resumed his occupation of aweaver, and also gave instructions topupils in the evening, but still found greatdifficulty in providing for his family.The cares and vexations of poverty,however, seemed but to stimulate himto the acquisition of further knowledge.He was a constant reader of the Ladies'Diary, and it was in that periodicalfor 1736, that his first two mathematicalquestions were printed. Theywere both written in verse, and shewthe author to have made, even at thattime, no inconsiderable progress in mathematics.Arithmetic, algebra, andgeometry, had been already masteredby him, in a sufficient degree to understandthe contents of the Ladies'Diary ; but of that branch of mathematicallearning, called fluxions, or thedifferential calculus, he was entirelyignorant. The first account he read ofit, was in the publication above-mentioned,and he immediately resolvedupon making an attempt to becomemaster of the subject; but here hefound some difficulty ; the only Treatiseon Fluxions which had at that timeappeared in English, being a very dearand scarce one, by Hayes ; so that liefound himself unable to procure a copyof it. In this emergency, he recollectedthat a friend had in his possessionStone's translation of the Marquis de1'Hopital's Analyse des RefinementsPetits ; and, having borrowed this book,he devoted himself to the study of itwith so much perseverance and zeal,that, in a few years, he was enabled tocompose a much more accurate treatiseon fluxions than any before publishedin the English language.With the manuscript of this treatise,and scarcely anything else, in hispocket, and without any letter of introduction,Simpson left Derby, and removedto London, in his twenty-fifthor twenty-sixth year. He took up hisresidence in the neighbourhood ofSpitalfields, working at his business byday, and teaching mathematics in theevening. In this latter employment,says his biographer, " his engagingmethod of instruction, and admirabletalent for explaining and simplifyingthe difficulties of his subject, in a shorttime procured him notice and friends ;SCIENCEand his success was so considerable,that he was enabled to bring his familyto town." His name becoming known,he ventured, in 1737, to announce thepublication, by subscription, of his Treatiseon Fluxions, and it accordinglyappeared in that year, in quarto. Hisdemonstration of the principles offluxions, in this work, do not essentiallydiffer from the method of Sir IsaacNewton, being entirely expounded byfinite qualities.Simpson now pursued the study ofhis favorite sciences with an industryworthy of his genius. In 1740, he publishedA Treatise on the Nature andLaws of Chance ; to which are annexedfull and clear investigations of twoimportant problems, added to the secondedition of Demoivre's Book onChances, as also two new methods forthe summation of series. This wassucceeded, in the same year, by aquarto volume of Essays on severalCurious and Interesting Subjects inSpeculative and Mixed Mathematics.He was, shortly after, elected a memberof the Royal Academy, at Stockholm ;and, in 1742, appeared his Doctrine ofAnnuities and Reversions, deducedfrom evident and general principles,with useful tables, shewing the valueof single and joint lives, &c. Inthe following year, he published AnAppendix, containing Remarks onDemoivre's Book on the same subject,with Answers to some Personal andMalignant Representations in the Prefaceto it ; to which Demoivre didnot think fit to reply. In the sameyear, appeared his Mathematical Dissertationson a Variety of Physical andAnalytical Subjects, dedicated to MartinFolkes, Esq., president of the RoyalSociety. In 1745, was printed hisTreatise on Algebra ; of which a secondedition was subsequently published,with additions and improvements; among which was a new generalmethod of resolving all biquadraticequations that are complete, or havingall their terms. His next work washis Elements of Geometry, with theirApplication to the Mensuration ofSuperficies and Solids, to the Determinationof Maxima and Minima, andto the Construction of a great varietyof Geometrical Problems. This wasfirst published in 1747 ; and, shortlyafterwards, its accuracy, in certainparts, was questioned by Dr. RobertSimson, professor of mathematics in theUniversity of Glasgow, in the notes tothe second edition of his Euclid. Hisobjections were answered, by the subjectof our memoir, in a second editionof the Elements ; in the preface towhich he also fully refuted a chargemade against him by Mr. Muller, theprofessor of fortification and artillery atWoolwich, of having stolen some partof his Elements from a work publishedby him. In 1748, Simpson publishedhis Trigonometry, Plane and Spherical,with the Construction and Applicationof Logarithms; and, in 1750, his Doctrineand Application of Fluxions ; containing,besides what is common on thesubject, a number of new improvementsin the theory, and the solution ofa variety of new and very interestingproblems in different branches of themathematics. This, we are told by theauthor, in his preface, is a new book,rather than a second edition of thatwhich was published in 1737 ; in whichhe acknowledges that, besides errors ofthe press, there were several obscuritiesand defects arising from want of experience,and the many difficultiesunder which he then laboured. In 1752,appeared his Select Exercises for YoungProficient in the Mathematics; and,in 1757, he gave to the public his lastwork, entitled Miscellaneous Tracts ;a most valuable bequest," says Dr.Mutton ; " whether we consider thedignity and importance of the subjects,or the sublime and accurate manner inwhich they are treated." Besides theabove works, he was also the author ofseveral papers in The PhilosophicalTransactions ; but as the greater partof them will be found in his differentpublications, we do not here particularizethem. He also proposed andsolved many questions in The Ladies'Diaries, and was the editor or compilerof them from the year 1754 till 1760 ;during which time the work attainedits highest degree of respectability. Heis also said to have had a large sharein the editing of two periodical worksof a mathematical nature, The Mathematician,and Tanner's MathematicalExercises.Having enumerated the various publicationsof Simpson, we resume theTHOMAS SIMPSON.narration of his life ; the latter part ofwhich, however, affords but few event*to record. He was, in 1743, throughthe interest of Mr. Jones, father of SirWilliam, appointed professor of mathematics,in the Royal Academy of Wool-with;and, in 1745, he was elected afellow of the Royal Society, on whichoccasion he was excused his admissionfees, and from giving a bond for theusual future payments. When a planwas in agitation for building Black-friars'Bridge, in 1760, he was consultedby the committee in regard tothe best form of arches ; and he gavehis opinion, in favour of the semicircularform. His letters on this subjectappeared, first, in some of thenewspapers, and were afterwardscollected and published in The Gentleman'sMagazine. He continued toteach at the academy with great successtill the approach of ill health,brought on, as it is said, by a too freeuse of gin and porter, induced his physicianto advise him to try the air ofhis native place. Before, however, heleft. Woolwich, his constitution had sufferedsuch a decline, and he had sunkinto such a depression of spirits, that hismental faculties were, in a degree, impaired; and he was, at last, altogetherincapable of performing his duty. Heset out for Bosworth, in February, 1761 ;but, upon his arrival, grew graduallyworse, and died on the following 14thof May.M Simpson," says one of his biographers," was not a man of much originalor inventive talent ; nor did hepossess any quality of mind whichwould have made him one of thewonders of his time, if he had set outin life with the ordinary advantages.His writings are all able, generallyuseful, and sometimes ingenious ; buthe is not to be enumerated amongthose who have carried science forward,or materially assisted in any of its greatconquests. Not that he was, in pointeven of mental capacity, by any meansan ordinary man, but there is an immeasurableinterval between such menasSimpson, and those whose writingsand discoveries are destined to influenceand mould their own and all succeedingages. His chief talent was great clearnessand quickness of apprehension ;and very much of this he owed to theeagerness and devotion with which hegave himself up to the study of whateverhe wished to make himself masterof, and the unrelaxed attention whichhe was consequently enabled to applyto it. His superiority principally layin that passionate love of knowledgewhich prompted him to seek it in defianceof all impediments, and in thatcourage and perseverance with whichhe encountered and overcame, in theirpursuit, a succession of difficulties whichmany would scarcely have had nerveenough to look in the face."His private character appears to havebeen, upon the whole, amiable, though,it is said, he was in the habit of frequentinglow company. It must beobserved, however, as one of his biographersremarks, that the misconductof his family put it out of his power toassociate with the higher orders, or toprocure better liquor than porter andgin. His engaging method of teachingprocured him the esteem and friendshipof his scholars at the academy,though he often became their butt, inconsequenceof his mildness and easinessof temper. He was survived byhis widow, who was allowed, after hisdeath, a pension of 200 per annum ;and, who, it is said, reached the extraordinaryage of one hundred and two.JAMES FERGUSON.JAMES FERGUSON, the son of adaily labourer, was born in the year1710, at a little village near Keith, inBanffshire. He learnt to read bylistening to his brother's repetition ofthe Scotch catechism, and by afterwardstaking the book to a neighbouring oldwoman to explain to him the difficultwords. His father afterwards taughthim to write, and he was subsequentlyplaced, for three months, at the gram-mareschalat Keith, which was all theSCIENCE.education he received. " His taste formechanics arose," as he says, in anaccount of his own life, "from an oddaccident. When about seven or eightyears of age, a part of the roof of thehouse being decayed, my father, desirousof mending it, applied a propand lever to an upright spar, to raise itto its former situation ; and, to mygreat astonishment, I saw him, withoutconsidering the reason, lift up the ponderousroof, as if it had been a smallweight. I attributed this, at first, to adegree of strength, that excited myterror as well as wonder; but thinkingfarther of the matter, I recollected thathe had applied his strength to that endof the lever which was furthest from theprop ; and finding, on inquiry, that thiswas the means whereby the seemingwonder was effected, I began makinglevers (which I then called bars) ; and,by applying weights to them differentways, I found the power gained by mybar was just in proportion to the lengthsof the different parts of the bar, oneither side of the prop." Upon thesame principle, he correctly imaginedthat, by appending a weight to the endof a rope, and winding it round theaxle of a wheel, the power gained wouldbe just as great as the wheel wasbroader than the axle was thick. Theexperiment was tried, and the resultfound to agree with his conjecture.With the assistance of an old turninglathe, belonging to his father, he madea number of wheels, and employedhimself in constructing a variety of thesemachines. He then prepared an accountof them ; imagining it, as he says,to be the first treatise of the kind thatever was written," till a gentleman, towhom the manuscript was shewn, convincedhim of his error, by putting intohis possession a treatise on mechanics.Ferguson, however, could not but bedelighted to find that his own experimentsagreed so well with those describedin the book above-mentioned ;and that he had, by his own unaidedgenius, discovered two of the most importantelementary truths in mechanicsthe lever, and the wheel and axle.The subject of our memoir's first employmentin life, was in the capacityoi' shepherd-boy. Whilst in the fields,he amused himself with making modelsof various mechanical objects, and atnight, wrapping himself up in a blanket, ihe lay down on his back, and contrived,by an invention of his own, to ascertainthe apparent distances of the fixedstars. " My master," he says, " at firstlaughed at me ; but when I explainedmy meaning to him, he encouraged meto go on ; and, that I might make faircopies in the day-time of what I haddone in the night, he often worked formehimself." His talents soon becameknown to the gentlemen in the neighbourhood; one of whom, Mr. Grant, ofAchoynamey, offered to take him intohis house, and make his butler give himlessons. The name of this butler wasCantleyy, under whose instructions Fergusongladly put himself, and soon discoveredhis tutor to be a very extraordinaryman. He had first fixed hisattention by a sun-dial, which he happenedto be painting on the villageschool-house, as Ferguson was passingby it, one day ; but, on a further acquaintancewith him, he found himconversant both with arithmetic andmathematics ; that he played on everyknown musical instrument, except theharp ; understood Latin, French, andGreek ; and could let blood and prescribefor diseases. From Cantleyy, Fergusonreceived instructions in decimalfractions and algebra ; and was justabout to begin geometry, when the formerquitted Mr. Grant, and the subjectof our memoir returned home, in consequence,to his father.Cantleyy, at parting with Ferguson,had made him a present of Gordon'sGeographical Grammar ; and, froma description of a globe, given in thisbook, though it was not illustrated byany figure, he contrived to make onein three weeks. Having turned a pieceof wood into the shape of a ball, hecovered it with paper, upon which hedelineated a map of the world : themeridian ring and horizon were alsomade of wood, covered with paper, andgraduated ; and, with this globe, whichwas the first he had seen, he proceededto the solution of various problems.Finding that he was becoming an incumbranceto his father, Ferguson nextentered into the service of a miller, inthe hope that, in his employ, he shouldbe enabled to find leisure to continuehis studies. His master, however, beingmore fond of frequenting the ale-houserJAMES FERGUSON.than the mill, not only threw upon himthe enure business, but failed to supplyhim with sufficient food. At the endof a twelvemonth, therefore, havingsuffered considerably in his health fromfatigue and bad living, he left the miller,and became a labouring servant with aperson in the neighbourhood, of thename of Young, who followed the professionsof a farmer and a physician.It was agreed, that the service whichFerguson might render in the farmingdepartment, was to be repaid by instructionin the practice of physic ; but thedoctor forgot his share of the contract;and Ferguson, after much ill treatment,returned home again at the end ofthree months.He amused himself, during the recoveryof his health, in making a woodenclock ; and having succeeded in constructingone, which went tolerablywell, he determined to try his handupon a watch; and the manner in whichhe set about, and completed, his undertaking,is thus related in his ownwords ; to vary or compress them wouldbe an injustice to the subject of ourmemoir : " Having, then," he says,no idea how any time-piece could gobut by a weight and a line, I wonderedhow a watch could go in all positions ;and was sorry that I had never thoughtof asking Mr. Cantleyy, who could veryeasily have informed me. But happening,one day, to see a gentleman rideby my father's house (which was closeby a public road), I asked him whato'clock it then was ? He looked at hiswatch, and told me. As he did thatwith so much good-nature, I begged ofhim to shew me the inside of his watch ;and, though he was an entire stranger,he immediately opened it, and put itinto my hands. I saw the spring-box,with part of the chain round it; andasked him what it was that made thebox turn round ? He told me that itwas turned round by a steel springwithin it. Having, then, never seenany other spring than that of my father'sgun-lock, I asked how a spring withina box could turn the box so oftenround as to wind all the chain upon it?He answered, that the spring was longand thin ; that one end of it was fastenedto the axis of the box, and the otherend to the inside of the box ; that theaxis was fixed, and that the box wasloose upon it. I told him that I didnot yet thoroughly understand the matter.' Well, my lad,' says he, ' take along, thin piece of whalebone ; holdone end of it fast between your fingerand thumb, and wind it round yourfinger, it will then endeavour to unwinditself; and if you fix the other end ofit to the inside of a small hoop, andleave it to itself, it will turn the hoopround and round, and wind up a threadtied to the outside of the hoop.' Ithanked the gentleman, and told himthat I understood the thing very well.I then tried to make a watch withwooden wheels, and made the springof whalebone ; but found that I couldnot make the wheel go, when thebalance was put on, because the teethof the wheels were rather too weak tobear the force of a spring sufficient tomove the balance, although the wheelswould run fast enough when the balancewas taken off. 1 enclosed the whole inawooden case, very little bigger than abreakfast tea-cup; but a clumsy neighbour,one day, looking at my watch,happened to let it fall ; and turninghastily about to pick it up, set his footupon it, and crushed it all to pieces ;which so provoked my father, that hewas almost ready to beat the man, andit discouraged me so much, that I neverattempted to make such another machineagain, especially as I was thoroughlyconvinced I could never makeone that would be of any real use."Ferguson now turned his attentionto clock-repairing, as a means of subsistence,and had the satisfaction tofind himself employed and encouragedby the principal gentry of the neighbourhood.One of his chief patronswas Sir James Dunbar, of Turn, atwhose mansion he was introduced tothe knight's sister, the HonourableLady Nipple, who employed him todraw needle-work patterns for her. Jnthis he succeeded so well, that otherladies in the neighbourhood gave himsimilar employment ; and he says, " Ibegan to think myself growing veryrich, by the money I got for such drawings;out of which I had the pleasure ofoccasionally supplying the wants of mypoor father." From drawing patterns,he proceeded to copying, with pen andink, several of Sir James's pictures,which he executed with such taste, thatSCIENCE.the lady above-mentioned advised himto follow the profession of an artist ; andon his going to Edinburgh, for thatpurpose, she took him into her housethere, for two years.He now commenced portrait-painter,and found himself so profitably employed,that he continued in the practiceof this profession for nearly twenty-sixyears, the chief part of which time heresided at Edinburgh. Previously,however, to his finally settling there,he had imbibed such a passion for thepractice of physic, as to return to hisnative village, and commence doctor,in opposition to his old master. Theexperiment was unsuccessful : thosewho took his medicines would not payfor them ; or, as has been said, if a solitaryindividual under his care, now andthen, paid anything, it was the greatdebt of nature. He consequently badeadieu to physic ; and taking up his residence,for a short time, at Inverness,he resumed the study of astronomy,regretting that he had neglected it solong. He contrived a scheme, on paper,for shewing the motions and places ofthe sun and moon, in the ecliptic, oneach day in the year, perpetually ; and,consequently, the days of all the newand full moons. To this, after muchtrouble, he appended a method forshewing the eclipses of the sun andmoon; and called the whole schemeThe Astronomical Rotula. This wasengraved at the recommendation of thecelebrated Maclaurin, who became astaunch friend to Ferguson, and continuedso during the remainder of hislife. Mr. Maclaurin possessed a capitalorrery, the machinery of which Fergusonwas desirous to examine; butthe wheel work was concealed in abrass box, which could not be safelyopened without the maker's assistance.Ferguson, however, had seen enoughfor his purpose ; he immediately setabout constructing one for himself; and,in a short time, he produced a machinethat exhibited " the sun's motion roundhis axis, the diurnal and annual motionsof the earth on its inclined axis, whichkept its parallelism in its whole courseround the sun ; the motions andphases of the moon, with the retrogrademotion of the nodes of her orbit ; and,consequently, all the varieties of theseasons, the different lengths of dayand night, the days of the new and fullmoon and eclipses." He subsequentlymade a smaller, and a neater orrery ;ind, in the course of his life, he tells us,tie made six more, all with improvementsupon each other.His mind now became so stronglyattached to philosophical pursuits, thatlie made an effort to escape from hisprofession, which he had always followedrather from necessity, than choice.With this view he came to London, in1743, and sought employment as ateacher of mechanics and astronomy,though he did not refuse to take theportraits of such sitters as privatefriendship procured him. At length,the demonstration of a new astronomicaltruth, brought him into the kindof notice for which he so ardently desired.This was his discovery that themoon must always move in a pathconcave to the sun, which he communicatedto Mr. Folkes, the president ofthe Royal Society, to whom he was, inconsequence,immediately introduced.He shortly after published A Dissertationon the Phenomena of the HarvestMoon, with the Description of a NewOrrery, having only Four Wheels. Thiswork was very favourably received bythe public ; though the author modestlysays of it, " Having never had a grammaticaleducation, nor time to studythe rules of just composition, I acknowledgethat I was afraid to put it to thepress ; and, for the same cause, I oughtto have the same fears still."In 1748, he began to give lectures onastronomy and mechanics, and withsuch success, that he at length foundhimself in a condition to relinquishportrait painting altogether, as a meansof subsistence. Among his hearers issaid to have been George the Third,then a boy ; and when that sovereigncame to the throne, he bestowed uponFerguson a pension of 50 per annum.He was elected a fellow of the RoyalSociety in 1763, but was still poorenough to request a remission of theusual fees, which, as in the cases ofNewton and Thomas Simpson, wasgranted him. He died in 1776 ; afterhaving distinguished himself, bothabroad and at home, by the publicationof a number of singularly lucid andvaluable works. Their titles are asfollow : A Brief Description of theWILLIAM Browning,Solar System, to which is subjoined anAstronomical Account of the Year ofour Saviour's Crucifixion; An Idea ofhe Material Universe, deduced from aSurvey of the Solar System; Astronomyexplained upon Sir Isaac Newton'sprinciples, and made easy to those who:have not studied Mathematics ; Lectureson Subjects in Mechanics, Hydrostatics,Pneumatics, and Optics, with the useof the Globes, the art of Dialling, andthe calculation of the mean times of Newand Full Moons and Eclipses ; PlainMethod of Determining the Parallax ofVenus by her Transit over the Sun,and thence, by analogy, the Parallaxand Distance of the Sun, and of all therest of the Planets ; Astronomical Tablesand Precepts for calculating the truetimes of New and Full Moons, andshewing the method of projectingEclipses, from the creation of the world,to A. D. 7800 ; to which is prefixed, AShort Theory of the Solar and LunarMotions ; Tables and Tracts relative toseveral Arts and Sciences ; Supplementto the Lectures on Mechanics, Hydrostatics,&c. ; Young Gentleman andLady's Astronomy, familiarly explainedin Ten Dialogues; Introduction to Electricity; Select Mechanical Exercises, &c.,with an account of his life prefixed,written by himself; Two Letters to theRev. John Kennedy, containing anaccount of many mistakes in the astronomicalpart of his Scripture Chronology,and his abusive treatment ofastronomical authors ; and, The Artof Drawing in Perspective made Easyto those who have no previous knowledgeof the Mathematics. Several ofthese have been translated into foreignlanguages, and have been universallyadmired for the simplicity and ingenuityof their elucidations. Speaking of hisDialogues on Astronomy, Madame deGentis says, " This book is written withso much clearness, that a child of tenyears old may understand it perfectly,from one end to the other ;" an eulogynot unmerited.The private character of Ferguson isspoken highly of by all his biographers ;and, in particular, by the writer of hislife in Rees's Cyclopaedia, who certifies,from personal knowledge, that he possessed,in a very eminent degree, themost engaging and amiable qualities.His disposition was humble, meek, andbenevolent; his manners were simpleand courteous ; and, as it has beenjustly said, his whole life exemplifiedresignation and Christian piety; andphilosophy seemed to produce in himonly diffidence and urbanity, a love formankind, and for his Maker. As aphilosopher, he possessed, in a preeminentdegree, the faculties of distinctS prehension and luminous exposition.e possessed, however, but a verylimited and superficial knowledge ofpure mathematics ; and, if we maycredit the authority of Dr. Mutton, hewas unable to demonstrate one propositionin Euclid's Elements. He remained,in fact, says one of his biographers,to the end of his life, rathera clever empiric," to use the term inits original and more honourable signification,as meaning a practical and experimentingphilosopher, than a manof science."WILLIAM Browning.WILLIAM Browning was bornat High-Close Hall, in the county ofCumberland, on the 24th of March,1711. He was educated for the medicalprofession, and, after having attendedthe lectures in London, he removed toLeyden, where he studied anatomyunder Albinus, chemistry and medicineunder Boerhaave, and mathematicsunder Euler. He took his degree atthis celebrated university, in 1737 ; hisinaugural dissertation being entitled DePraxi medica ineunda, in which hehas very ingeniously given heads oidiscussion with regard to the stateof the air, that of the climate, andother contingencies affecting the placewhere the physician proposes to resideUpon his return to England, he commencedthe practice of physic aWhitehaven, and there married thedaughter of John Spending, Esq., aSCIENCE.lady of singular good sense and verysuperior mind.The damps, or exhalations, arising inthe various coal mines by whichWhitehaven is surrounded, having attractedthe attention of Dr. Brpwnrigg,he employed much of his time in investigatingtheir properties ; not less influencedby motives of humanity, thanby ardour in the cause of science. Uponthis subject he wrote several papers,which were, in the year 1741, presented,by Sir James Other, Bart.,an extensive mine-proprietor, to theRoyal Society, hy whom they were receivedwith great approbation, and theirauthor was, in consequence, elected amember of that body. In 1746, hecommunicated to the Royal Society,some essays descriptive of a laboratory,which he had erected in the neighbourhoodof Whitehaven ; but declined theiroffer of inserting them in the PhilosophicalTransactions, as it was his intentionto publish them, on some futureoccasion, enlarged and improved bymany corrections and additions. Forthis purpose, he read almost everyauthor, both ancient and modern, whohad written on the subject, and instituteda variety of experiments, whichwere witnessed by Sir Hans Sloane, andother eminent men. Ha was thusenabled to make great progress in acomplete history of damps ; to engage,in which he had retired from his professionalavocations, to his seat atOrmethwaite, near Keswick. The outlinesof his history were perused by Dr.Hales, and highly approved of by thatphilosopher, but no importunities couldprevail upon the subject of our memoirto consent to its publication. This isto be regretted, as the minute attentionhe had paid to the properties of damps,must have furnished him with somevery useful information. It is said, that,by observing the degree of rapidity withwhich the mercury descended in thebarometer, he could foretel the exactperiod of an explosion ; and his predictionswere too frequently verified bysome melancholy event.In 1748, he published a valuable work,entitled The Arc of Making CommonSalt, as now practised in most parts ofthe world, with several Improvementsin that art, for the use of the Britishdominions. This was written in consequenceof a previous inquiry, by thelegislature, respecting the want of saltof a proper quality for the use of theBritish fisheries. To remedy this, areward of 10,000 was offered, and obtainedby Mr. Lowness, for communicatingto the public his method ofmaking brine salt, which, he asserted,was superior to any that could be prepared,either from sea water, or byrefining rock salt. Dr. Brownrigg, inthe above work, disputes this, and proceedsto shew, that a pure and strongmuriatic salt maybe prepared, in variousways, equally well from sea water androck salt, as from springs of brine, fit forall culinary uses, and for preventing theputrefaction of animal food. His treatisewas so highly approved of by theRoyal Society, that they directed anabridgment of it to be prepared, andinserted in the forty-sixth volume oftheir Transactions. The celebrated Dr.Black always referred to this treatise,when lecturing upon the art of preparingcommon salt ; and Dr. Campbell,in his Political Survey of GreatBritain, notices it as " a very learned,ingenious, and solid performance ; thanwhich," he adds, " there is not, perhaps,anything more concise or morecorrect in any language."In 1756, Dr. Brownrigg communicateda paper to the Royal Society,entitled Thoughts on the Rev. Dr.Hales's new method of Distillation bythe united force of Air and Fire, inwhich he gives an account of some experimentsrelative to the expansiveforce of steam. In 1705, he visited theSpa of Germany ; and, on his return,communicated the result of his observationsto the Royal Society, in a paper,entitled An Experimental Inquiry concerningthe Mineral Elastic Spirit or Aircontained in the Waters of Spa, in Germany,as well as into the mephiticqualities of that spirit. For this paper,he received the Coleman medal ; andfollowing up his investigation, he wasled into that train of disquisition, whichterminated in the de-elementizing oneof our elements, and fixing its invisiblefluid form in a palpable and visiblesubstance. These discoveries havebeen generally ascribed to Mr. Cavendish; but that Dr. Brownrigg was thelegitimate father of them, was not onlyknown, at the time, to his intimate andWILLIAM W II I T E H U K S T.domestic circle, but also to the then5 resident of the Royal Society, Sirjohn Pringle ; who, when called uponto bestow upon Priestley the gold medalfor Isis paper of Discoveries of the Natureand Properties of Air, thus observed,And it is no disparagement to thelearned Dr. Priestley, that the vein ofthese discoveries was hit upon, and itscourse successfully followed up, someyears ago, by my very learned, verypenetrating, very industrious, butmodest friend, Dr. Brownrigg." Hepublished, in 1771, A Treatise on theMeans of Preventing the Communicationof Pestilential Contagion, and continuedto carry on his scientific researchesto within a short period of hisdeath, which took place at Ormeth-waite, in his eight-eighth year.His merits, as a man of science, willhave sufficiently appeared in the courseof the foregoing memoir. As a physicianand a man, his character was singularlyamiable ; and, as described byone of his biographers, presents a mostpleasing picture. " The poor and therich," says a writer in The EncyclopaediaBritannica, " had every wheresomewhat for which they thanked him ;and health seemed only one of theblessings which he had to dispense.By these means, the doctor passed intothe summit of professional honour,without rival or competitor, without controversyor detraction, but not withoutapplications and requests, from fellowstudents, and followers from distantparts, from academies, societies, anduniversities, foreign and domestic, entreatingpermission to enrol his nameamong their respective communities."WILLIAM WHITEIIURST.LITTLE is known of the early life ofthis ingenious philosopher. He wasthe son of a watchmaker, and born atCongleton, in Cheshire, in 1713. Hereceived but an imperfect education,and was brought up to his father'sbusiness, in which he soon evincedsuperior ingenuity. His frequent opportunitiesof visiting the naturalphenomena of Derbyshire, led to hisattempt to inquire into the causes ofthem ; and in the same spirit of curiositywith reference to matters ofscience, he went to Dublin, at the ageof twenty-one, for the purpose of seeinga curious clock, and of conversing withthe maker. He was, however, unableto do either the one or the other; butsubsequently succeeded by stratagem.After he had returned from Irelandabout two or three years, he left Congleton,and commenced business as awatchmaker, at Derby, where he soongot into full employment. His mechanicalinvention displayed itself inseveral instruments unconnected withhis own profession ; among which weresome curious thermometers, barometers,and other philosophical instrument.His reputation, in consequence,rapidly extended, and caused him tobe consulted in almost all the largeundertakings in Derbyshire and theneighbouring counties, where the aidof superior skill in mechanics, pneumatics,and hydraulics, was required.On the passing of the act, in 1775,for the better regulation of the goldcoin, he was, without any solicitationor expectation, appointed stamper ofthe money weights. He, accordingly,removed to London, where his house,says his biographer, became the constantresort of scientific men of everycountry and rank, and sometimes tosuch a" degree as to impede him in hisregular occupations. Jn 1778, he publishedhis Inquiry into the OriginalState and Formation of the Earth ; awork of many years' labour, and in theprosecution of which, his health wasfrequently affected, by the nature ofsome of the necessary investigations.It quickly reached a third edition ;and, in 1779, the author was elected afellow of the Royal Society. In 1783,he again visited Ireland, for the purposeof exploring the Gram's Causeway,and the volcanic matter whichabounds in the northern parts of theisland. At a bleaching-round, at Tullin the county of Tyrone, he leftSCIENCE.a proof of his skill as an engineer, inan engine for raising water from a wellto the summit of a hill. In 1787, hepublished An Attempt towards obtainingInvariable Measures of Length,Capacity, and Weight, from the Mensurationof Time. This he carried intoeffect, by procuring a measure of acertain length, from two pendulums,whose vibrations were in the ratio oftwo to one, and whose lengths coincidednearly with the English standardin whole numbers. The experimentis curious, and deserves to be recorded.On a supposition that the length of apendulum, which swings seconds in thelatitude of London, is 39 l-5th inches,the length of one vibrating 42 times inaminute must be 80 inches ; and ofanother, vibrating 84 times in a minute,must be 20 inches ; and their difference,60 inches, or five feet, is hisstandard measure. By experiments,however, the difference between thelengths of the two pendulum rods wasfound to be only 59-892 inches, insteadof 60, owing to the error in the assumedlength of the seconds pendulum ;39 l-5th inches being greater than thetruth, which ought to be 39 l-8thvery nearly. " He thus," says hisbiographer, " obtained a fact as accurateas is possible in a thing of thisnature, namely, the difference betweenthe lengths ot the two pendulum rods,the vibrations of which are known ;and hence may be obtained, by calculation,the true lengths of pendulums,the spaces through which heavy bodiesfall in a given time, and many otherparticulars respecting the doctrine ofgravitation, the figure of the earth, &c."Mr. Whitehurst died, no less esteemedfor his moral qualities than in reputefor his scientific knowledge, in February,1788, at his house in Bolt Court.He had, for some time previous to hisdeath, been engaged in drawing upsome papers on chimneys, ventilation,&c., which were published by Dr.Willan, in 1794. His communicationsto the Philosophical Transactions are,Thermometrical Observations at Derby,in volume fifty-seven ; An Account ofa Machine for Raising Water at Fulton,in Cheshire, in volume sixty-five ; andExperiments on Ignited Substances, involume sixty-six.SIR WILLIAM WATSON.WILLIAM WATSON was born nearSmithfield, London, in 1715 ; and, afterhaving completed his education atMerchant Tailor's School, was, in 1730,apprenticed to an apothecary, in Alders-gateStreet. During his apprenticeshiphe evinced a partiality for natural history,and obtained the honorary premiumgiven annually, by the Apothecaries'Company, to those apprentices mostproficient in botanical knowledge. In1738 he married, and commenced business,but became more known to thepublic by his reputation as a writer onnatural history, and general philosophicalsubjects. In 1741, he was admitteda fellow of the Royal Society ; in1745, obtained the Copley medal, forsome discoveries he had made in electricity; in 1757, was created M.D. bythe Universities of Halle and Wittenberg;and, in 1759, became a licentiateof the College of Physicians inLondon. Up to this time he had publisheda number of valuable tracts, bothmedical and scientific, but principallythe former ; by which he had acquireda fame, not only in England, but on thecontinent. The chief of his papers wereprinted in the Philosophical Transactions,and among the most importantwill be found those containing a descriptionof a rare species of fungus,since called Lycoperdum fornication ;and observations on the cicuta, or commonhemlock, hemlock dropwort, andwhite henbane. He was also the firstto make known to the English reader,M. Personnel's discovery that corals,corallines, and other similar supposedvegetable productions, were of anima"origin, and the fabrications of polypian account of which Mr. Watson communicatedto the Royal Society in1752; " at a time," says Dr. Pulteney,when the learned were wavering inSIR WILLIAM WATSON,their opinions on this matter." In1754, he published, in The Gentleman'sMagazine, an account of the first editionof the Species Plantarum, ofLinnaeus, which produced from thatcelebrated professor, an answer to him,in Latin, acknowledging, in high terms,the skill and candour with which he hadexecuted his performance. He was thefirst in England who fired spirit ofwine, both by the direct and the repulsivepower of electricity ; but hismost important achievement in thisscience, was the discovery " that theelectric powers were not created by theglobe or tube, but only collected bythem."In 1747, and the following year,several experiments took place, underhis direction, at Shooter's Hill, wherebyforming an electrical circuit offour miles, he proved, at the sametime, the velocity and instantaneousnessof electricity. The high eminenceto which he had attained in thisscience, introduced him to the societyof the most illustrious philosophers ofhis day, who, together with the kingand nobility, frequently attended at hishouse to witness his operations. Hewas particularly intimate with Sir HansSloane, on whose nomination, he became,about 1753, one of the trusteesof the British Museum, the garden ofwhich institution, he, by his skill anddiligence, much enriched. In 17fi2, hewas appointed physician to the FoundlingHospital ; fellow, and one of theelect, of the College of Physicians, in1784; and, in 1786, on carrying up thecongratulatory address of the college,on the king's 'escape from assassination,received the honour of knighthood.His death took place in the May of thefollowing year, at his house, in Lincoln'sInn Fields.Few men have devoted themselvesto science with such assiduity and successas did Sir William Watson ; suchwas his extensive memory, that he wasusually called, by his friends, " theliving lexicon of botany ;" and so greathis knowledge of plants, that the leadingbotanists of the day often abidedby his decision, in disputed questions.His electrical knowledge has insuredhim a lasting fame among all succeedingphilosophers in that branch ofscience : alluding to a yet unattemptedexperiment, Volta observes " ten Watsonforce fat testator di carlo;" (AWatson might perhaps make an attemptto do it;) and Muschenbroek,addressing him in a letter, on the subject,writes, " Magnificentissimis tuisex-pediments superasti conatus omnium ;"(By your splendid experiments youhave surpassed the efforts of every one.)Dr. Hartshorn, who gives him ahigh character for every thing estimableas a man, relates the following anecdoteof him : Being awoke suddenly,by his servant, who came to informhim that his house had been brokenopen, and that his plate (which was ofconsiderable value) was stolen, he observed*' Is that all ? I was afraidyou had brought some alarming messagefrom Mr. , concerning whosedangerous situation I have been veryuneasy all night." Two species of anew genus in the Triandrous class,were called after his name, by Miller,in his Gardener's Dictionary, but Linnaeusthought proper to sink the genericterm of Watson, for that of Merianella,the original name given to the speciesin question ( Antholyza) by Dr. Trew.JAMES Brindled.THIS celebrated engineer was bornat United, in the parish of Worm-hill,and county of Derby, in the year1716. His father dissipated the littleproperty of which he was possessed, bycontracting; a style of living: to whichhis means were inadequate ; and youngBentley was thus disabled from obtainingeven the common rudiments ofeducation. He appears to have passedthe first years of his youth in countrylabour ; and, at the age of seventeen,was apprenticed to Mr. Bennet, a millwright,of Macclesfield, in Cheshire. Inthis situation, his mechanical geniusquickly developed itself, and he made1G3SCIENCEsuch progress in the business of hismaster, that the whole conduct of itwas frequently left in his hands. " Hehad not been long at the trade," saysthe writer of his life in The BiographiaBritannica, " before the millers,wherever he had been employed, alwayschose him again, in preference tothe master, or any other workmen ;;md before the expiration of his servitude,at which time Mr. Bennet, whowas advanced in years, grew unable towork, Mr. Brindled, by his ingenuityand application, kept up the businesswith credit, and even supported the oldman and his family in a comfortablemanner."Mr. Bennet, indeed, seems to havestood more in need of instruction fromBrindled, than the apprentice from hismaster. A paper-mill, on which he hadbeen employed, and of which he hadconstructed great part in no verypromising way, attracted the notice ofsome one more skilful in such matters,and induced him to observe that Bennetwas only throwing his employer'smoney away. On hearing of this,Brindled, who had never seen a paper-mill,set out, one Saturday evening,without saying a word to his master;and, having obtained a sight of thedesired object, returned, after walkingon foot a distance of fifty miles, in timeto commence his work on the followingMonday morning. This cursory surveyhad enabled him to comprehendevery thing necessary to its proper construction; and the mill, before alludedto, was, soon after, completed underhis superintendence, in a manner thatperfectly satisfied the proprietor. Brindled,consequently, set up in businessfor himself, with a very high reputation,in the neighbourhood of his residence ;and it was not long before his abilitiesbecame more generally and extensivelyknown. He was employed, in 1752,to erect a water-engine for draining acoal mine, at Clifton, in Lancashire,which he executed with great rapidity, jnotwithstanding the difficulty of raisingwater, which was conveyed by a subterraneoustunnel, near six hundredyards long, cut through a rock.His share in the erection of a newsilk-mill, at Congleton, in Cheshire, stillmore prominently displayed his abilities,and in a manner that at once establishedhis reputation. He had beenengaged to fabricate the larger wheelsand other coarser parts of the apparatus,whilst the more intricate machinery wasintrusted to another person ; Brindledbeing, as yet, considered rather a skilfulworkman than an experienced engineer.His frequent correction, however,of the numerous blunders madeby the principal projector, soon led theemployers of Brindled to view him in adifferent light; and when he refusedto act in a subordinate capacity to onewhose errors he was constantly beingcalled upon to rectify, they acceded tohis wishes, and appointed him solemanager of the whole work. He completedit in a very superior manner;having introduced,' among other improvements,the contrivance for windingthe silk equally upon the bobbinsand not in wreaths. He also addedthe simple gear for stopping not onlythe whole, but any individual parts ofthe machine, in an instant. The contrivanceof engines for cutting the teethand pinions of the wheels, which hadbefore been done by hand, was likewiseBrindled's 5 and he made someconsiderable additions to the mill forgrinding flints, at the potteries in Staffordshire.In the year 1756, he undertook toerect a steam-engine, near Newcastle-undermine,on a plan of his own, ofwhich one leading aim was to preventthe unnecessary condensation of steam,for the purpose of saving fuel. He,accordingly, made his boiler andcylinder of materials which were muchslower conductors of heat than metallicsubstances ; and he would have, probably,considerably improved this plan,had not the exertions of private interest,on the part of some other engineers,diverted him from his purpose.It is, however, in no less an importantcharacter than that of thefounder of the canal navigation ofthis country, that we have principallyto speak of Brindled. The Duke ofBridgewater has the honour and meritof having selected him as the instrumentof this vast and magnificentachievement. The duke, who possessedsome rich coal mines at Worsley, adistance of about seven miles fromManchester, had hitherto been unableto render them productive, for want of aJAMES Brindled.sufficiently economical means of transport.His father had obtained, in 1732,an act of parliament for cutting a canalto Manchester; but the expense andskill required in the undertaking deterredhim from carrying his projectinto execution. The young duke,however, relying upon the abilities ofBrindled, applied to him to survey theground; and, upon his report that itpresented no difficulties which mightnot be surmounted, appointed him tosuperintend the cutting of the canal,for which an act was obtained in 1758.The plan adapted by Brindled was thefirst of its kind in the kingdom, thatof cutting the canal of uniform levelthroughout, and, consequently, withoutlocks. In the course of this work, itis stated that " he made no blunders ;and never had either to undo anythingor to wish it undone ; on thecontrary, when any new difficultyoccurred, it appeared almost as if hehad been all along providing for it ; asif his other operations had been allalong directed from the first by hisanticipation of the one now about to beundertaken." When he had broughtthe canal as far as the river Trwell, hedetermined to carry it across the waterby an aqueduct; but as the undertakingwas so extraordinary, he, requestedthe duke to take the opinionof another engineer before he allowedit to be entered upon. The referee, onseeing the spot, and hearing Brindled'sexplanation, shook his head, and remarkedthat " he had often heard ofcastles in the air, but never before wasshewn where any of them were to beerected." Brandies was, however, desiredby the duke to proceed ; and hisconfidence was not misplaced, for, onthe 17th of July, 1761, ten months fromthe date of its commencement, he hadthe pleasure of seeing the first boat passoverit. The whole structure was twohundred yards in length, supported bythree arches, of which the centre onewas nearly forty feet above the surfaceof the river. From Irwell, the canalwas carried on to Manchester, whereour engineer constructed a curious machinefor landing coals on the top of ahill. An act was procured, in 1762, forcarrying a branch of the canal tocommunicate to Liverpool, which wascompleted by Brindled, upon the sameplan as the other part of the work.Brindled's next great undertaking wasto unite the Trent and Mersey, bya canal, to be called the Grand TrunkNavigation Canal. In the course ofthis work, which he did not live tofinish, the elevated country throughwhich it had to be carried, required noless than five tunnels ; one of whichBrindled constructed at HardcastleHill, of two thousand eight hundredand eighty feet in length, and at adepth, in some places, of more than twohundred feet below the surface of theearth. Whilst he was carrying on hisoperations, strangers from all partscame to see them ; and, about the sametime, a letter appeared in one of thenewspapers, in which the followingpassage occurs : " Gentlemen, cometo view our eighth wonder of theworld, the subterranean navigationwhich is cutting by the great Mr.Brindled, who handles rocks as easilyas you would plum-pies, and makesthe four elements subservient to hiswill. He is as plain a looking man asone of the boors of the Peak, or one ofhis own carters ; but when he speaks,all ears listen, and every mind is filledwith wonder at the things he pronouncesto be practicable." It is unnecessaryto particularize the numerousother canals in which Mr. Brindledwas employed during the remainder ofhis useful career. It will be sufficientto state, that few works of the kindwere undertaken without his advice ;and he was engaged in superintendingmost of them until within a short periodof his death, which was hastened by hisintense application, and took place atTurnhurst, in Staffordshire, on the 27thof September, 1772.The intellectual character of thisextraordinary man, whose life andachievements, it has been aptly observed,are of more consequence andvalue to society than the restless agitationsof kings and conquerors, was aspeculiar and extraordinary as his genius.Without having learnt even thefirst principles of mechanics, he wasable to produce the most scientificresults according to calculations of hisown. His process was entirely mental,and performed by steps which he doesnot appear to have communicated toany one : all we know of it is, that heSCIENCE.sometimes assisted, with figures, amemory naturally tenacious, and madestill more so by circumstances. Histhoughts were constantly dwelling onhis favourite pursuits, and any interruptionto them, even for the sake ofrecreation, appears to have disturbed,rather than have relieved, his mind.Whilst in London, he was once persuadedto see a play, but his ideas wereso much confused by witnessing it, thathe declared it had rendered him unfitfor business, and he would, on no account,be present at another performance.A very characteristic anecdoteis told of him whilst he was underexamination by a committee of thehouse of commons : On being askedfor what purpose he conceived rivers tohave been created, in consequence ofthe contemptuous manner in which heseemed to regard them as a means ofnavigation, he replied, after some hesitation," Undoubtedly, to feed canals."Though it is not absolutely true that hecould neither read nor write, as lettersto his friends are in existence, it isprobable that he was always at someloss to express himself properly onpaper. His appearance was plain, almostto meanness ; and his countenance,except when he was engaged in conversationupon his favourite pursuits, gavelittle indication of genius or intelligence.MATTHEW STEWART.MATTHEW STEWART, son of theRev. Dugald Stewart, was born at Roth-say,in the Isle of Bute, where hisfather was minister, in the year 1717.After having completed his schooleducation, he was entered, in 1734, ofthe University of Glasgow, where heprosecuted his studies, with a view ofpreparing himself for the church. Hisdiligence and abilities obtained for himthe friendship of the two professors, Dr.Hutchinson and Dr. Simson, and, inparticular, of the latter, by whom hewas instructed in the sublime mysteriesof the ancient geometry. This he pursuedwith an ardour and success whichdelighted and astonished his master,who, as we have stated in our memoirof him, was making strenuous oppositionto the encroachments which themodern analysis, as he conceived, wasmaking on the ancient. In 1741, Mr.Stewart removed to Edinburgh, to attendthe lectures at the university, butsail continued to prosecute his mathematicalstudies, having for his teacherthe celebrated Maclaurin, to whom hehad been introduced by Simson. Hisnew instructor powerfully recommendedthe modern analysis ; but his own impression,strengthened by a correspondencewhich he kept up on the subjectwith Dr. Simson, were too stronglyfixed, in favour of the ancient geometry,to be shaken, even by Maclaurin. Hepursued his investigations on the subject,with increased ardour, and theresult was, his discovery of those singularand interesting propositions, whichwere published, in 1741, under the titleof General Theorems. " Mr. Stewart,"says his biographer, a not wishing toanticipate the discoveries of his friend,gave them no other name than that oftheorems; but they are chiefly prisms,and may be considered as some of themost beautiful, as well as the mostgeneral, propositions, known in thewhole compass of geometry."Whilst engaged in the above researches,the subject of our memoir hadentered into the church, and obtained,through the patronage of the Earl ofBute and the Duke of Argyle, the livingof Roseate. This retired and romanticsituation he quitted, on beingelected to fill the chair of mathematicsin the University of Edinburgh, vacantby the death of Maclaurin. He enteredupon the duties of his office in September,1747, and immediately set himselfto consider the most simple andelegant means of applying geometry tosuch problems as the algebraic calculusalone had been thought able to resolve.The first specimen of this kind whichhe gave to the world, was the solutionof Kepler's problem ; a masterly example,both of the method he hadadopted, and of the abilities with whichMATTHEW STEWART.lie had applied it. The solution wasdirect in its method, and simple in itsprinciples, and founded on a generalproperty of curves, which, perhaps, it issaid, had never before been observed.It was printed in the essays of thePhilosophical Society of Edinburgh for1756, to which work Mr. Stewart alsocommunicated some propositions in extensionof a curious theorem in thefourth book of Pappus, and relating tothe subject of prisms.In 1761, he published Tracts, Physicaland Metaphysical, in aid of a plan whichhe had formed for the introduction ofthe strict and simple form of ancientdemonstration into the higher parts ofthe mixed mathematics. In the first ofthese tracts, which is considered thebest elementary treatise of physicalastronomy extant, he lays down thedoctrine of centripetal forces in a seriesof propositions demonstrated, the quadratureof curves being admitted, withthe utmost rigour, and requiring noprevious knowledge of mathematics,except the elements of plane geometryand of conic sections. The order ofthese propositions is admirable, andnothing can exceed the clearness andsimplicity of the demonstrations. Hisobject, in the three following tracts, wasto determine, by the same vigorousmethod, the effect of those forces whichdisturb the motions of a secondaryplanet ; and from these he proposed todeduce not only the theory of the moon,but a determination of the sun's distancefrom the earth. The former isallowed to be one of the most difficultsubjects to which mathematics has beenapplied, but Mr. Stewart was unfortunatelyprevented, by ill health, frompursuing his investigations on this subject,to the most satisfactory length.In regard to the distance of the sun, Mr.Stewart was, with other mathematicians,anxiously watching for the transit ofVenus, which was to happen in the yearabove-mentioned, in hopes of deducingfrom it a solution of this curious problem.The transit, however, took place withoutaffording any very important results,though observed by astronomersfrom every country in Europe. Havingresolved, therefore, to apply theprinciples he had already laid down,Mr. Stewart published, in 1763, hisEssay of the Sin's Distance, wherethe computation being actually made,the parallax of the sun was found to beno more than six deg. nine min. ; and,consequently, his distance, nearly 29,875semi-diameters of the earth, or about118,541,428 English miles: a determinationwhich far exceeded all formerestimates, and excited great surprise inthe scientific world. The principles onwhich it was founded were disputed intwo pamphlets, one by Mr. Dawson,and the other by Mr. Landen; butthough it must be acknowledged,"says his biographer, " that Dr. Stewart'sdetermination of the sun's distance isby no means free from error, it may besafely asserted, that it contains a greatdeal which will always interest geometricians,and always be admired bythem."He was too much averse to controversyto answer the objections takenagainst him in the above pamphlets,even if his health, which now beganvisibly to decline, had permitted him.In 1772, he retired into the country,and never resumed his labours at theuniversity, which were continued byhis son, who was elected joint professorwith him, in 1775. Mathematicalstudies, however, were still pursued byhim as an amusement, and one of hislatest and most favourite investigationswas the analogy between the circle andhyperbola, on which subject he left,among his papers, some curious approximationsto the areas of both. Hedied, highly respected, in the month ofJanuary, 1785.Dr. Stewart was a man of the moststudious habits, but read few books ;and, in this respect, is said to haveverified the observation of D'Alem-bert, that of all men of letters, mathematiciansread least of each others'writings. His habits of intense application,added to the natural vigour ofhis mind, enabled him to retain thememory of his discoveries in a very wonderfulmanner. He seldom wrote outany of his investigations till it becamenecessary to do so for the purpose ofpublication ; and when he discovered aproposition, he would put down theenunciation with great accuracy ; and,on the same piece of paper, constructvery nearly the figure to which it referred.To this, it is said, lie trustedfor recalling to his mind, at any futureSCIENCE.period, the demonstration, or analysis,however complicated it might be.In addition to the works before-mentioned,he published one well calculatedto promote the study of ancientgeometry, entitled Propositions Geometricalmore Veterum Demonstrate.The method here employed constitutedan important part in the analysis of theancient geometers, and a few examplesof it have been preserved : those in thePropositions are particularly valuable.JOHN CANTON.JOHN CANTON, the son of a ,was born at Stroud, inGloucestershire, on the 31st of July,1718. He was educated at a school inhis native place, and there apprenticedto his father, who soon becamealarmed for his health, in consequenceof the ardour with which he devotedhis leisure time to astronomical studies.Without any other aid than theCaroline tables annexed to Wing'sAstronomy, he computed eclipses of themoon and other phenomena, and constructedvarious kinds of sun-dials.His father, to prevent his labours atnight, had forbidden him the use of acandle, but this he found means tosecrete in his chamber, till the familyhad retired to rest. The prohibitiononly seems to have stimulated his exertions; as, during this period, he cutout, with a knife, upon common stone,the lines of a large upright sun-dial, onwhich was indicated, besides the risingof the sun, his place in the ecliptic, andsome other particulars. So gratifyinga specimen of his son's abilities, Mr.Canton felt top much pride to conceal,ind its exhibition on the front of hishouse caused great admiration, andthe introduction of the maker to severalgentlemen in the neighbourhood. Thebooks from some private libraries towhich he thus gained access, greatlyfacilitated his progress in mathematics,and, at the same time, gave him a tastefor natural philosophy. He was introducedto the metropolis, by Dr. Miles,of Tooting, with whom he resided fromMarch, 1737, till the following May,when he articled himself, for five years,;us clerk to Mr. Watkins, master of theacademy in Spital Square. At the expirationof this term, he was taken intopartnership, for three years, and on theretirement of Mr. Watkins, he becamehis successor, and continued in SpitalSquare for the remainder of his life.He married, in December, 1744, a MissColebrooke, the niece of a banker inLondon.Electricity appears to have been thefirst subject in science to which Mr.Canton gave his attention, after hisarrival in London. The discovery ofthe Leyden phial having just takenplace, he made an experiment to determinethe quantity of electricity accumulatedin it. He effected this byascertaining the number of sparks itwould give to an isolated conductor,and communicated the result, in apaper to the Royal Society, in 1746.In the following year, he published twoelectrical problems in The Gentleman'sMagazine. In 1749, he was occupied,with Mr. Benjamin Robins, in ascertainingthe height to which rocketsmay be thrown ; they, in general, rosefour hundred, but "some reached onethousand yards, the latter of whichwere seen at a distance of nearly fortymiles. In 1750, a communication tothe Royal Society, of a method ofmaking artificial magnets, without theuse of, and yet far superior to, anynatural ones, procured his electionas a member of that body, and theirgold medal for that year. About thesame time, he was created M.A. by theUniversity of Aberdeen; and, in November,1751, was elected one of thecouncil of the Royal Society. On thechanging of the style, in 1752, he sentto the Earl of Macclesfield several memorialcanons for finding leap year, theepoch, &c., to be inserted in the Com-mon prayer Book ; but, being too latefor this purpose, they were given aplace in Dr. Jennings's Introduction tothe Use of the Globes. It was in thisyear also that Mr. Canton was the firstJOHN Plan DEN.to verify Dr. Franklin's hypothesis, bydrawing lightning from the cloudsduring a thunder-storm. In this experimenthe obtained sparks half aninch long, and of the duration of twominutes. From his Electrical Experiments,&c., read before the RoyalSociety, in December, 1753, he alsoappears to have made a discovery contemporaneouswith that of Franklin,that some clouds possess the positive,and some the negative, state of electricity.In a paper which he communicate1 , in November, 17.54, lie provedthe dependence of the plus and minuselectricities to be on a rubber or electric,and not on the nature of the substancewhich was rubbed, as commonly received.He also showed, by an admirableapparatus, well known by the name ofCanton's electrometer, that air is capableof receiving and retaining electricity.In 1756, he solved a prize questionin the Ladies' Diary, respectingthe nature and concomitant circumstancesof shooting stars; and, in September,1759, he inserted in The Gentleman'sMagazine, an account of thelaws, by which the tourmalin exhibitsits electric states during the time ofheating and cooling. Without goinginto a detail of Mr. Canton's subsequentexperiments, it will be sufficient tostate their results as communicated tothe Royal Society. He proved thatthe attractive power of magnets is less,the higher the temperature ; thatwater is not, as before concluded, incompressible; that phosphorus may beproduced from common oyster-shells;and that the luminousness of the seaarises from the putrefaction of its animalsubstances. Several of his papers,besides those mentioned, have beenpublished in Priestley's History ofPhilosophy.Mr. Canton died on the 22nd ofMarch, 1772, highly respected by hisprivate friends, and deeply regretted bythe philosophical world.JOHN LAND EN.JOHN Landed was born at Pea-kirk,near Peterborough, in Northamptonshire,in January, 1719. Thoughhe * was one of our most eminentmathematicians, little has been recordedof his life, beyond an account of hiswritings, which must form, therefore,the chief subject of the present memoir.As early as 1744, we rind him a writerin the Ladies' Diary ; and he was soonamong the principal of those who contributedto the support of that celebratedperiodical, in which almost everyEnglish mathematician of eminencehas, at one time or other of his life,become a candidate for fame. In 1754,he published, in the PhilosophicalTransactions, an Investigation of someTheorems, which suggest several veryremarkable properties of the circle, andare, at the same time, of considerableuse in resolving fractions, the denominatorsof which are certain multino-meals, into more simple ones, and bythat means, facilitate the computation offluents. In 1755, he published a volumeof about one hundred and eighty pages,entitled Mathematical Lucubrations,containing a variety of tracts relative tothe rectification of curve lines, the summationof series, the method of findingfluents, and other branches of the highermathematics. The title to this publication,we are informed, by Mr. Mutton,was made choice of by the author, as ameans of informing the world, that thestudy of the mathematics was, at thattime, rather the pursuit of his leisurehours, than his principal employment,which appears to have been that of afarmer. This business he carried onat the village of Walton, near Peterborough,till the year 1762, when heremoved to Milton, the seat of EarlFitzwilliam, upon his being appointedland-steward to that nobleman.He had, in the meantime, publishedin the Philosophical Transactions, anew method of computing the sums ofcertain series; and, by subscription, hisDiscourse on the Residual Analysis, inwhich he resolved a great variety ofproblems, by an entirely new mode ofreasoning, and pointed nut the superiorSCIENCE.elegance of his method to that whichhad been derived from the fluxionarycalculus. In 1764, he published thefirst book of the Residual Analysis, inwhich he applies it to the drawing oftangents, and finding the properties ofcurve lines ; to describing their involvesand volumes ; finding the radius ofcurvature, their greatest and least ordinates,and points of contrary flexure;and to the determination of their cusps,and the drawing of asymptotes. Heproposed, in the second book, to showits application to a great variety ofmechanical and physical problems ; buthe never found leisure to put his paperson this subject in order for the press.In January, 1766, he 'was elected afellow of the Royal Society ; and, in1768, published, in their Transactions,his specimen of a new method of comparingcurvilineal areas, by which manysuch areas may be compared, as havenot yet appeared to be comparable byany other method ; a circumstance ofgreat importance in that part of naturalphilosophy which relates to the doctrineof motion. In the Transactionsfor 1770, he gave some new theoremsfor completing the whole area of curve-lines; and, in the same work, for1771, appeared his Disquisition concerningcertain Fluent, which areassignable by the arcs of the conic sections; where are investigated some newand useful theorems for computing suchfluents. This subject had previouslybeen considered by Maclaurin andD'Alembert, but some of the theorems ofthese celebrated mathematicians, beingin part expressed by the difference betweenan hyperbolic arc and its tangent,and that difference not being directlyattainable when the arc and its tangentboth became infinite, as they will do,when the whole fluent is wanted, thoughsuch fluent be finite; these theorems,therefore, fail in such cases, and the computationbecomes impracticable withoutfurther help. Mr. Landen removedthis defect, by assigning the limit of thedifference between the hyperbolic arcand its tangent, while the point of contactis supposed to be removed to aninfinite distance from the vertex of thecurve ; and he concludes the paper bystating a curious and remarkable propertyrelating to pendulous bodies,which is deducible from those theorems.He also published, in 1771, his Animadversionson Dr. Matthew Stewart'sComputation of the Sun's Distance fromthe Earth, a work written in a mostunnecessary and disgraceful style ofacrimony. In 1775, he gave the investigationof a general theorem, whichhe had promised in 1771, for findingthe length of any curve of a conichyperbola, by means of two elliptic arcs ;and he observes, that by the theoremsthere investigated, both the elastic curveand the curve of equable recess from agiven point, may be constructed in thosecases where Maclaurin's elegant methodfails.In 1777, appeared his New Theory ofthe Motion of Bodies revolving aboutan axis in free space, when that motionis disturbed by some extraneous force,either percussive or accelerate. Hewas not aware, at the time, that it hadbeen doubted, whether there is anysolid whatever besides the sphere, inwhich any line passing through thecentre of gravity will be a permanentaxis of rotation ; but, subsequentlyfinding this stated in the Opuscules ofD'Alembert, he reconsidered the subject,and succeeded in pointing outseveral bodies, which, under certaindimensions, have that remarkable property.He published this paper in avolume of memoirs, which appeared in1780, and which contains also a largeappendix with a complete collection oftheorems for the calculation of fluents,principally investigated by himself. In1781, 1782, and 1783, he published,successively, three small tracts, on thesummation of converging sines, inwhich, with great skill, he explainedand extended the theorems of De-moivre,Stirling, and Thomas Simpson.In the beginning of 1782, Mr. Landenhad made such improvements in histheory of rotatory motion, that hethought himself able to give a solutionof the general problem, mentionedabove, namely, to determine " the rotatorymotion of a body of any formwhatever, revolving, without restraint,upon any axis passing through itscentre of gravity." His solution, however,differed so materially from that ofD'Alembert, that he began to suspectits correctness, and, for the present,therefore, deferred making it public.He was further confirmed in his doubtsJOHN SM EATON.on the subject, by finding that Euler'ssolution of the same problem agreedexactly with that of D'Alembert. Theperspicuity of Euler's method enabledhim to discover where the differencelay between that and his own, whichhe now resolved to revise with thegreatest attention. He went over hisprocess again and again, with theutmost circumspection; and, beingevery time more convinced that hisown solution was right, and theirswrong, he at length gave it to the public,in the seventy-fifth volume of theTransactions, for 1785. The solutions,however, of D'Alembert and Eulerwere still preferred by many eminentmathematicians; and that of Mr. Landedwas attacked by the Rev. CharlesWildfire, in a paper on spherical motion,in the Transactions for 1790. Heinconsequence, again revised, andgreatly extended his own solution, ofthe truth of which he still remainedpersuaded, although that of Euler's wasfurther confirmed by Frisk, in his Cos-biographia,and by Euler himself, on arevision of the process. Mr. Landencarried on these and several other investigations,during the intervals ofthat agonizing disorder, the stone, withwhich he had, for many years, beenafflicted, and which proved fatal to himon the 15th of January, 1790. Afterhis death appeared the second volumeof his Memoirs, which contain, amongother important papers, a solution ofthe general problem concerning rotatorymotion, the resolution of the problemrelative to the motion of a top, and aninvestigation of the precession of theequinoctial points, in which he had thehonour of detecting, for the first time,the miscalculation of Sir Isaac Newton,in his celebrated solution of the sameproblem.Mr. Landen, undoubtedly, ranksvery high as a mathematician ; but hischaracter appears to have been, in somerespects, far from amiable. He possesseda coarseness of mind, which notonly made him treat his inferiors withcontempt, but was displayed in his controversieswith such men* as Euler andMatthew Stewart, in language equallydisgraceful to, and unworthy of, a manof genius. From the contrast betweenhis manners, and those of his noblefriend, the Earl of Fitzwilliam, thevillagers are said to have been in thehabit of exclaiming, when they sawthem pass together, " There goes LordLanden and Mr. Fitzwilliam." It is afact, that his manuscripts were sold forwaste paper, to the shopkeepers ofPeterborough.JOHN SMEATON.THIS eminent mechanic was born atAusthorpe, near Leeds, in Yorkshire,on the 28th of May, 1724. He was theson of an attorney, and was educatedwith a view to that profession himself;but his own taste gave him a preferencefor scientific pursuits, which his father,at length, allowed him to follow. Hehad developed his mechanical bent ofmind at a very early period, having, itis said, used workmen's tools for playthings,and made machines while inpetticoats. His biographer, Mr. Holmes,in describing his occupations at the ageof eighteen, observes, " he forged hisiron and steel, and melted his metal :he had tools of every sort for workingin wood, ivory, and metals: and hadmade a lathe, by which he had cut aperpetual screw in brass, a thing littleknown at that day."In 1750, he commenced business inHolborn, as a mathematical and philosophicalinstrument maker ; and, inthe following year, made two nauticalvoyages, for the purpose of trying amachine he had invented for measuringa ship's way at sea. A variety of ingeniouscontrivances, communicated byhim to the Royal Society, procured hiselection as a member of that body, in1753 ; and he subsequently obtainedtheir gold medal for a paper, entitledAn Experimental Inquiry concerningthe Natural Powers of Water and Windto Turn Mills and other Machines dependingon Circular Motion. By theexperiments alluded to in this paper,SCIENCE.he bad discovered such improvementsas augmented the powers of wind andwater, as applied to mechanism, by atleast one-third.In 1754, he visited Holland and theNetherlands, for the purpose of makinghimself acquainted with the mechanicalcontrivances of those countries; and, onhis return, he followed the business ofa, civil engineer, in which his abilitiesenabled him to become so famous.These had rendered him so celebrated,that, in the year 1755, on the destruction,by fire, of the Eddystone lighthouse,he was recommended, by theEarl of Macclesfield, president of theloyal Society, as the fittest person inthe kingdom to reconstruct it. He wasaccordingly appointed the architect ofthis precarious structure, which he completedin 1759, with a durability whichthe tempests of seventy years harefailed to undermine. The reader neednot, perhaps, be told, that this edifice isof stone; that the foundations are letinto the socket of the rock on which itstands ; and that the cement used is thelime of Watched, from whence Mr.Smeaton contrived to bring it in cydercasks, as the proprietors would notsuffer it to be exported in its crudestate. His account of the progress ofthe work, with the history of the twopreceding light-houses, is most interestingand curious ; particularly as relatesto the first light-house, the builder ofwhich, one Instance, was swept, withthe whole edifice, into the waves, onthe night of the 26th of November, 1708.Mr. Smeaton was now consideredthe most eminent engineer in the kingdom,and there were few public worksupon which he was not employed. In1764, he was chosen one of the receiversof the Derwentwater estate,annexed to Greenwich Hospital, whichhe greatly benefited by his improvements.He rendered the river Caldernavigable ; gave the first plan and surveyfor a communication between theFaith and the Clyde; and effectedvarious improvements in Ramsgateharbour, to which he was appointedengineer. The management of theGreenwich and Deptford water-workswas also committed to him, which hesuperintended with his usual ability. Hedied of a paralytic stroke, at his nativeplace, on the 8th of September, 1792.Besides the papers contributed byhim to the Philosophical Transactions,he wrote several others, in connexionwith his professional employment,which appeared posthumously, in threevolumes, octavo, under the title ofReports made on Various Occasions,in the course of his employment asan Engineer. Smeaton's characterappears to advantage, both in his privateand professional relations. Hewas somewhat hasty and peremptoryin his disposition, but neither vainnor obstinate ; of a sound judgmentand ready invention ; a lover of sciencefor its own sake, pursuing it rather as ameans of becoming useful than famous,of becoming famous than wealthy. Hespent much of his time in astronomy,and had fitted up an observatory in hisown house, furnished with some curiousinstruments of his own contriving.The following anecdote is told ofSmeaton : He was a frequent guest atthe table of the Duke of Queensberry,and, on one occasion, having, out ofcomplaisance, been induced to join aparty at Pope Joan, his attention wasonly seriously called to the game byfinding that the stake which he had, asdealer, to double in Pope, had amountedto almost as much as he possessed.Instead, therefore, of attempting tosupply it, he took out a small piece ofpaper, and wrote on it an assignment ofthe chief part of his property. Theduke, who requested to perused, tookthe hint in a manner which relievedSmeaton ; and, it is said, never afterwardsplayed himself but for the meresttrifle.JOHN HOPE.JOHN HOPE, the son of a surgeon,and grandson of Lord Rankeilar, wasborn at Edinburgh, on the 10th ofMay. 1725. Having received the rudimentsof his education at DalkeithSchool, he entered the university of hisJOHN HOPEnative city, and studied mathematics,philosophy, and medicine. He thenvisited the principal medical schools ofthe continent, particularly those ofParis, where he cultivated his favouritestudy of botany, under the celebratedBernard Jussieu. In 1749, he returnedto Scotland, and, in the commencementof the following year, took hisdegree of M.D. at the University ofGlasgow, and commenced practice atEdinburgh. After a highly successfulprofessional career of about ten years,he was, in 1761, on the death of Dr.Aston, appointed professor of botanyand materia medica, king's botanist forScotland, and superintendent of theroyal garden. The indefatigable zealandattention, however, with which hepursued his duties as a lecturer, impairinghis health, he, in 1768, resignedhis office, as teacher of materia medica,and was nominated, by a new commissionfrom the king, regius professorof medicine and botany. At the sametime, his other appointments were confirmedto him for life; an honourstronglyindicative of his merit, as they hadnever been given to others but as a temporarygrant. He had, in the year lastmentioned, been elected physician tothe Royal Infirmary ; and, in additionto the distinctions he thus received athome, was honoured by the insertion ofhis name, as a member of several celebratedforeign societies, besides havingbeen elected a fellow of the RoyalSociety in London. He was held alsoin high estimation by Linnaeus, whoplaced him among the first class ofbotanists, and called, after his name, thebeautiful shrub Hope. On Linnaeus,indeed, he seems to have had a claim ofgratitude as well as esteem ; for, accordingto Dr. Pulteney, {i the adoptionof the doctrines of Linnaeus by thoselearned professors, Drs. Hope and Martyn,was the era of the establishmentof the Linnaean system in Britain."His death took place on the 10th ofNovember, 1786 ; " at a time," saysDr. Duncan, " when he was holding thedistinguished office of president of theRoyal College, and might be justly consideredat the very head of his professionin Edinburgh."Scotland is much indebted to Dr.Hope for the improvements lie made inher botanical resources, and for the establishmentof a new botanical gardenat Edinburgh, where, a short time afterits cultivation, were to be seen " therarest plants of every country, on aspot, which, but a few years before, wasconsidered as little better than a barrenwaste, hardly producing even a pile ofuseful grass." He also prevailed upongovernment, through the medium ofthe Duke of Portland, to institute apermanent fund for its support; andindeed," continues the authority justquoted, " to Dr. Hope, who was thefirst mover in everything respectingthat garden, his country in particular,and science in general, are indebted forall the advantages resulting from thatestablishment." As a proof of his zealfor the diffusion of his favourite science,it may be stated that he prolonged thecourse of lectures to an equal lengthwith any other at the university ; and,at his own expense, gave away anannual gold medal.He is said to have left, incomplete,an extensive botanical work, to whichhe had devoted many years ; but, hisonly original compositions in print,are, two articles in the PhilosophicalTransactions, one on the Rheum pal-natum,and the other on the Ferulaassafoetida. These illustrate his anxietyto render botany subservient to thearts more immediately useful in life,but particularly to medicine; and, bythe former publication, he succeeded, inconjunction with Sir Alexander Dick,in introducing the practical cultivationof rhubarb in Britain. In this, he wasso far successful, as entirely to supersedethe necessity of sending abroad for thatmedicine ; he was not able to accomplishas much in the assafoetida plant ;but he proved that, by proper cultivation,it was capable of being broughtnearly to the state of perfection at whichit arrives in its native soil.The character of Dr. Hope wasmarked by considerable warmth oftemper, generosity, liberality, and anenthusiastic earnestness in the pursuitof science, and the encouragement ofmerit. About ten years after his commencingpractice, he married MissStevenson, a physician's daughter, atEdinburgh, by whom he had four sonsand one daughter.SCIENCE.JAMES Mutton.JAMES HUTTON, the son of a merchantin Edinburgh, was born in thatcity on the 3rd of June, 1726. He losthis father when very young, and wassent by his mother to the high school,and, afterwards, to the University ofEdinburgh, of which he was entered astudent in 1740. His taste for chemistrywas first awakened by an observationof Mr. Stevenson, professorof logic, who happened to mention, asan illustration of some particular doctrine,the fact that gold is dissolved inaqua regia ; and that two acids, whichcan each of them singly dissolve any ofthe baser metals, must unite theirstrength before they can attack themost precious. Young Mutton immediatelysought for such books as mightgive him further instruction respectingthis phenomena ; one of which wasHarris's Lexicon Technical, a workwhich at once fixed his predilection forthe science of chemistry.In compliance, however, with thewishes of his friends, he was, in 1743,apprenticed to Mr. George Chalmers,writer to the signet ; but, unable to restrainthe bent of his mind, he devotedmore of his time to making experiments,than to the transcribing of lawpapers. Mr. Chalmers perceiving this,advised him to select some other profession,and generously freed him fromthe articles into which he had enteredwith himself. He, in consequence, selectedthat of medicine, as most nearlyallied to chemistry ; and, in 1744. wasentered a medical student of the university.In 1747, he went, for improvement,to Paris ; and, after a stay thereofabout two years, returned home bywayof the low countries, and took thedegree of M. D. at Leyden, in 1749.On coming to London, however, at theend of the year, he altered his viewswith respect to the pursuit of medicineas a profession, and ultimately came toa resolution to abandon it altogether.This was in consequence partly of thewant of an opening at that time for aphysician in Edinburgh, and, partly, ofa correspondence into which he hadentered with a friend respecting thejoint establishment of a manufacture ofsal ammoniac from coal-soot. This wassome time before it took place ; however,on coming to Edinburgh, in thesummer of 1750, Dr. Mutton relinquishedall idea of practising, andturned his attention to agriculture. Hewent, for some time, into Norfolk,where he took up his residence in thehouse of one Dybold, a farmer, whowas at once his preceptor and his host.The pursuit of rural economy led him tomake frequent excursions into variousparts of England ; and it was in thecourse of these journies that he firstbegan to study mineralogy, by way ofamusing himself on the road. In aletter to Sir John Hall, written in 1753,he says, that he was become very fondof studying the surface of the earth,and was looking with anxious curiosityinto every pit, or ditch, or bed of ariver, that fell in his way ; and that " ifhe did not always avoid the fate ofThales, hi* misfortune was certainly notowing to the same cause." The antiquityof husbandry in Flanders, inducedhim to pay that country a visit in 1754;whence he returned, in the summer ofthe same year, with an accession ofagricultural and mineralogical knowledge.He fixed upon his own farm inBerwickshire as the place of his agriculturaloperations, and remained theretill about the year 1768, with the exceptionof a few months, occupied byhim in an excursion to the north ofScotland. His improvements in tillagewere soon conspicuous on his farm;and he has the credit of being one ofthe first who introduced the new husbandryinto a country where it hassince made more rapid advances thanin almost any other part of GreatBritain. The sal ammoniac establishment,to which we have before alluded,appears to have been founded duringDr. Mutton's residence in Berwickshire; but it was not till 1765, that thesubject of our memoir became a regularpartner in the concern.Dr. Mutton now took up his resinHUTTON.hence at Edinburgh; and having lethis farm to advantage, began to confinehis attention to scientific pursuits. Inthe course of a variety of experiments,he discovered, for the first time, thatmineral alkali is contained in zeolite,a fact which the experiments of M.Klaproth, Dr. Kennedy, and others,have since confirmed. In 1774, hemade a mineralogical tour into Wales ;and, in 1777, he gave to the world hisfirst publication, under the title of Considerationson the Nature, Quality, andDistinctions of Coal and Culm. Thislittle pamphlet was designed to answera question, which began to be muchagitated, and at length came before theprivy-council, whether the small coal ofScotland is the same with that of England,and whether it ought to be carriedcoastwise, free of all duty. The resultwas, the exemption from the payment-dutyof the small coal of Scotland ;which was owing, in a great degree, tothe satisfactory information given byDr. Mutton on the subject, in the abovepamphlet.Dr. Mutton had, from the period ofhis fixing his residence in Edinburgh,been a member of the PhilosophicalSociety, before which he read severalpapers, but the only one published wasthat On Certain Natural Appearancesof the Ground on the Hill of Arthur'sSeat. It appeared in the second volumeof the Transactions of the Royal Societyof Edinburgh, shortly after the incorporationof that body with the oneabove-mentioned, in 1783. It was tothe Transactions of this Society alsothat Dr. Mutton communicated hisaccount of the theory of the earth, asubject upon which he had been engagednearly thirty years. The distinguishingfeature of this theory, whichhas been so ably illustrated by ProfessorPlayfair, is, the universal agencyof heat in consolidating the rockystrata, after the materials of which theywere formed had been collected by thesubsiding of loose, earthy materials, atthe bottom of the sea ; and the heat heconceived to be seated in the centralparts of the earth. The elevation ofthe strata from the bottom of the sea tothe higher situations, which they havesince occupied, he ascribes to the expansivepower of heat acting on wateror other bodies ; and he thus accountsfor the present appearances. He supposesthe earth to have undergonemany revolutions at very distant intervalsof time, and to be subjected to alaw which produces a general and suddenconvulsion, as a stage in certaincycles of changes, which at all othertimes are slowly, yet incessantly advancing.This theory, as Dr. Playfairobserves, rests, as to its evidence, partlyon its conformity to analogy, and partlyon the explanation which it affordsof certain phenomena in the naturalhistory of the earth. The degree of thisevidence will be considered differentlyby different minds; Dr. Mutton, certainlythought that the conclusion to whichhe had come, founded upon the fact ofthe liquefaction of mineral substancesby heat, (which he considered completelyestablished) was indisputable.No other proof, in his opinion, seemednecessary; nor did he appear to thinkthat the direct testimony of experiment,could it have been obtained, wouldhave added much to the credibility ofthe results deduced from this part of hissystem. " For my part," says his biographerand illustrator, " I will acknowledge,that the matter appears to me inalight somewhat different ; and thoughthe arguments of Dr. Mutton are sufficientto produce a very strong conviction,it is a conviction that would bestrengthened by an agreement with theresults even of such experiments as it iswithin our reach to make. It seemsto me, that it is with this principle ingeology, much as it is with the parallaxof the earth's orbit in astronomy ; thediscovery of which, though nos necessaryto prove the truth of the Copernicansystem, would be a most pleasingand beautiful addition to the evidenceby which it is supported. So, in theHuttonian geology, though the effectsascribed to compression are fairly deduciblefrom the phenomena of themineral kingdom itself, compared withcertain analogies which science hasestablished ; yet the testimony of directexperiment would make the evidencecomplete, and would leave nothingthat credulity itself could possibly desiderate."The Huttonian theory, however,was received with indifference by thescientific world, probably on account ofthe many unsatisfactory geological theolries that had before appeared. Mr.Playfair, however, confesses that otherreasons contributed to prevent the Hut-ioniantheory from making a due impression: it was proposed too briefly,and with too little detail of facts, for asystem which involved so much thatwas new, and opposite to the opinionsgenerally received. Dr. Button's succeedingworks were, On the Theory ofRain ; Physical Dissertations ; Dissertationson different Subjects of NaturalPhilosophy; An Investigation of thePrinciples of Knowledge, and the Progressof Reason from Sense to Scienceand Philosophy, in three quarto volumes; and, in 1795, his Theory of theEarth, in two volumes, was publishedin consequence of an attack which hadbeen made upon his doctrines by Mr.Kirwan. He left behind him a thirdvolume, which is still in manuscript,together with a volume of Elements ofAgriculture. These works formed hislatest occupations,' and were nearlyready for the press a short time beforehis death, which took place on the 26thof March, 1797.Dr. Mutton was simple in his manners,but extremely animated and forciblein conversation ; and, whetherserious or gay, full of ingenious andoriginal information. His general characterwas highly amiable, and no manwas more esteemed by his friends. Inperson, he was slender, but active, witha thin countenance, high forehead, anda keen penetrating eye; but full ofgentleness and benignity. With respectto his intellectual capacities, " none,"says his biographer, "was more skilfulin marking the gradations of Nature, asshe passes from one extreme to another ;more diligent in observing the continuityof her proceedings; or moresagacious in tracing her footsteps, evenwhere they were most lightly impressed."THOMAS PENNANT.THIS eminent naturalist was born atDowning, in Flintshire, in 1726. Hereceived his school education at Wrexhamand at Fulham, whence he wassent to the University of Oxford, with aview of studying jurisprudence. Adecided bent, however, towards naturalhistory prevented him from followingthe law as a profession. He imbibedhis taste for the former science as earlyas his twelfth year, from a perusal ofWilloughby's Ornithology; and formineralogy, by making a tour intoCornwall, in 1746, in company withDr. Borlase. In 1754, he was elected afellow of the Society of Antiquaries ;and, in the following year, an accountwhich he sent to Linnaeus, of a conchaanomia, procured his enrolment as amember of the Royal Society of Psal.In 1761, he published his British Zoology,in one hundred and thirty-twocoloured plates, for the benefit of theWelch Charity Schools. He republishedit some years afterwards ; addeda volume relative to reptiles and fishes ;and another, containing the vermes,testaceous, and crustaceous animals.The death of his wife, to whom hehad been married about eight years,induced him, in 1765, to visit the continent,where he became known to themost distinguished scientific foreignersof the day. In 1767, he was elected afellow of the Royal Society ; and, in1770, the University of Oxford presentedhim with the degree of LL.D.In the previous year he had publishedhis Indian Zoology ; and, about the sametime, he made a journey into Scotland,an account of which he publishedin 1771. His description of a country,at that time but partially known toEngland, was read with interest andavidity, and induced the author to visitthe Hebrides, in 1772, of which islandshe gave a most entertaining and valuableaccount. He now became anhabitual tourist ; and, after visiting thenorthern counties of England, madeseveral excursions in his native country,the result of which he gave to thepublic in 1778, in one quarto volume,with plates, entitled A Tour in Wales ;followed, in 1781, by A Journey toSnowdon.THOMAS PENNANT.He also published, in two volumes,quarto, his History of Quadrupeds,of which a synopsis had previouslyappeared; and, m the PhilosophicalTransactions of the same year, wasinserted his History and Natural Historyof the Turkey. In 1785, cameout, in two volumes, quarto, his ArcticZoology, containing quadrupeds andbirds, with a copious introduction prefixed,which has been considered themost interesting and original of all hiswritings. His London, however, is,perhaps, his most popular work, andhas been preferred to all other publicationsof the class, both for its style andmatter. In 1793, he printed his autobiography,in which he announced hisintention of resigning authorship ; buthis habits were too strong for his resolution.He employed his time in writingan account of the History of the Parishesof Whiteford and Holy well, in which hegives a garrulous but vivacious accountof many particulars of his family history.It appeared in 1796, and wassucceeded by a View of Hindostan, in1798, in which year our author died, atthe age of seventy-two. He had marrieda second wife in 1776, the sister ofSir Roger Mostyn, and left families byboth marriages.Mr. Pennant, who was a member ofseveral foreign societies, was gentlemanlikeand agreeable in his manners,a cheerful companion, and warm friend.His light, rapid, and vivacious style,render him one of our most amusingtopographical writers ; though, for wantof sufficient care, he is frequently incorrect.He is chiefly distinguished asanatural historian ; in which characterhe is considered as very respectableauthority, and has the merit of "beingclear and judicious in his principles ofarrangement, and concise, energetic,and, for the most part, exact in hisdescriptions.The following anecdote has been toldof him: Among other peculiarities, hehad a great antipathy to a wig, whichhowever, he could suppress, until reasonyielded to wine. Dining once at Chester,with an officer who wore a wig, Mr.Pennant became half seas over; whenanother' friend, that was in company,carefully placed himself between Pennantand the wig, to prevent mischief.At length, however, after muchpatience, and many a wistful look,Pennant started up, seized the wig, andthrew it on the fire. Down stairs ranPennant, and the officer, with hissword, after him, through all the streetsof Chester ; but Pennant, from his superiorknowledge of topography, escaped.This was, whimsically enough, calledPennant's Tour through Chester.JOSEPH BLACK.THIS eminent chemist was born ofBritish parents, at Bordeaux, in 1728.He was intended for the medical profession,and received his education atthe grammar-school of Belfast and theUniversity of Glasgow, which latter heentered in 1746. Here he became oneof the favourite pupils of the celebratedCullen, whose excellent method of instructionin chemistry, though not afirst-rate chemist himself, gave Blacka decided preference for that science.He assisted his master in several of hisexperiments ; and on taking his degreeof M. D., at Edinburgh, in 1754, hechose a chemical topic. It was a treatiseentitled De humor acid a librisoro et Magnesia Alba ; and, in thenext year, be communicated his furtherideas on the subject, in a paper, readbefore a society in Edinburgh, containingExperiments on Magnesia Alba,Quick Lime, and some other AlkalineSubstances. In this paper, which waspublished in the second volume of TheEssays, Physical and Literary, 1756, hegave an account of one of the most importantdiscoveries in chemistry, andwhich is generally considered as thesource of much that has immortalizedthe name of Cavendish, Priestley, andothers, memorable for their acquisitionsin the knowledge of aerial bodies. Thiswas no other than the existence of anaerial fluid, which he denominated fixedair, the presence of which gave mildness,and its absence causticity, toalkalies and calcareous earths.SCIENCE.In 1756, he was appointed to thechair of chemistry and anatomy, atGlasgow ; but the latter being unsuitedto his taste, he exchanged it for that ofmedicine. In 1762, he added anothernew feature to chemical philosophy,by his discoveries with respect to latentheat, its connexion with fluidity, thephenomena that occur during the processesof freezing and boiling, &c. ; allwhich he explained in the most clearand satisfactory manner. We have notspace to enter fully into the nature ofhis investigations, but one of his propositionsshould be stated, in order thatthe reader may fully understand theterm, latent heat. Water, it seems,when converted into ice, gives out 140deg. of heat ; ice, when converted intosteam, absorbs about 1,000 deg. of heat,without becoming sensibly hotter than212 deg. Philosophers had long beenaccustomed to consider the thermometeras the surest method of detecting heatin bodies, yet this instrument gives noindication of the 140 deg. of heat whichenter into air when it is converted intowater, nor of the 1,000 deg. which combinewith water when it is convertedinto steam. Dr. Black, therefore, saidthat the heat is concealed (late) inthe water and steam ; and briefly expressedthis fact by calling the heat inthat case, latent heat. This was, undoubtedly,a principal leading step tosome of the grand discoveries madeby Lavoisier, Laplace, and others ; yetthese chemists scarcely ever named Dr.Black in their dissertations ; and Mr.Deluc had the impudence to claim thetheory of latent heat as his own.In 1765, he succeeded Dr. Cullen, asprofessor of chemistry, at Edinburgh ;and the success and perseverance withwhich he carried on his researches,were accompanied by a series of lecturesequally remarkable for ease,elegance of style, and originality ofreasoning, with novelty of information.His only publications, subsequent tothis appointment, were, a paper On theEffects of Boiling upon Water in disposingit to Freeze more readily,printed in The London PhilosophicalTransactions for 1774 ; and An Analysisof the Water of some Hot Springs inIceland, in The Edinburgh PhilosophicalTransactions for 1791. The latterrelates, principally, to the formation ofthe silicious stone, which is depositedby these springs, and is considered aperfect specimen of accuracy in theanalysis of mineral waters. Thiseminent chemist died suddenly, on the6th of December, 1799 ; at which timehe was a member of the PhilosophicalSocieties of London and Edinburgh ;and, what was considered a very distinguishedhonour, one of the eightforeign members of the Academy ofSciences of Paris. He was found deadin his chair, still holding a cup in hishand, so that his servant came into theroom and went out again, without, atfirst, perceiving he was a corpse.The reputation of Dr. Black began tosuffer, in the decline of his life, in consequenceof his permitting others topass him in the very career of discoverywhich he had opened. This arose, inagreat measure, from the almost entiredevotion of his time to the duties of hislectureship ; and with such distinguishedeminence did he fill the chair, that fewgentlemen left Edinburgh withouthaving attended a course or two ofProfessor Black. His private characterwas highly estimable, and few menhave died more respected in the Scotchmetropolis.MATTHEW Bolton.MATTHEW Bolton was born atBirmingham, on the 14th of September,1728, and after having received a tolerableeducation, studied drawing andmathematics. He commenced businessas a manufacturer of hardware ; and,having discovered a new method ofinlaying steel, he sent a considerablequantity of buckles, watch-chains, &c.to the continent, where they were purchasedby the English, as the offspringof French ingenuity. Finding his premisesat Birmingham not sufficientlycapacious for his purposes, he, in 1762,purchased an extensive tract of heath,about two miles from the town, and atMATTHEW Bolton.an expense of 9,000, laid the foundationof those vast and unrivalled works,known as the Soho manufactory. Tothis spot his liberality soon attractednumbers of ingenious men from allparts, by whose aid he so successfullyimitated or moulu, that the most splendidapartments in this and many foreigncountries received their ornaments fromthe Soho establishmentAbout 1767, finding the force of thewater-mill inadequate to his purposes,he constructed a steam-engine uponthe original plan of Slavery ; and, twoyears afterwards, entered into partnershipwith the celebrated James Watt,in conjunction with whom, he turnedthat machine to several new and importantuses. They soon acquired amechanical fame all over Europe, bythe extent and utility of their undertakings,the most important of whichwas their improvement in the coinage,which they effected about 1788. Thecoins struck at the Soho manufactorywere remarkable for their beauty andexecution, and caused the inventors tobe employed by the Sierra Leone Company,in the coinage of their silver, andby the East India Company in that oftheir copper. Mr. Boulton also senttwo complete mints to St. Petersburg!! ;and, having presented the late Emperor,Paul the First, with some of themost curious articles of his manufacture,that sovereign returned him a politeletter of thanks and approbation, togetherwith a princely present of medalsand minerals from Siberia, and specimensof all the modern money of Russia.Another invention, which emanatedfrom the Soho establishment, was amethod of copying oil paintings withsuch fidelity, as to deceive the mostpractised connoisseurs. The last discoveryfor which Mr. Boulton obtaineda patent, was an important method forraising water and other fluids, by impulsej the specification of which is publishedin the ninth volume of the Repertoryof Arts, page 145. It had beendemonstrated by Daniel Bernoulli, thatwater, flowing through a pipe, andarriving at a part in which the pipe issuddenly contracted, would have itsvelocity at first very greatly increased ;but no practical application of the principleappears to have been attempteduntil 1792, by an apparatus set up byMr. Whitehurst, at Fulton, in Cheshire.To this apparatus Mr. Boulton added anumber of ingenious modifications,some of which, however, says a writerin the Encyclopaedia Britannica, "aremore calculated to display the vividimagination of a projector, than thesound judgment of a practical engineer,which had in general so strongly characterizedall his productions."After a life devoted to the advancementof the useful arts, and the commercialinterests of his country, thesubject of our memoir died, on the 17thof August, 1809, in the eighty-first yearof his age, and was buried on the 24th,at Wandsworth, near Soho; his funeralbeing followed by six hundred workmen,each of whom received a silver medal,struck to commemorate the eventMr. Boulton presents us with anexample of the vast influence andeffects, that may be produced uponsociety by the well-directed powers ofa great mind, abundantly stored withresources, but disdaining the selfish andnarrow views that might have contractedits usefulness, had he neglectedto call to his aid the genius of a Watt,and others equally eminent in theirmore contracted spheres. His privatecharacter was very amiable, and in hismanners and conversation he is said tohave been extremely fascinating. Heleft one son ; and, at the period of hisdecease, was a fellow of the Royal Societiesof London and Edinburgh, andan associate of several scientific institutionsabroad.RICHARD PULTENEY.THIS distinguished botanist, the onlyone of thirteen children who arrivedat maturity, was born at Loughborough,in Leicestershire, on the 17thof February, 1730. He was educatedas a Calvinistic dissenter; and, afterhaving served an apprenticeship to anapothecary, commenced business on hisSCIENCE.own account, in the town of Leicester.His religious doctrines, it is said,operated against him, and preventedhim from obtaining much employmentin his profession. He struggled, however,says his biographer, " againstpecuniary difficulties with economy ;and shielded his peace of mind againstbigotry, in himself or others, by lookingthrough nature up to nature's God.' "In other words, he had imbibed a tastefor natural history, to which he devotedthe principal part of his time ; and soearly as the year 1750, he appears tohave communicated some papers toThe Gentleman's Magazine. To thisperiodical he continued to be a contributorfor a period of fifty years, andsome of the most valuable articles whichit contains, relative to botany, are fromhis pen. Among those written by Dr.Pulteney, the principal are, A Series ofLetters on the Poisonous Plants of thisCountry; A Brief Dissertation onFungi in general ; A Series of Experimentsand Observations, to Shewthe Utility of Botanical Knowledge inrelation to Agriculture and the Feedingof Cattle ; an abstract of a Latin treatise,published by Linnaeus, and entitledSomnus Plantarum (The Sleepof Plants) ; An Account of the First andSecond Volumes of a New and EnlargedEdition of Professor Linnaeus'sSystema Naturae ; On Tremella Nostoc ;On the Orchestra Grass ; Account ofthe Flora Russia ; On Myrica Gale;The Aerostatica described ; On Tri-chose.The importance of the above communicationswill be at once acknowledged,when it is recollected that, atthe time when they were written, thepursuit of natural history, in England,was confined to a very few persons,and an acquaintance with the principlesof the Linnaean system, to still fewer.The Somnus Plantarum, mentionedabove, was afterwards treated, by thesubject of our memoir, in ai; enlargedand more scientific manner, and obtainedinsertion in the PhilosophicalTransactions, under the title of SomeObservations upon the Sleep of Plants ;and an account of that faculty whichLinnaeus calls Vigils Forum, with anenumeration of several plants whichare subject to that law. For thesepapers, and a previous communicationrelative to the rare plants of Leicestershire,our author was, in 1762, ad Imitted a member of the Royal Society.The president of this learned body, atthat time, was the Earl of Macclesfield,to whom Dr. Pulteney was introduced,besides several other distinguished characters,who not only admired hisscientific knowledge, but intimated adesire to encourage him in his professionalcareer. In consequence ofthis, he proceeded to Edinburgh ; and,in 1764, graduated M. D., his inauguraldissertation being entitled Cinchonaofficinalis ; a subject which he treatedwith so much ability, that it was afterwardsinserted in the third volume ofThe Thesaurus Medicis.On his return to London, Dr. Pul-tenetwas introduced, by the celebratedMrs. Montagu, to the Earl of Bath,who. acknowledged him as a relation,and appointed him his travelling physician.'The death of his patron takingplace soon after, he removed to Bland-ford,in Dorsetshire, and there commencedmedical practice under veryfavourable circumstances. His professionalmerit soon became conspicuous ;and, in a few years, his circuit includednot only the whole of his own county,but also the contiguous parts of Wiltshire,Hampshire, and Somersetshire.In 1779, he married a Miss Gallon, alady of superior attainments, but bywhom he never had any children.In 1781, he published his GeneralView of the Writings of Linnaeus, one ofthe most popular botanical publicationswhich ever appeared in this country.Sanctioned by the commendations,"says his biographer, Dr. Maton, " of allwho were already conversant with itssubjects, the work soon attracted generalcuriosity : the labours of Linnaeusand the sciences to which they related,became much more correctlyunderstood ; and Dr. Pulteney foundhimself placed among the first, both ofthe Linnaean scholars and of the philosophicalnaturalists of his country."The work sold extensively ; and, in1789, was translated into French, byL. A. Million de Grandison. TheRoyal Academy of Sciences of Stockholm,testified their approbation of it,by presenting the author with twomedals, struck in honour of Linnaeus ;one by command of the King of Sweden,RICHARD PULTENEY.and the other at the expense of CountTessin.In 1784, he was chosen an honorarymember of the Royal Medical Societyof Edinburgh; and, in 1787, of theChirurgical and Obstetrical Society ofthat city, and also of the Medical Societyof London. In 1790, he publisheda more original and laboriouswork than the last, under the title ofHistorical and Biographical Sketchesof the Progress of Botany in England,from its Origin to the Introduction ofthe Linnaean System. This, thoughabounding with original and valuableinformation, does not contain all thatmight have been collected on the subject; a defect of which the authorhimself seems to have been well aware.I have no expectation," he said, in aletter to a friend, " that a book of thisnature will come to a second edition,in my lifetime ; after I am gone, somebodywill take it up and make a goodwork of it, now I have led the way."Such has not yet been the case ; owing,probably, as Dr. Maton observes, to theoriginal edition not being hithertowholly disposed of.In 1793, Dr. Pulteney was elected afellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.Of the Linnaean Society hehad been elected a fellow from itsearliest institution, and was a mostvaluable contributor to its Transactions.Among his communicationsmay be mentioned, Description of aMinute Epiphyllous Lycoperdon, discoveredon the Leaves of AnemoneNemorosa ; Observations on the EconomicalUse of Ranunculus Aquatilis,with Introductory Remarks on theacrimonious quality of some of theEnglish species of that genus ; and OnAscarides discovered in the Intestinesof Pelicans Carbo and Cristatus. Hismedical papers, in the PhilosophicalTransactions, are, The Case of a Manwhose Heart was found enlarged to avery Uncommon Size ; Concerning theMedical Effects of a Poisonous Plant(^Enanthe croats), exhibited insteadof the Water-Parsnip ; and An Accountof Baptisms, Marriages, and Burials,during Forty Years, in the Parish ofBlandford Forum. He also wrote someprofessional papers in The Memoirs ofthe Medical Society of London, andin The Medical Observations and Inquiries.His principal contribution tothe former publication is entitled, Caseof an Extraordinary Enlargement of theAbdomen, owing to a Fleshy encystedTumour. As an antiquarian, also, Dr.Pulteney displayed considerable researchand skill. He was a liberalcontributor to Dr. Aikin's EnglandDelineated, and Mr. Nichols's Historyof Leicestershire. Archdeacon Coxeprofited by his valuable communicationon subjects relating to naturalhistory, and his conchological knowledgewas exhibited in the assistancewhich he rendered to M. Da Costa, inthe compilation of his British Conchology,and in his contributions to theHistory of Dorsetshire. He died, onthe 7th of October, 1801, of a pulmonarycomplaint, with which he hadbeen afflicted at an early period of hislife. Out of an affluent fortune, hemade liberal benefactions to severalcharitable institutions, and left to theLinnaean Society his valuable Museumof Natural History. In 1805, appeareda second edition, with corrections, considerableadditions, and memoirs of theauthor, by W. G. Maton, M. D.The character of Dr. Pulteney wasestimable and amiable in a very high degree,and no man ever had friends morestrongly attached to him, or was moregenerally respected by his numerousacquaintances. His manner was cheerfuland urbane, and his countenancebespoke the simplicity, candour, andliberality of his mind. His ardour forscience never forsook him ; and he wasas zealous in the pursuit of it at theclose of his life as at the commencementof his professional career. His conversation,like his morals, was spotless ;his religion unaffected, and devoid ofbigotry or intolerance, the only failingsin others, which he is said to have contemplatedwithout sympathy or indulgence.SCIENCE.HENRY CAVENDISH.HENRY CAVENDISH, son of LordCharles Cavendish, a younger brotherof the Devonshire family, was born atNice, in Piedmont, on the 10th of October,1731. He received the rudimentsof education at a private academy, atHackney, and completed it at the Universityof Cambridge, where the pursuitsof philosophy and chemistry engrossedthe chief portion of his time. His naturaltemper, and pecuniary circumstances,which were narrow, during hisfather's life, concurred in strengtheninghis disposition to study and retirement ;so that his habits underwent but littlealteration, when he became inheritor ofa large property. On leaving college,the above sciences continued to be thesubject of his investigations, which aconstitutional coldness of feeling enabledhim to carry on with a caution,patience, and perseverance, that greatlyaccelerated his discoveries.The Newtonian philosophy early engagedhis attention, and having masteredthe principles, he applied themto an explanation of the laws of electricity.He only wrote two papers onthis subject, the result, however, of veryelaborate investigation, and respectivelyentitled An Attempt to explain someof the Principal Phenomena of Electricity,by means of an Elastic Fluid; andAn Account of a Set of Experimentsto determine the Nature of the Shockcommunicated by the Torpedo. In thelatter, he explained the singular propertiesof electrical fishes ; showing thatdistinction between common and animalelectricity, which has been confirmedby the subsequent discovery ofgalvanism. The calculation of a remarkablyluminous arch, seen in February,1784, formed the subject of one ofhis meteorological communications tothe Transactions of the Royal Society ;and another contained an account ofthe meteorological instruments, belongingto that body, with remarks on theiruse and construction. It need scarcelybe observed, that he was one of its mostdistinguished members, as well as oneof the most valuable contributors to itsTransactions, to which he consignedthe whole of his scientific writings.The chief of these are his papers onchemistry, the first of which appearedin The Philosophical Transactions for17 66, entitled Experiments on FactitiousAirs. In this he gives an account ofhis examination of fixed and inflammableair, which ended in his discoveryof the extreme comparative levity ofthe latter ; thus laying the foundation ofthe practice of aerostation. In a subsequentpaper, he proves the interestingfact of the solubility of lime andmagnesia in water, by means of fixedair, the result of his experiments onsome mineral water, at Ratione Place.His determination of the proportion ofoxygen and of azotic gas, in the compositionof atmospherical air, forms thesubject of another paper. His observationof the congelation of quicksilver,having turned his attention to the subjectof freezing in general, he instituteda variety of experiments, which heexplained in two papers, constitutingone of the most interesting parts of thetheory of heat. In fine, his chemicalwritings may be said to contain fivevaluable discoveries, all little short ofperfection : Firstly, the nature andproperties of hydrogen gas ; secondly,the solvent of lime in water, when it isdeposited by boiling ; thirdly, the exactproportion of the constituents of commonair, and the fact that the proportionnever sensibly varies ; fourthly, thecomposition of water ; and, fifthly, thecomposition of nitric acid. The lastpaper he wrote was A Method of dividingAstronomical Instruments 5 hisother astronomical communications are,The Civil Year of the Hindooss, and itsDivisions ; A Rule for finding theLongitude by the Lunar Observations ;and An Account of Experiments todetermine the Density of the Earth.This eminent philosopher, to whosediscoveries science is indebted for theexplanation of so many natural phenomena,died at his residence on ClaphamCommon, on the 24th of February,1810 ; leaving property, it is said, to theHENRY CAVENDISH,amount of ^1,300,000. Regarded as aman, his character presents little to beadmired. With all his immense wealth,he does not appear to have encouragedlearning and science in any other waythan by keeping a valuable library,open to the use of literary men. Tothese he confined his society, but evenin the circles of his most intimatefriends, he was occasionally shy andsilent.Of parade and compliment he hadan absolute horror ; a singular instanceof which is related to have occurredat one of the Sunday meetings at SirJoseph Banks's. Dr. Ingenious cameup to him, in a pompous manner, withan Austrian gentleman in his hand,whom he formally introduced to him byall his Skies. The gentleman then begana speech, in which he assured Mr.Cavendish that his principal reason forvisiting London, was his ardent desireto see and converse with one of theornaments of the age, and the mostillustrious of philosophers. Mr. Cavendishstood with his eyes cast down, notanswering a word, and betraying everysign of distress and confusion. Atlength, spying an opening in the circle,he darted through it, and, with allspeed, escaped to his carnage, and drovedirectly home.He scarcely maintained any communicationwith his family, and is saidonly to have seen once a-year, and thatfor a few minutes, the relative to whomhe left the bulk of his property. Beforethe discoveries of Priestley, Scheele,and Lavoisier, the experiments of Mr.Cavendish had opened a path of chemicalinvestigation equally new andsplendid. As a mathematician he hasbeen excelled by many of his predecessors; but none of them, it is to beobserved, had attempted to employtheir powers of investigation in thepursuit of physical discovery. " Whateverthe sciences revealed to Mr. Cavendish,"says Cuvier, " appeared alwaysto exhibit something of the sublime andthe marvellous ; he weighed the earth ;he rendered the air navigable ; he deprivedwater of the quality of an element; and he denied to fire the characterof a substance. The clearnessof the evidence on which he establishedhis discoveries, new and unexpected asthey were, is still more astonishingthan the facts themselves which he detected; and the works in which he hasmade them public, are so many masterpiecesof sagacity and methodical reasoning,each perfect as a whole and inits parts, and leaving nothing for anyother hand to correct."NEVIL MASKLELYNE.son of Edmund Masklelyne,of Preston, in Wiltshire, was born in London,in October, 1732, and educated atWestminster School and the Universityof Cambridge. Optics and astronomyattracted his attention at an early age";and, in order to a full comprehensionof these sciences, he applied himselfwith ardour to mathematics ; and, in afew months, made himself master ofthe elements of geometry. After takinghis bachelor's degree at the university,where he was first a member of CatherineHall, and afterwards of TrinityCollege, he obtained a curacy in theneighbourhood of London, whither heremoved in 1755. Here he becameacquainted with Dr. Bradley, and pursuedhis favourite studies with such success,that his name soon became knownto the scientific world. In 1758, hewas elected a fellow of Trinity College,Cambridge ; of the Royal Society ofLondon, in 1759 ; and, in the autumnof the following year, was appointed bythat body to visit the island of St.Helena, in order to observe the transitof Venus over the sun, which was tohappen on the 6th of June, 1761.On his return, he published, in 1763,a useful practical work, called TheBritish Mariner's Guide; and, in thesame year, being appointed chaplain tohis majesty's ship, the Louisa, he wentout to Barbadoes, by order of theboard of longitude, in order to ascertainthe correctness of Mr. Harrison's timekeeper.In 1765, he was appointedSCIENCE.astronomer-royal ; and, soon afterwards,placed before the board of longitudea plan for An Annual NauticalAlmanac and Astronomical Ephemeris.The former was published in1767 ; and, in the same year, appeared,by order of the board of longitude, hisAccount of the going of Mr. JohnHarrison's Watch, &c., which gave riseto a controversy between him and theinventor. In 1774, were published hisTables for Computing the ApparentPlaces of the Fixed Stars, and ReducingObservations of the Planets.They were followed, about two yearsafter, by the first volume, in folio, ofAstronomical Observations made at theRoyal Observatory, Greenwich, whichwere continued annually till 1803.During the years If 74, 1775, and1776, Mr. Masklelyne was engaged inendeavouring to determine the meandensity of the earth. An unsatisfactoryexperiment had been previously madeby Rougher, who, in attempting to determinethe attraction of mountainsfrom the quantity by which the plumb-lineof the astronomical sector wasaffected, found only half the quantity itshould have been from the size of themountain, which he, therefore, concludedto be hollow. The subject ofour memoir chose, for the place of hisobservation, the mountain of Schehal-lien, in Scotland, taking with him thesector he had used at St. Helena, afterhaving corrected the suspension andchanged the divisions. The result wassuch as to tend to the presumption thatthe internal parts of the earth containlarge quantities of metals, the meandensity of the earth to that of waterbeing calculated as nine to two, and tothat of stone as nine to five.In 1792, Dr. Masklelyne publishedM. Michaelis Taylor's Tables of Logarithms,to which he prefixed a verymasterly introduction, containing preceptsfor the use of them. His communicationsto the Transactions of theRoyal Society, which are valuable andnumerous, are to be found in the volumesfrom the fifty-first to the seventy-sixth.He published, separately, fewworks of importance besides thosealready mentioned, if we except hisedition of Mayer's Tables and Precepts,and his Observations on theEquation of Time, in which he haspointed out an error of La Caille andLaplace. He is said to have been theinventor of the prismatic micrometer ;the idea, at all events, of employing adouble refraction, is undoubtedly his.It does not appear in what year he receivedhis doctor's degrees, but it wassome time previous to 1782, in whichyear he was presented to the living ofNorth Runeton, Norfolk. He died,highly respected for his amiable andpious character, in 1811, leaving onedaughter.His merits, as an astronomer, havebeen summed up by Delamere, whojustly observes, that Masklelyne leftthe most complete set of observationswith which the world was ever presented; " and if, by any great revolution,"he adds, " the works of allother astronomers should be lost, andthis collection preserved, it would containsufficient materials to raise again,nearly entire, the edifice of modernastronomy."SIR RICHARD ARKWRIGHT.RICHARD ARKWRIGHT was bornof humble parents, in Preston, Lancashire,in 1732. His original occupationwas a barber, and he practised thatcalling when he first came to Warrington,the scene of the commencementof his mechanical career, in 1767. Hehad, at this time, invented a contrivanceof something in the nature of perpetualmotion, but a watchmaker, of the nameof Kay, to whom he showed it, dissuadedhim from continuing his operations.The same person, who appears to havefailed in a similar attempt, remarked toArkwright, that he might, with profit,turn his attention to cotton-spinning,and offered to describe to him the process.Arkwright, after some objectionsto the scheme, in consequence of its havingalready ruined so many, undertookSIR RICHARD ARKWRIGHT.to embark in it, and, in conjunctionwith Kay, applied to Paul Atherton,Esq., of Liverpool, to construct an engine.This the poverty of our inventor'sappearance induced the gentleman atfirst to refuse ; but he afterwards consented,on the understanding that Kayshould make the clockmaker's part ofthe engine, and superintend the progressof the work, m its general construction.Soon after its completion,Mr. Arkwright took out a patent forhis engine, in 1769, and renewed it in1775 ; but, in consequence of the abovefacts having been brought before theKing's Bench, it was, by that court,set aside, in 1785.Not long after he had obtained hispatent, Arkwright had entered intopartnership with a Mr. Smalley ofPreston, but failing for want of money,they removed to Nottingham, wherethe assistance of some rich capitalistsenabled them to erect a considerablecotton-mill, turned by horses. On thesecession of Smalley, Mr. Dale^*%Scotchman, was taken into partnershipby Arkwright, who, as he was attacked,about this time, by other English manufacturers,used to say, that he wouldput into the hands of a Scotchman arazor that would shave them all.Arkwright was knighted in December,1786, on presenting an addressfrom the high sheriff and hundred ofWordsworth. At this time, he residedat his works at Rumford, in Derbyshire,where, being able to make hisengines go by horses, by water, and bysteam, as first movers, he was rapidlyamassing a large fortune. He diedthere on the 3rd of August, 1792, leavingbehind him, it is said, property tothe amount of 500,000.Sir Richard Arkwright's inventioncannot be considered as altogether new,nor is he entitled to the exclusive meritof its construction, as we have seenthat Kay, the watchmaker, had a greatshare in it, and, indeed, suggested to SirRichard the scheme. The crudity ofthe idea, however, was matured byArkwright, and great credit is due tohim for the perseverance which he usedin bringing it into practical operation.He trod a path where several had previouslyfailed, as he himself tells us, inastatement of his own case, wherein hestates that, among others, one liar-grave,of Blackwell, in Lancashire,after having obtained a patent, in 1767,for an engine that would at once spintwenty or thirty threads of cotton intoyarn for the fustian manufacture, hadhis machines destroyed by populartumult, and was, at length, by privatecombination, deprived of his patent,and died in obscurity and distress.Arkwright had also to contend againstmany disadvantages, and he was notableto accomplish his object with anyprofit to himself or his partners, untila period of five years, and a sum of120,000 had been consumed. Butwhatever may be his merit as an originalinventor, this country is certainlyindebted to him for having raised thecarding and cotton-spinning, from comparativelynothing, to a great nationalmanufacture. Some idea of the influencewhich his invention has hadupon the increase of cotton fabrics maybeformed, from the fact that the annualimportation of raw cotton from 1771 to1780 averaged only 5,735,000 Ribs; whilstfrom 1817 to 1821, it amounted to144,000,000, of which 130,000,000 Ribs.were spun in England.JOSEPH PRIESTLEY.THIS eminent philosopher was bornat Fieldhead, near Leeds, in Yorkshire,in March, 1733. His father was engagedin the clothing manufacture, andwas a Calvinistic dissenter ; but thecare of his education devolved on anaunt (Mrs. Highly), by whom he wasadopted almost from his infancy. Shewas a woman of exemplary benevolenceand piety, and was neither unremittingnor unsuccessful in her endeavours toinstil the same qualities into her nephew.He received the first part of his educationat several schools in the neighbourhoodof Leeds, where he madeconsiderable progress in the learnedSCIENCE,languages, including Hebrew, with aview of fitting himself for the ministry.His weak health threatened, for a time,to frustrate this intention, and he, inconsequence,applied himself to themodern languages, in order to qualifyhimself for a merchant in Lisbon. Hisconstitution, however, becoming renovated,he resumed his original purpose ;and, in 1752, went to complete his courseof theological studies at the dissentingacademy, kept by Dr. Ashworth, atDaventry. On his entrance into thisestablishment, he was found to possessa considerably greater degree of knowledgethan might have been expectedfrom his years, even with the studioushabits by which they were accompanied,whilst his conduct was marked by astrict sense of religion, and displayedthat vital spirit of piety, which even, insome degree, assimilated him to thatclass of Christians, from whose doctrinesno one more widely deviated.He remained at Daventry threeyears, pursuing, during that time, sucha course of theological inquiry, as atlength induced him to relinquish theorthodox system in which he had beeneducated, for that of Arianism. It washere, also, that he first read the worksof Dr. Hartley, to whose theories hesoon became a convert, and whosewritings ever afterwards maintained apowerful influence over his whole trainof thinking. On leaving Daventry, heaccepted the charge of a small congregationat Needham Market, in Suffolk ;but neither his style of preaching, northe opinions which he held, were of anature to render him a popular ministerin this place. It is even saidthat the dissenting clergymen in theneighbourhood considered it a degradationto associate with him : and wereafraid to ask him to preach, becausethe genteeler part of their audiencealways absented themselves when heappeared in the pulpit. Yet, manyyears afterwards, as he informs us himself,when his reputation was very high,and he preached in the same place,multitudes flocked to hear the verysame sermons which they had formerlylistened to with contempt and dislike.He passed, therefore, the three years ofhis pastorship at Needham in poverty,discountenance, and obscurity; but stillpursuing his theological and scripturalresearches with equal ardour and boldness.The consequence was, before heleft Needham, a still further departurefrom the received systems, and, in particular,his total rejection of the doctrineof atonement.In 1758, he appeared as a candidatefor a meeting-house in Sheffield, buthis trial-sermon was not approved of.In the following year, he removed toNamptwich, in Cheshire, where he officiatedas minister, and also opened aschool, in which he taught with indefatigablezeal. To the common objectsof instruction, he added that of naturalphilosophy, and thus fostered in himselfa taste for the pursuit of thatscience. In 1761, he published, for theuse of his scholars, an English Grammar,on a new plan ; and, in the sameyear, he was invited by the trustees ofthe Dissenting Academy at Warrington,to fill the post of tutor in the languages.He, soon after, married thedaughter of a Mr. Wilkinson, an ironmasternear Wrexham, a lady who issaid to have been of very good understanding,and great strength of mind.His reputation, as a man of variousknowledge and active inquiry, nowbegan to extend itself, and he was notlong in supporting his claim to it by hiswritings in various branches of literatureand science. Of these, many relatedto his department in the academy,which included, besides philology, lectureson history and general policy.His ideas of government, of which weshall speak hereafter, were supportedby him in An Essay on Government,which was folio wed "by An Essay onEducation, with some remarks in animadversionof a treatise on the samesubject by Dr. Brown, of Newcastle.About the same time also appeared hisChart of Biography, an ingenious andhighly commended work. He shortlyafter visited London ; and, during hisstay there, contracted an acquaintancewith Dr. Franklin, Dr. Watson, Dr.Price, and Mr. Canton, by whom he"was encouraged to pursue a plan hehad formed of writing A History ofElectricity. This work, which he publishedin 1767, relates to many new andingeniously devised experiments of hisown, besides containing a very clearand well arranged account of the riseand progress of electricity. It was re-JOSEPH PRIESTLEY.civet with great applause, both abroadand at home ; was translated intoforeign languages, and went throughseveral editions. The Royal Societyimmediately admitted the author amember of their body ; and, about thesame time, the University of Edinburghconferred upon him the degree of LL.D.In 1767, he quitted the academy atWarrington to become minister to alarge congregation of dissenters at Leeds.This he found a very agreeable change ;the liberality of his opinions met withno check from those over whom he presided; and pursuing his theological inquirieswith renewed ardour, he becamea convert to Socinianism. This changehe attributed to a perusal of Dr. Larder'sletter on the Logos ; and heevinced his sincerity and zeal by anumber of publications on the subject.The labours of the closet did not hinderhim from discharging his moTe activeduties as a pastor ; on the contrary, hispersonal efforts to instruct his "flockwere most assiduous, and, in particular,with regard to the younger portion.But whilst he was thus rising intoeminence among the dissenters, hewas also following up those ideas andinvestigations, which ended in some ofthe most magnificent discoveries thathave enlightened the world of science.A brewery at Leeds, which happenedto adjoin his residence, first railed hisattention to the properties of thatgaseous fluid then termed fixed air; respectingwhich he made a number ofexperiments, and at length succeededin contriving a simple apparatus forimpregnating water with it. He publishedan account of this in 1772 ; and,in the same year, encouraged by thesuccess which his History of Electricityhad met with, he published, by subscription,in one volume, quarto, TheHistory and Present State of Discoveriesrelating to Vision, Light, and Colours.The performance, though one ofgreat merit, fell short of the general expectations; and, fortunately for science,was received with a comparative coldness,which induced the author to confinehimself to original researches ofthe experimental kind. For this he waseminently fitted ; his inquiring andoriginal turn of mind being impelled byall the ardour of genius, unshackled bytoo strict an acquaintance with thosesciences, which, had he known themearlier, might, probably, have inducedhim to follow some beaten track. Tohis little knowledge of chemistry, atthis time, he himself ascribes the originalityof his experiments, and thesubsequent discoveries to which theygave rise : one experiment led to another,till he, at length, arrived at thatreputation which has insured immortalityto his name ; but of which hehimself spoke with a modesty not oftento be met with among the most humblefavourites of fame. " Few persons, Ibelieve," he says, in his autobiography,have met with so much unexpectedgood success as myself, in the course ofmy philosophical pursuits. My narrativewill shew that the first hints, atleast, of almost everything that I havediscovered of much importance, haveoccurred to me in this way ; in lookingfor one thing, I have generally foundanother, and sometimes a thing of muchmore value than that which I was inquestof. But none of these expecteddiscoveries appear to me to have beenso extraordinary as that I am about torelate, viz. the spontaneous emission ofdephlogisticated air from water containinggreen vegetating matter; and itmay serve to admonish all persons whoare engaged in similar pursuits, not tooverlook any circumstance relating toan experiment, but to keep their eyesopen to every new appearance, and togive due attention to it, however inconsiderableit may seem."Dr. Priestley appears to have commencedhis experiments, with regard tofixed air, as early as 1768, and it wasbefore the former year that he procuredgood air from saltpetre ; discovered theuses of agitation and of vegetation asmeans employed by nature in purifyingthe atmosphere, destined to the supportof animal life ; and that air, situated byanimal respiration, is a pabulum to vegetablelife. Factitious air had alsobeen procured by him in a much moreextensive variety of ways than had beenpreviously known, and he had been inthe habit of using mercury, instead ofwater, for the purpose of many of hisexperiments. Of these discoveries, hegave an account in a paper read beforethe Royal Society, in 1772, together w withan announcement of the discovery ofnitrous air, and its application as a testSCIENCE,of the purity or fitness for respirationof air generally. This paper obtainedfor him the Coleman medal, in presentingwhich to him, Sir John Pringle,the president of the Royal Society,said, " I present you, sir, with thismedal, the palm and laurel of this community,as a faithful and unfading testimonialof their regard, and of the justsense they have of your merit, and ofthe persevering industry with whichyou have promoted the views, andthereby the honour, of this society ;and, in their behalf, I must earnestlyrequest you to continue your liberaland valuable inquiries, whether byfarther prosecuting this subject, probablynot yet exhausted, or by investigatingthe nature of some other ofthe subtile fluids of the universe. These,sir, are, indeed, large demands ; butthe Royal Society have hitherto beenfortunate in their pneumatic researches;and were it otherwise, they have muchto hope from men of your talents andapplications, and whose past labours havebeen crowned with so much success."After Priestley had been engaged forsix years in his ministry at Leeds, heaccepted an offer made to him by LordShelburne (afterwards Marquess ofLansdowne), to reside with him in thenominal capacity of librarian, but, inreality, as a literary companion to hislordship. The offer was made in sohandsome a manner, and upon suchadvantageous terms, to one whose familywas fast increasing, that Priestleyat once accepted it ; and removed, inconsequence,to a house at Cane, inWiltshire, near his lordship's seat. Hisconnexion with this nobleman lastedfor seven years ; during which, he notonly continued his investigations of thesubject of his former researches, butgreatly distinguished himself as a metaphysicaland polemical writer. Asthe works which he wrote in this character,probably led to his separationfrom Lord Shelburne, we shall, in thisplace, enumerate some of them. In1775, he published, preparatory to hispurpose of introducing to public noticethe Parthian theory of the humanmind, his Examination of the Doctrinesof Common Sense, as held by the threeScotch writers, Drs. Reid, Beattie, andOswald. His edition pf Hartley shortlyafterwards appeared, in his preface towhich he expressed some doubts of theimmateriality of the sentient principlein man. He had previously, it shouldbe observed, declared himself a believerin the doctrine of philosophical necessity.Opinions so favourable to infidelity,brought upon him much obloquy;but, regardless of all consequencesin the pursuit of truth, hepushed his inquiries more closely andassiduously than ever. These investigationsterminated in his entire conversionto the material hypothesis, orthat of the homogeneity of man's nature,and led to his publication, in 1777, ofDisquisitions on Matter and Spirit, inwhich he gave a history of the doctrinesconcerning the soul, and openly supportedthe ideas he had adopted. Itwas followed by A Defence of Unitarianism,or the simple Humanity ofChrist, in opposition to his Pre-existence,and of The Doctrine of Necessity.The publication of these works wasfollowed by a manifest coolness on thepart of Lord Shelburne towards thesubject of our memoir, but whether inconsequenceof the odium which theauthor incurred by them, or of thesentiments which they contained, isdoubtful. To all appearance, however,the parties separated on amicable terms,and the public heard of nothing to thecontrary ; but yet, when, as Priestleyinforms us, he came to London, andproposed to call on the noble lord, thelatter declined his visits. He also tellsus, that during his connexion with hislordship, he never once aided him inhis political views, nor ever wrote apolitical paragraph. Lord Shelburnehe admits, treated him in every respectas he could wish; left him under norestraint with respect to his pursuits;and occasionally took him with him inhis excursions, one of which, in 1774,was a tour to the continent. The mannersand society of a nobleman's housewere not, however, quite congenial toone, whose tastes were simple, andwhose address was plain and unceremonious;yet, it must be confessed,that posterity is somewhat indebted toLord Shelburne, for having affordedto Priestley opportunities of pursuinghis scientific researches, which he couldnot have enjoyed as a dissenting minister.He allowed, also, Priestley toJOSEPH PRIESTLEY,retain an annuity of 150, which washonourably paid to the last ; and, it issaid, that when the bond for securingto him this sum was burnt at the riotsof Birmingham, his lordship presentedhim, in the handsomest manner, withanother. It may not, perhaps, be uninterestingto mention, that whilstPriestley was in Paris, with his noblepatron, the celebrated infidel philosophersand politicians to whom he wasintroduced, told him, that he was thefirst person they had met with, of whoseunderstanding they had any opinion,who was a believer in Christianity.Upon interrogating them closely, however,he found that none of them hadany knowledge either of the nature orprinciples of the Christian religion !In 17747, Dr. Priestley published,in succession, three volumes, entitledExperiments and Observations on differentkinds of Air, which were afterwardsextended, by him, to six octavovolumes. The important matter whichthey contained, has rendered the nameof the author familiar in all the enlightenedcountries of Europe; and theirpublication formed an era in that lededge of aeriform fluids, which is thebasis of modern chemical science. Hisother works, relating to chemistry, aretoo numerous to mention ; and we shalltherefore proceed with a detail of thatpart of his life in which he figured as atheologian and politician.On leaving Lord Shelburne, Dr.Priestley removed to Birmingham, onaccount of the advantages he might derivethere from able workmen, in pursuinghis experimental inquiries. Thedefalcation of his income was suppliedby a subscription among some nobleand generous friends, which he, withouthesitation, accepted ; considering itas more honourable to himself than apension from the crown, which, it issaid, might have been obtained for him,if he had desired it, during the briefadministration of the Marquess of Rockingham,and the early part of that ofMr. Pitt. His stay at Birmingham hadnot been long, when he was unanimouslyappointed to the charge of theprincipal dissenting congregation inthat town. He entered into the dutiesof his office with his accustomed zeal,performing them all without interruptinghis philosophical and literary pursuits.Various theological works came,in succession, from his pen, and, inparticular, his History of the Corruptionsof Christians, and History ofEarly Opinions concerning Jesus Christ.They gave rise, as he had anticipated,to much controversy, into which heentered, without reluctance, and in thecourse of which he displayed neitheranger nor spleen. When the dissentersrenewed their application to parliamentfor the repeal of the test and corporationacts, he resorted to his pen in theirbehalf; and at the same time tookthe opportunity of declaring his hostilityto all ecclesiastical establishments,which he regarded as inimical to therights of private judgment, the propagationof truth, and the spirit of Christianity.He predicted their downfalin his publications on the subject, whichat length caused him to be consideredas the most dangerous and inveterateenemy of the established church in itsconnexion with the state. The clergyof Birmingham were amongst the foremostin opposing the claims, so ablyadvocated by him in behalf of the dissenters,and "displayed not a little irritationin repelling his attack upon theirown rights. Priestley answered themin a series of familiar letters to the inhabitantsof Birmingham, which addedstill more to the anger of his opponents,in consequence, no less, of theironical style in which they were written,than of the matter which they contained.In this state of things, theparty feeling that prevailed upon thesubject received additional excitementfrom the circumstances of the Frenchrevolution ; an event with respect towhich people were yet most oppositelyand powerfully influenced. The anniversaryof the capture of the Bastile onthe 14th of July, had been kept asafestival, by the friends of the cause,and its celebration was announced totake place, at Birmingham, in 1791.The subject of our memoir declinedattending the meeting, but in the riotswhich ensued, the populace markedhim out as the object of their fury.They set fire to his house, from whichhe narrowly escaped with life, anddestroyed his fine library, manuscripts,and apparatus, amidst the most brutalexultations. It was some time beforehe could reach a place of safety, beingSCIENCE,tracked in his flight with all the ardourof a bloodhound, and hunted like aproclaimed criminal. In aggravationof the circumstances of this outrage,which was attended with the conflagrationof many other houses and places ofworship, it appears, upon undoubtedauthority, that it was rather favouredthan controlled by some, whose dutyought to have led them to active interferencefor the preservation of thepublic peace. That they did not do so,however, is less surprising, than thatparty fury should have been speciallydirected against one, who had madehimself so conspicuous a champion onthe opposite side, and who had directedhis attacks without any regard to thedictates of caution or worldly policy.His appeal to government for indemnificationfrom the loss which he hadsustained, was not altogether in vain;though the compensation awarded himfell far short of what he had a right, injustice,to expect. He bore his calamitywith great resignation, and had thesatisfaction to witness the exertions ofmany to support him under it, whoadmired his virtue and talents, and regardedhim as a sufferer for his principles.Removing to Hackney, he wasshortly afterwards chosen to succeedDr. Price, as minister to the dissentingcongregation of that place ; and, at thesame time, connected himself with thenew dissenting college lately establishedthere. Here, resuming his usual occupations,he passed some time in ease andserenity ; no man, as it has been saidof him, being ever blessed with a mindmore disposed to view every event onthe favourable side, or less clouded bycare and anxiety. But the malignity ofparty dissension had not yet subsided,and public prejudice continuing to operatestill strongly against him, he foundhimself and his family so much molested,that he, at length, determined toquit a country so hostile to his personand principles.He chose America for the place ofhis retreat, and accordingly embarkedfor that country in the month of April,1794. On his arrival, he took up hisresidence at the town of Northumberland,in Pennsylvania, where his firstcare was to get together a well-furnishedlibrary and chemical laboratory.This he effected, but not without greatlabour and difficulty, in consequence ofthe remote situation of his place ofabode. He was soon after offered, butthought fit to decline, a chemical professorshipin Philadelphia ; but he wasby no means idle at home. He pursuedwith ardour his philosophicalexperiments ; but theology, which wasalways his favourite study, was thesubject nearest his heart, and his senseof its importance increased with hisyears. He was not altogether free fromthe effects of political animosity, evenin America, being regarded, by the government,with suspicion and dislikeduring the administration of Mr.Adams. Under that of Mr. Jefferson,however, he was treated in a friendlymanner, and he survived all disquieton that head. The greatest trials of hisfortitude in the latter part of his lifewere his domestic calamities, which hebore in a manner worthy of his temperand his principles. Those which hemost acutely felt were the death of hisyoungest son, a very promising youngman, and afterwards of his truly estimablewife. He was himself suffering froma debility of his digestive organs, whichat length brought on such a state ofbodily weakness, as made it manifesthe had not long to live. Of this, hisdisease gave decided warnings, inJanuary, 1804, and the effect upon himwas to cause him to lose no time infinishing the literary tasks in which hewas engaged, and particularly in preparingfor the press some works inwhich he was greatly interested. Amongthese were, a continuation of his ChurchHistory, and Notes on all the Books inthe Bible, which, he learned with greatsatisfaction, that his friends in Englandhad raised a subscription to enable himto print, without any risk to himselfLike a man setting his affairs in order,previously to a long journey, he is representedto have continued, to the lasthour of his life, giving, with the utmostcalmness and self-collection, directionsrelative to his posthumous publicationsintermixed with discourses expressiveof the fullest confidence in those cheeringand animating views of a futureexistence, that the Christian faith openedto its disciples. He died on the 6th ofFebruary, 1804, so quietly, that thosewho sat beside him did not perceivethe last moment of his existence.JOSEPH PRIESTLEY.Aware, possibly, that the solemn periodwas at hand, and unwilling to shockhis children, who were sitting by hisbed-side, by his departure, he hadtaken the precaution of putting hishand before his face.Dr. Priestley is to be considered inthe quadruple character of a philosopher,theologian, metaphysician, andpolitician. Of his philosophical writings,those containing his Observations onAir are the most important, though notso popular as his History of Electricity.This, however, Dr. Thompson, in hisAnnals of Philosophy, gives good reasonsfor not thinking deserving ofthe great reputation which it acquiredfor its author. The chief merit heawards to it, is that of collecting, inone view, the scattered facts whichwere spread through a great variety ofpreceding books, and which, at thattime, it was difficult to obtain. Dr.Priestley's two principal discoveries inelectricity were, that charcoal is a perfectconductor of electricity ; and thatall metals may, without exception, beoxidized, by passing through them asufficiently strong electrical charge. Hemade no additions nor improvementsto the theory of electricity ; whilst somany have taken place since his historyappeared, that his work in no degreerepresents the present state of thatscience. His History of the Discoveriesrelative to Light and Colours, hasadded nothing to his reputation ; hisdeficiency in mathematical knowledgeunfitted him for such a work, and histreatise on the subject, had he not distinguishedhimself in other departments,would scarcely have brought him intonotice. Of his Elementary Treatise onElectricity and Natural Philosophy, andhis book on perspective, it will suffice tosay, that they are written in a verylively and entertaining manner, andwell calculated for enticing young mento their respective studies.We now come to consider his discoveriesin pneumatic chemistry, ofwhich, however, it will be incompatiblewith the design of this work to giveanything but a general outline. Thefirst of his great discoveries was nitrousgas, the properties of which he ascertainedwith great sagacity, and almostimmediately applied it to the analysisof air. Its assistance was most materialin all subsequent investigations, and it,in a great measure, led the way to ourpresent knowledge of the constitutionof the atmosphere. His next grand discoverywas oxygen gas, which was accountedas one of the most importantrevolutions in chemistry. This substance,however, is said to have been previouslydiscovered by Scheele ; and Lavoisierlikewise laid claim to it ; but the Frenchphilosopher was undoubtedly precededby Priestley, who showed Lavoisier themethod of procuring it during the year1774, a considerable time before hispretended discovery was made. Wearelikewise indebted to Dr. Priestleyfor the discovery of most of the othergaseous bodies at present known, andfor the investigation of their properties.Among these may be mentioned sulphuricacid, fluoric acid, muriatic acid,ammoniacal, carpeted hydrogen, carbonicoxide, and nitrous oxide. It washe who first discovered the acid producedwhen the electric spain is takenfor some time in common air ; a factwhich led afterwards to the knowledgeof the constituents of nitric acid, whichcontributed so essentially to the establishmentof the new chemical doctrine.To him also we are indebted for aknowledge of the great decrease of bulkwhich takes place when electric sparksare passed through ammoniacal gas ;to say nothing of his curious experimentson the freezing of water ; onthe amelioration of atmospherical air,by the vegetation of plants ; on theoxygen gas given out by them in thesun ; and on the respiration of animals.To enumerate, indeed," as Mr. Kirwansays, " Dr. Priestley's discoveries, wouldbe to enter into a detail of most of thosethat have been made within the lastfifteen years. How many invisible fluids,whose existence evaded the sagacity offoregoing ages, has he made known tous? The very air we breathe he hastaught us to analyze, to examine, toimprove : a substance so little known,that even the precise effect of respirationwas an enigma, until he explainedit He first made known to us theproper food of vegetables, and in whatthe difference between them and animalsubstances consisted. To him pharmacyis indebted for the method ofmaking artificial mineral waters, as wellas for a shorter method of preparingSCIENCE.other medicines ; metallurgy, for morepowerful and cheap solvents ; and chemistry,for such a variety of discoveriesas it would be tedious to recite discoverieswhich have new modelled thatscience, and drawn to it, and to thiscountry, the attention of all Europe.It is certain, that, since the year 1773,the eyes and regards of all the learnedbodies in Europe have been directed tothis country by his means. In everyphilosophical treatise his name is to befound ; and in almost every page theyall own that most of their discoveriesare due either to the repetition of hisdiscoveries, or to the hints scatteredthrough his works." This is, undoubtedly,true; for Lavoisier availedhimself of all the discoveries of Priestley,repeated and arranged them, and,by means of them chiefly, and of thediscoveries of Mr. Cavendish, succeededin establishing his peculiar opinions.Priestley, it should be added in thisplace, continued, till the end of his life,an advocate for the phlogistic theory ;and, the year before his death, publisheda curious paper, in which hesummed up all his objection to theLavoiserian theory.As a theologian, Dr. Priestley mayrank among the most zealous opponentsof atheism, as well as of trinitarianChristianity. He considered Mosesand Jesus Christ as divine instructors,endowed with the power of workingmiracles, in order to prove the truthof their mission, and who each inculcatedthe system of morality bestsuited to the particular times in "whichthey lived. He denies the sacred historiansto have been inspired ; but considers,upon the whole, the evidencefor their fidelity and veracity to be sostrong, that it would be a greatermiracle to admit the possibility of theiraccounts being forgeries, than to admitthe truth of the Christian religion.Christ, he considers, as a mere man,and, in consequence, denies the immaculateconception, together with thedoctrine of the atonement, of election,and reprobation, and of the eternityof a future punishment. He believedin the existence of a God, infinite inwisdom, power and goodness, and consideredthe system of the universe, thebest possible; the apparent imperfectionsand the evil which exists in itbeing necessary to produce the greatestpossible quantity of happiness. Theseopinions he proposed and defended invarious publications, written for themost part hastily, and marked ratherby force and acuteness, than by accuracyor profundity. His conversionto Unitarianism is one of the proudestboasts of its followers ; but though noman could be more sincere in his conversion, he has not left the grounds ofthe adoption of this system less disputable,or more generally convincingthan before.As a metaphysician, he is chieflydistinguished as the strenuous advocateof Dr. Hartley's theory of association,upon which he founded the doctrine ofmaterialism and of necessity as legitimateinferences. Dr. Aikin, and otherof his biographers, give him credit fortreating these abstruse subjects withgreat perspicuity and acuteness, qualitieswhich characterize the chief portionof his writings. We join not thecry which they raised against him, butcannot forbear deprecating the mannerin which he has treated Dr. Reid, inhis Examination of the Doctrine ofCommon Sense as held by Dr. Reid,Oswald, and Beattie. He has therecommented upon the writings of theformer in a tone quite at variance withhis usual moderation, and by no meansproper towards one who was, beyondall doubt, a better mathematician andmetaphysician, and whose doctrines,on the above subject, he is generallyallowed to have failed in his attemptsto overthrow.His political principles were similarto those afterwards advocated by Godwin; he was an advocate for theperfectibility of the human species,or, at least, its continually increasingtendency to improvement. In hisEssay on the First Principles of CivilGovernment, he lays it down as thefoundation of his reasoning, that it mustbe understood, whether it be expressedor not, that all people live in societyfor their mutual advantage; sothat the good and happiness of themembers, that is, the majority of themembers of any state, is the greatstandard by which everything relatingto that state must be finally determined; and though it may be supposedthat a body of people may beJOSEPH Priestley.bound by a voluntary resignation of alltheir rights to a single person, or to afew, it can never be supposed that theresignation is obligatory on their posterity,because it is manifestly contraryto the good of the whole that 'it shall beso. From this first principle he deducesall his political maxims, and henever afterwards wavered or varied inhis opinions on the subject. Though,however, he approved of a republic inthe abstract, yet considering the habitsand prejudices of the people of GreatBritain, he laid it down as a principlethat their present form of governmentwas best suited to them.In summing up the character of Dr.Priestley, as a whole, we cannot dobetter than quote the words of Mr.Kirwan, which have been adopted byalmost all the doctor's biographers :He was a man of perfect simplicityof character, laying open his wholemind and purposes on all occasions,and always pursuing avowed ends bydirect means, and by those only. Inintegrity and true disinterestedness,and in the performance of every socialduty, no one could surpass him. Histemper was easy and cheerful, hisaffections were kind, his dispositionsfriendly. Such was the gentleness andsweetness of his manner in social intercourse,that some who had entertainedthe strongest prejudices against him, onaccount of his opinions, were convertedinto friends on personal acquaintance.Of the warm and lasting attachment ofhis more intimate friends, a mosthonourable proof was given, which hedid not live to be made acquaintedwith. It being understood, in England,that he was likely to suffer a loss of200 in his annual income, about fortypersons joined in making up a sum of450, which it was intended to becontinued annually during life. Noman who engaged so much in controversy,and suffered so much frommalignity, was ever more void of ill-willtowards his opponents. If he werean eager controversialist, it was becausehe was much in earnest on allsubjects in which he engaged, and notbecause he had any personalities togratify. If, now and then, he betrayeda little contempt for adversaries whomhe thought equally arrogant and incapable,he never used the language ofanimosity. Indeed, his necessarianprinciples coincided with his temper inproducing a kind of apathy to therancour and abuse of antagonists. Inhis intellectual frame were combinedquickness, activity, acuteness, and theinventive faculty which is the characteristicof genius. These qualities wereless suited to the laborious investigationsof what is termed erudition, thanthe argumentative deductions of metaphysics,and the experimental researchesof natural philosophy. Assiduousstudy had, however, given hima familiarity with the learned languagessufficient, in general, to render thesense of authors clear to him, and heaimed at nothing more. In his ownlanguage, he was contented with facilityand perspicuity of expression, in whichhe remarkably excelled."To this account of Mr. Kirwan, wemay add some particulars from Dr.Thomson's Biographical Memoir. Hewas an early riser, and always lightedhis own fire before any one else wasawake ; and it was then that he composedalmost all his works. His powersof conversation were very great, andhis manners in every respect extremelyagreeable ; these were, however, perfectlysimple and unaffected ; and hecontinued all his life as ignorant of theworld as a child. Of vanity, he is saidto have possessed a more than usualshare; but was rather, perhaps, deficientin pride. He allowed himselfbut little recreation ; for his favouriteamusement was playing on the flute,an instrument on which he performedtolerably well ; and he generally recommendedmusic as a relief to thestudious. It was his constant practice,another of his biographers says, toemploy himself in various pursuits atthe same time; whereby he avoided thelanguor consequent upon protractedattention to a single object, and cameto each, in turn, as fresh as if he hadspent an interval of entire relaxation.This effort he pleaded as an apology tothose who apprehended that the greatdiversity of his studies would preventhim from exerting all the force of hismind upon any one of them ; and, infact, he proceeded to such a length, inevery pursuit that interested him, asfully to justify, in his own case, therule which he followed.SCIENCE,We shall conclude our memoir witha sketch of the merits of its subject, bythe late eminent Professor Playfair ; anauthority so valuable should not beomitted, especially as it has not beforebeen adduced by any of the biographersof Priestley. " On the whole," saysMr. Playfair, " from Dr. Priestley'sconversation, and from his writings,one is not much disposed to considerhim as a person of first-rate abilities.The activity, rather than the force, ofhis genius, is the object of admiration.He is indefatigable m making experiments,and he compensates, by thenumber of them, for the unskilfulnesswith which they are often contrived.Though little skilled in mathematics,he has written on optics with tolerablesuccess ; and though but moderatelyversed in chemistry, he has done veryconsiderable service to that science. Ifwe view him as a critic, a metaphysician,and a divine, we must confineourselves to a more scanty praise. Inhis controversy with Dr. Reid, thoughhe has said many things that are true,he has shewn himself wholly incapableof understanding the principalpoint in debate ; and when he hasaffirmed that the vague and unsatisfactoryspeculations of Hartley havethrown as much light on the nature ofman, as the reasonings of Sir IsaacNewton did on the nature of body, hecan hardly be allowed to understandin what true philosophy consists. As tohis theology, it is enough to say that hedenies the immateriality of the soul,though he contends for its immortality,and ranges himself on the side ofChristianity. These inconsistencies andabsurdities will, perhaps, deprive himof the name of a philosopher, but hewill still merit the name of a useful anddiligent experimenter."EDWARD WARING.EDWARD WARING, descendedfrom an ancient family at Milton, inthe county of Salop, was born in theyear 1734. He received his educationat Shrewsbury free-school, and at MagdalenCollege, Cambridge, where hesoon became one of the most distinguishedmathematical students. Hetook his bachelor's degree in 1737,and went through his examination, onthe occasion, in such a manner as to beconsidered a perfect prodigy. In 1759,he was elected Lucasian professor ; butthe appointment of so young a man toa situation which had been filled byNewton, Saunderson, and Barrow, gavegreat offence to the senior members ofthe university. This induced Waringto circulate the first chapter of hisMiscellanea Analytica, in vindicationof his scientific character, and the consequencewas a controversy of someduration. It was commenced by Dr.Powell, master of St. John's, who attackedWaring's production in a pamphlet,which was ably answered byMr. Wilson (afterwards Sir JohnWilson, a judge of the Common Pleas,)in behalf of the subject of our memoir.Dr. Powell replied in 1760 ; and, inthe same year, the degree of M. A. wasconferred upon Mr. Waring by royal.mandate.In 1762, appeared the whole of hisMiscellanea Analytica, published inquarto, from the university press, witha dedication to the Duke of Newcastle.This work extended his reputation overallEurope : he was elected, withoutsolicitation, member of the societies ofBologna and Gottingen, and receivedvarious marks of esteem from the mosteminent mathematicians, both at homeand abroad. It was written upon theabstruse parts of algebra, but theauthor's own words will give the bestidea of the nature of this work : " Ihave myself wrote," he says, "on mostsubjects in pure mathematics, and inthese books inserted nearly all the inventionsof the moderns with which Iwas acquainted. In my prefaces I havegiven a history of the inventions ofthe different writers, and ascribed themto their respective authors, and likewisesome account of my own. Toevery one of these sciences I have beenable to make some additions ; and, inEDWARD WARING.the whole, if I am not mistaken inenumerating them, somewhere betweenthree and four hundred new propositionsof one kind or other, considerablymore than has been given byany English writer ; and in noveltyand difficulty not inferior ; I wish Icould subjoin, in utility. Many moremight have been added, but I nevercould hear of any reader in England,out of Cambridge, who took the painsto read and understand what I havewritten. But I must congratulate myselfthat D'Alembert, Euler, and LeGrange, three of the greatest men inpure mathematics of this or any otherage, have since published and demonstratedsome of the propositions containedin my Meditations Algebraicalor Miscellanea Analytica, the only bookof mine they could have seen at thattime ; and D'Alembert and Le Grangemention it as a book full of interestingand excellent discoveries in algebra.Some other mathematicians have insertedsome of them in their publications.The reader will excuse mysaying so much, there being some particularreasons which influenced me."These " particular reasons" had, nodoubt, relation to the attack which hadbeen made on his scientific capabilities,and are, therefore, a sufficient apologyfor the egotistical vein in which hevindicates his pretensions to mathematicalskill.Mathematics, however, were not thesole object of the attention of Mr.Waring, who appears to have beenintended for the medical profession.After having pursued the study ofphysic for some time, he took his degreeof M. D. in 1767 ; and, subsequently,attended the lectures andhospitals in London, but it does notappear that he ever enjoyed extensivepractice as a physician. For this, otherreasons have been given besides hisfondness for scientific pursuits, whichsupplied him with an inexhaustiblefund of amusement and occupation.These are, his possession of a veryhandsome patrimonial fortune, andan embarrassment of manner beforestrangers, which operated much againsthis success in a profession, one of thechief requisites of which consists in anengaging address. His MeditationsAlgebraical, to which he alludes in thequotation we have made from hiswritings, were published in 1770, atwhich time he resided at St. Ives, inHuntingdonshire. In 1772, appearedhis Proprieties Algebraical Curvesand, subsequently, his MeditationsAnalytical, which were in thepress during the years 1773, 1774,1775, and 1776. In the latter year, hemarried, and went to reside on his ownestate at Paisley, about eight milesfrom Shrewsbury, where he continuedto prosecute, with unabated diligence,his mathematical inquiries. A varietyof papers, which he had communicatedto the Transactions of the Royal Society,procured him, in 1784, theColeman medal ; and, in 1794, heevinced the attention he had paid tostudies of a more popular and familiarnature, by printing, though, it seems,he never published, An Essay on thePrinciples of Human Knowledge. FromPaisley, Dr. Waring occasionally proceededto London, on a visit to theboard of longitude, of which he was amember, but seldom remained long inthe metropolis. He died in consequenceof a violent cold, caught whilst he wassuperintending the repairing of hishouse, in August, 1798.The private character of Dr. Waringwas highly respectable ; it was markedby inflexible integrity, as well as greatmodesty. In his manner he was exceedinglysimple and plain, yet he wasalmost looked up to with reverence bythose who knew, from his writings, thesuperiority of his understanding. As amathematician, he was undoubtedlyone of the most eminent of his day ;and is, according to his own account, thediscoverer of nearly four hundred propositionsin the analytics. This, sayshis biographer, may appear as a vaingloriousboast, especially as the greaterpart of these discoveries, from theirabstruse nature, are likely to sink intooblivion ; but he was, in a manner,compelled to make it, by the insolenceof Lalande, the celebrated French astronomer,who, in his life of Contorted,asserts, that, in 1764, there was nofirst-rate analyst in England. Waringreplied to this assertion in a letter toDr. Masklelyne ; in which, after mentioningthe inventions and writings ofseveral English mathematicians, ofwhom two were living in 1764, he givesSCIENCE.a full and impartial detail of his owndiscoveries, many of which were publishedprior to that year. To use hisown words, however, few thought itworth while to read even half of hisworks ; a neglect ascribed, by his biographer,to a perplexity both in thestyle and manner of his calculations.The reader, it is said, is stopped atevery instant, first to make out theauthor's meaning, and then to fill upsome chasm in the demonstration. Hemust invent anew every invention ;for after the enunciation of the theoremor problem, and the mention of a fewleading steps, little farther assistance isafforded. His papers which he communicatedto the Philosophical Transactionshave the same fault, thoughmost of them afford very strong proofsof the powers of his mind, both inabstract science and the application ofit to philosophy. They are under thefollowing titles : Mathematical Problems; New Properties in Conies ; TwoTheorems in Mathematics ; Problemsconcerning Interpolations ; A GeneralResolution of Algebraical Equations ;On Infinite Series; On Finding theValues of Algebraical Quantities byconverging Series, and demonstratingand extending Propositions given byPappus and others; On CentripetalForces; On some Properties of theSum of the Division of Numbers ; Onthe Method of Corresponding Values ;On the Revolution of Attractive Powers ;and a second paper On Infinite Series.THOMAS HENRY.THOMAS HENRY, descended froma respectable family in the county ofAntrim, was born on the 26th of October,1734, at Wrexham, in North Wales,where his father kept a boarding-school.He was educated at the grammar-schoolof Wrexham, and was to havebeen sent to Oxford, to study for thechurch ; but, as the time drew near,says his biographer, his parents, whohad a numerous family, and were farfrom being in affluent circumstances,shrunk from the prospect of expensesthat were unavoidable, and the uncertaintyof eventual success. He was, inconsequence,articled to Mr. Jones, anapothecary of his native town, butserved the latter part of his apprenticeshipunder a member of the same professionat Knutsford, in Cheshire. Onits expiration, he became assistant to apractitioner at Oxford, where he hadthe opportunity of attending a course oflectures on anatomy, in which the celebratedJohn Hunter, then a young man,was employed as demonstrator. In1759, he commenced practice on hisown account at Knutsford ; and, shortlyafter, married. At the end of five years,he removed to Manchester, where hecontinued, for nearly half a century, tobe employed in medical attendance, fortrie most part on the more opulent inhabitantsof the town and neighbourhood.It is, however, in his character of achemical philosopher, that we haveprincipally to consider the subject ofour memoir. For chemistry, he hadmanifested a decided taste during hisapprenticeship ; and had no soonermade himself sufficiently master ofwhat was ascertained in that departmentof knowledge, than he felt anambition to extend its boundaries. In1771, he communicated to the RoyalCollege of Physicians in London, AnImproved Method of Preparing MagnesiaAlba, which he published twoyears afterwards, with essays on othersubjects, in a volume dedicated to hisfriend, Dr. Perceval. The calcinationof magnesia had, at that time, beenpractised only in connexion with philosophicalinquiries : Mr. Henry was thefirst to make trial of the pure earth asamedicine ; to recommend its generaluse as such ; and to lay open to thescientific world some of its most importantchemical properties, which, asascertained by him, were considered byBergman and by Masque, as worthyof being incorporated into their respectivehistories of magnesia.Mr. Henry was elected a fellow ofthe Royal Society in May, 1775; and,THOMAS HENRY.in the following year, he translatedLavoisier's Historical View of the Progressof Pneumatic Chemistry, from thetime of Van Helmont downwards, withnotes by himself. He subsequentlytranslated a series of memoirs, communicatedby the same author to the ParisAcademy of Sciences, in which theviews of Lavoisier, respecting the antiphlogistictheory, are more fully developed.The results of many of Mr.Henry's experimental pursuits weregiven to the world chiefly through thepublications of his friends, Dr. Priestleyand Dr. Perceval. The most importantof these were some experiments onfixed air, by which he endeavoured toshow, that though fixed air is injurious,when unmixed, to the vegetation ofplants, yet that, when mingled in smallproportions with common air, it is favourableto their growth and vigour.Dr. Priestley, on having these facts communicatedto him, told Mr. Henry thathe was anxious to make them public,not only for their general merit, butbecause, in some respects, they differedfrom the result of his own experiments.The investigation was afterwards resumedby Mr. Henry, and made thesubject of a paper, which Mr. Edgeworth,and his diui^iiter, in their celebratedTreatise on Practical Education, recommend,among other works, for theperusal of young persons, as calculatedto gratify in them an enlightened curiosityrespecting the causes of naturalphenomena. Mr. Henry's next discoverywas a method of preserving waterv at sea, by impregnation with lime, onwhich subject he addressed the Admiralty,in a pamphlet, describing hismanner of separating that earth fromthe water, and the apparatus by whichit was effected.About this time, a philosophicalsociety being established at Manchester,Mr. Henry was, in 1781, appointed oneof the secretaries, and he subsequentlybecame president. He contributed avariety of papers to its Transactions,two of which deserve particular notice,as having greatly enhanced his reputationas a chemical philosopher. Thefirst of these contains an account of someexperiments on ferments and fermentation,by which a mode of exciting fermentationin malt liquors, without theaid of yeast, is pointed out ; with anattempt to form a new theory of thatprocess. The theoretical speculationswhich this essay contains have beensuperseded by subsequent discoveries ;but the facts, which it gives, are of considerableimportance. Jt was at thattime believed that the infusion of malt,called wort, could only be made to fermentby the addition of yeast, or barm ;but Mr. Henry discovered that fermentationmight be also produced by animpregnation with carbonic acid gas.By this method he was enabled to obtain,not only good beer, but yeast fitfor the making of bread ; and, fromseparate portions of the fermented liquor,he procured also ardent spirit andvinegar.The other essay, or paper, to whichwe have alluded is entitled, Considerationsrelative to the Nature of Wool,Silk, and Cotton, as Objects of the Art ofDyeing; on the various preparations andmordants requisite for these differentsubstances, and on the nature and propertiesof colouring matter. In thiselaborate essay, after giving a generalview of the history of the art of dyeing,he examines, first, the various theoriesrespecting the facility and permanencywith which different substances attractcolouring matter; and, secondly, themode of action of those substances,which, though themselves destitute ofcolour, are important agents in the processesof dyeing. In 1783, Mr. Henrycommenced giving lectures on the generalprinciples of chemistry, togetherwith a course on the arts of bleaching,dyeing, and calico-printing. He continuedto follow both his professionaland scientific pursuits till within a stewyears of his death, which took place onthe 18th of June, 1816.Mr. Henry's private character wasmost exemplary, and has, together withan account of his life and discoveries,been made the subject of a most eloquentand elaborate elope, in the Transactionsof the Manchester PhilosophicalSociety. In his practise of a physicianhe was highly successful ; and, both inhis medical and scientific character, wasconsidered the most eminent man inManchester.SCIENCE.JESSE Ramsden.THIS eminent mathematical and astronomicalinstrument-maker was theson of an innkeeper, at Salterhebble,near Halifax, in Yorkshire, and bornthere in 1735. He was educated firstat Halifax free-school, and afterwardsat an academy in Craven, Yorkshire,at which latter he made considerableproficiency in geometry andalgebra, and took great delight in thesestudies. On leaving school, he was putapprentice to a clothier, at Halifax, forthree years, at the expiration of whichperiod, he entered the service of anothermanufacturer of the same town,in the capacity of clerk. This situationhe exchanged, in his twentieth year, forasimilar one in a London house ; but,after he had stayed there two years, hisinclination for mechanical pursuits soforcibly revived, that he quitted theclothiers line altogether, and boundhimself apprentice to Mr. Burton, acelebrated thermometer and barometermaker, and engraver and divider ofmathematical instruments. On the expirationof his apprenticeship, he hiredhimself, at the rate of twelve shillingsa-week, as a journeyman workman, toone Cole, with whom he subsequentlyentered into a partnership, but sooneffected a dissolution, and opened aworkshop on his own account. He wasnot long in gaining employment fromsome of the most eminent mathematicalinstrument-makers of the day, and thusbecoming intimate with Dollond, marriedhis daughter about the year 1765.At this time he was not only master ofthe lathe and file, but of the art of grindingglasses, and had formed the design ofexamining every astronomical instrumentin use, with a view of correctingthose well designed, but imperfectlyexecuted, and of proscribing those whichwere defective, both in principle andconstruction.Mr. Ramsden kept a shop in theHaymarket, from 1766 till 1774, whenhe removed to Piccadilly, and carriedon business there for the remainder ofhis lite. Ai early as the former yearhe had invented his famous dividingmachine, and brought the sextant tosuch perfection as never to give morethan half a minute of uncertainty. Thevalue of his labours, in this respect, toscience, may be conceived from the factthat the same instrument generally inuse among astronomers might fail byfive minutes, and thus occasion, in thelongitude, an error of fifty nautical degrees.The merit of his dividing-machinewill be understood when it isstated, that a sextant can be dividedwith it in twenty minutes; and, insmaller works, it may be said tohave superseded, in a great measure,the use of beam compasses. For bringingthis machine to perfection, theboard of longitude gave Mr. Ramsdena premium of jgl,000, and caused a descriptionof it, with a plate, to be published,in 1777, winch edition was,unfortunately, burnt, The theodolitewas so far improved by Mr. Ramsden,as to serve, not only for taking angles,but also for measuring heights anddistances. He made one for GeneralRoy, of such accuracy, though only ofeighteen inches radius, as not to admitan error of a single second. His alterationin barometers for measuring theheight of mountains is another triumphof his skill. By marking at the bottomthe line of the level, and looking atthe top to the contact of the index withthe summit of the mercury, he made itpossible to. distinguish the hundredthpart of a line, and to measure heightswithin a foot. We may also here mentionhis superior execution of an electricalmachine ; a manometer, for measuringthe density of the air ; assayingbalances, which turn with a ten-thousandthpart of the weight used ; theoptic rectangle, prismatic eye-glasses, adiameter, pyrometer, and a reflectingobject-glass micrometer. Accounts ofhis successful improvement of the lastinstrument were published in theTransactions of the Koyal Society for1779 and 1785; and, in the followingyear, Mr. Ramsden was elected a mem-jesseRAMSDEN,ber of that body, an honour his modestyhad, for some time previously, led himto decline. In 1794, he was elected amember of the Imperial Academy ofSciences at Petersburg!) ; and, in 1795,he was presented with the annual goldmedal of the Royal Society.But the great works of the subject ofour memoir are yet to be mentioned ;these are the equatorial, the transit instrument,and the mural quadrant. Apatent was granted him for the first-mentionedinstrument, in which hischief improvements were, his rejectionof the endless screw, which, by pressingon the centre, destroyed its precision ;and his placing the centre of gravity onthe centre of the base, causing all themovements to take place in every direction.Upon one of these instruments,the greatest that had ever been attempted,he was employed nine or tenyears. It was made for Sir GeorgeShuckburgh, and in so admirable amanner, that observations could bemade nearly within a second. We havenot space fur a detail of the manner inwhich he improved the transit instrument;in this, as in others, exactnesswas his grand aim, and with that viewone of his inventions was, a method forsuperseding the use of the spirit level.In the mural quadrant he has distinguishedhimself by the exactness of hisdivisions, and by the manner in whichhe has furnished the planes, by workingthem in a vertical position. A proofof the perfection to which he broughtthis instrument, is to be seen in one ofsix feet, which he made for the Duke ofMarlborough, at Blenheim. " For this,"says one of his biographers, " which isas beautiful as it is perfect, Mr. Ramsdeninvented a method of rectifying thearc of ninety degrees, respecting whichan able astronomer had started somedifficulties ; but with a horizontal thread,and with a thread and plummet, forminga kind of cross, which does nottouch the quadrant, he showed him thatthere was not an error of a singlesecond in ninety degrees ; and that thedifference arose' from a mural quadrantof Bird, in which the arc of ninetydegrees contained several seconds toomuch, and which had not been verifiedby vso exact a method as this." Itseems, however, that Mr. Ramsdenpreferred the whole circle to the quadrant,and he is said to have demonstratedto M. de Lalande, that to attainto the utmost degree of precision ofwhich observation is susceptible, thequadrant must be renounced entirely.The perfection to which he brought hisinstruments recommended him to suchconstant employment, that, although hekept sixty men, he was unable to executeall his orders ; and persons whosucceeded in purchasing, were consideredfortunate. He sold them, however,at a cheaper rate than any otherartist in the same line, in London, andwas enabled to leave but a very smallfortune behind him. His intense applicationto business at length injuredhis health, and having removed toBrighton, for the benefit of the sea air,he died there, on the 5th of November,1800.His character has been drawn in avery high strain of panegyric, by theRev. L. Dutens, at the close of a memoirof him in Aikin's Biography. Heappears to have been above the middlesize, with a countenance full of sweetnessand intelligence, frank and cheerfulin manners, and full of humour,even to playfulness, among his intimatefriends. His chief failing appearsto have been a facility of temper, whichinduced him to break his promises toabsent, in favour of present, friends ; agraver defect in character than hiseulogists or biographers seem to haveconsidered. His temperance, simplicityof dress, and frugality, might havepointed him out as a miser, but for thetotal heedlessness of expense with whichhe pursued any new idea for the improvementof his instruments, and hisutter indifference to all views of pecuniaryprofit. His whole life was devotedto his business, and it was less inthe hours of relaxation than of illness,that he found time to make himselfcompletely master of the French language.His manual dexterity was on apar with his scientific knowledge; andit is said that he could, with his ownhands, have begun and finished everysingle part of his most complicated instruments.Of his skill in astronomicalmechanism the preceding memoir willhave furnished sufficient proof, nor needwe, perhaps, add, that as an optician hewas perfect ; yet, to use the words ofthe writer above-mentioned, l< WhileSCIENCE.Europe, in every corner, repeated hisname with respect, it was, to a greatportion of his countrymen, scarcelyknown, but as that of a very idle ; and he thus worked forevery foreign nation with a markedpredilection over his own countrymen."When he occasionally sent for aworkman to give him directions concerningwhat he wished to have done,he first shewed the recently finishedplan, then explained the different partsof it, and generally concluded by saying," Now see, man, let us try to findfault with it;" and if any improvementappeared to be feasible, lie spared noexpense to effect it. It is said to havebeen the custom of Ramsden to retire,in the evening, to what he consideredthe most comfortable corner in the house,the kitchen fire-side, and there, withhis drawing implements, on the tablebefore him, a cat sitting on one side,and a certain portion of bread, butter,and a small mug of porter placed onthe other, draw some plan for forminga new instrument, or for the improvement of one already made.DANIEL CHARLES SOLANDER.iHIS distinguished naturalist wasborn in the province of Norland, inSweden, where his father was minister,on the 28th of February, 1736. Hereceived both his scholastic and medicaleducation at Upsal, at the universityof which place, he appears alsoto have taken his doctor's degree.After having made a tour to Russia, hewas advised, by Linnaeus, whose pupilhe had been, to visit England ; and he,accordingly, set out for that countryin 17(50. On his way thither, he happenedto go on board a ship of war, forthe purpose of seeing a friend whoformed part of the-crew, when thevessel was suddenly ordered to sail tothe Canary isles; a circumstance whichprotracted the period of his arrival inEngland in a manner he had littleanticipated. On reaching the metropolis,he presented a letter of introduction,from Linnaeus, to Mr. PeterCollinsonon ; which gentleman, in 1762,recommended him to the trustees ofthe British Museum, as a person, whohad made natural history the study ofhis life, and was particularly qualifiedto draw up a catalogue of that part oftheir collection. In 1764, he waselected a fellow of the Royal Society ;and, in 1765, one of the assistants tothe British Museum, in the departmentof natural history. In the followingyear, he drew up, for Mr. Brander,the scientific description of his Hampshirefossils, entitled Fossil ,&c.In 1768, Mr. (afterwards Sir Joseph)Banks proposed to Dr. Solander toaccompany him and the celebratedCaptain Cook, in a voyage round theworld, in pursuit of discoveries in hisfavourite science ; and permission beinggranted him, by the trustees of theBritish Museum, to retain his appointmentduring his absence, he preparedto depart. " Such a companion," it isobserved, in the introduction to CaptainCook's first voyage, " Mr. Banks consideredan acquisition of no small importance; and, to his great satisfaction,the event abundantly proved that hewas not mistaken." In the course ofthis voyage, he encountered manydangers in his ardour for botanical discoveries,and, in particular, during hisascent of a mountain in Terra delFuego, in search of Alpine plants; onwhich occasion, Mr. Banks and himselfwere near losing their lives. Accordingto the Dictionnaire Historique, thesubject of our memoir had a salary of400 a-year during his absence, buton what account is not stated: he hadno public appointment, and was probablyindebted to the munificence ofMr. Banks for his pecuniary resourcesat this time. In 1 773, he was appointedone of the under-librarians in the BritishMuseum, and continued to hold thissituation till his death, which wasbrought on by apoplexy, on the 16thof May, 1782.In testifying to the merits ofDr. Solander as a naturalist, Dr.JAMES WATT.Pulteney speaks of his arrival in thiscountry as an era of importance in theprogress of botany, and as a great helpto the establishment of the Linnaeansystem in England. " His name," heobserves, " and the connexion he wasknown to bear, as the favourite pupil ofhis great master, had of themselvessome share in exciting a curiosity whichled to information ; while his perfectacquaintance with the whole scheme,enabled him to explain its minutestparts, and elucidate all those obscuritieswith which, on a superficial view, itwas thought to be enveloped. I addto this, that the urbanity of his manners,and his readiness to afford every assistancein his power, joined to thatclearness and energy with which heeffected it, not only brought convictionof its excellence to those who were inclinedto receive it, but conciliated theminds, and dispelled the prejudices ofmany who had been averse towards it."The last part of this account is confirmedby the statement of one of hisintimate friends, who says that, to avery extensive knowledge, he added amode of communication, not only remarkablefor its readiness, but for sopeculiar a modesty, that he contrivedalmost to appear to receive instructionwhen he was bestowing it in the mostample manner. In person, he wasshort, fair, and fat, with small eyes,and a good-humoured expression ofcountenance. The only publicationknown of his, is a paper in the PhilosophicalTransactions, entitled Accountof the Gardenia (Jasminoides), thoughhe is said to have written several others.Linnaeus gave the name of Solander toa genus of plants, in honour of hisfriend.JAMES WATT.JAMES WATT, the son of a merchant,was born at Greenock, in Scotland,on the 19th of January, 1736.He received the first part of his educationat a school in his native place, andcompleted it at home, by his own diligence.The science of mechanics, forwhich he afterwards became so famous,formed, at an early age, his favouritestudy ; and, in conformity with his desire,he was, at the age of eighteen,apprenticed to a mathematical instructin London. The badstate of his health, however, which hadbefore retarded his progress at school,compelled him to return, after a year'sstay in the metropolis, to Scotland.This was all the instruction he ever receivedin the business for which he wasintended, yet he must have attainedconsiderable skill, as, in 1757, he, atthe recommendation of some relations,commenced the practice of it, at Glasgow,and was immediately appointedmathematical instrument-maker to thecollege. He continued to hold thissituation till 1763, when he married,left his apartments in the university, forahouse in the town of Glasgow, andcommenced the profession of a generalengineer. He soon acquired a high reputation; and in making surveys andestimates for canals, harbours, bridges,and other public works, was as extensivelyemployed in his own country, asBrindled had been in England.His attention to the employment ofsteam, as a mechanical agent, had been,in the first instance, excited by witnessingsome experiments of his friend Mr.John (afterwards Dr.) Robison, and hehad also made some experiments himself,with a view of ascertaining its expansiveforce. It was not, however,till 1763-4 that he began to devotehimself seriously to the investigation ofthe properties of steam, and to ascertainthose results upon which his famewas to be founded. An examination ofNewcomen's engine, a model of whichhad been sent him to repair, revived allhis former impressions respecting theradical imperfections of the atmosphericmachine, to the improvements of whichhe now ardently devoted himself. Oneof his first discoveries was, that therapidity with which water evaporates,depends simply upon the quantity ofheat which is imbibed, and this againon the extent of the surface of theSCIENCE,vessel containing the water, exposedto the fire. He ascertained also thequantity of coals necessary for theevaporation of any given quantity ofwater, the heat at which it boils undervarious pressures, and many other particularsnever before accurately determined.He now proceeded to attempt aremedy of the two grand defects ofNewcomen's engine the necessity ofcooling the cylinder before every strokeof the piston, by the water injected intoit ; and the non-employment of themachine, for a moving power, of theexpansive force of the steam. Onaccount of the first defect, a muchmore powerful application of heat, thanwould otherwise have been requisite,was demanded for the purpose of againheating the cylinder, when it was to berefilled with steam. To keep this vessel,therefore, permanently hot, was thegrand desideratum ; and Watt at lengthhit upon an expedient equally simpleand successful. His plan was to establisha communication, by an open pipe,between the cylinder and another vessel,the consequence of which would be,that when the steam was admitted intothe former, it would flow into the latter,so as to fill that also. Supposing, then,that the steam should here only be condensed,by being brought into contactwith cold water, or any other convenientmeans, a vacuum would be produced,into which, as a vent, moresteam would immediately rush fromthe cylinder; this steam would alsobe condensed ; and so the process wouldgo on, till all the steam had left thecylinder, and a perfect vacuum hadbeen effected in that vessel, without somuch as a drop of cold water havingtouched or entered it. The separatevessel alone, or the condenser, wouldbe cooled by the water used to condensethe steam ; which, instead of being anevil, would tend to quicken and promotethe condensation. Experimentsfully confirmed Watt in these views ;and the consequence was, not only asaving of three-fourths of the fuelformerly required to feed the engine,but a considerable increase of its power.In overcoming this difficulty, Wattwas conducted to another, improvement,which effected the complete removalof what we have described as thesecond radical imperfection of Newcomen'sengine, namely, its non-employment,for a moving power, of theexpansive force of the steam. Theeffectual way, it occurred to him, ofpreventing any air from escaping intothe parts of the cylinder below thepiston, would be to dispense with theuse of that element above the piston,and to substitute there likewise thesame contrivance as below, of alternatesteam and a vacuum. This was to beaccomplished by merely opening communicationsfrom the upper part of thecylinder to the boiler, on the one hand,and the condenser on the other ; andforming it, at the same time, into anair-tight chamber, by means of a cover,with only a hole in it to admit the rodor shank of the piston, which might,besides, without impeding its freedomof action, be padded with hemp, themore completely to exclude the air. Itwas so contrived, accordingly, by aproper arrangement of the cocks, andthe machinery connected with them,that while there was a vacuum in oneend of the cylinder, there should be anadmission of steam into the other ; andthe steam so admitted now served, notonly by its susceptibility of sudden condensation,to create the vacuum, butalso, by its expansive force, to impel thepiston.These were the principal fundamentalimprovements in an engine, which hassince been brought to such perfectionof action and power, as to formone of the most triumphant eras in thehistory of human ingenuity. Insteadof entering into all the subsequent contrivanceswhich Watt invented, wecannot give a better idea of his splendidsuccess, than by quoting the language ofa recent writer. " In the present stateof the engine, it appears a thing almostendowed with intelligence. It regulates,with perfect accuracy and uniformity,the number of its strokes in agiven time, counting or recording them,moreover, to tell how much work it hasdone, as a clock records the beats of itspendulum ; it regulates the quantity ofsteam admitted to work; the brisknessof the fire, the supply of water tothe boiler; the supply of coals to thefire ; it opens and shuts its valves withabsolute precision as to time and manner;it oils its joints; it takes out anyTHOMAS Martin.air which may accidentally .enter intoparts which should be vacuous ; and.when anything goes wrong, which itcannot of itself rectify, it warns its attendantsby ringing a bell ; yet, withallthese talents and qualities, and evenwhen exerting the power of six hundredhorses, it is obedient to the hand of achild ; its aliment is coal, wood, charcoal,or other combustible ; it consumesnone while idle ; it never tires, andwants no sleep; it is not subject tomalady when originally well made, andonly refuses to work when worn outwithage; it is equally active in allclimates, and will do work of any kind ;it is a water-pumper, a miner, a sailor,a cotton-spinner, a weaver, a blacksmith,a miller, &c. &c. ; and a smallengine, in the character of a steamponey, may be seen dragging after it.on a rail-road, a hundred tons of merchandize,or a regiment of soldiers, withgreater speed than that of our fleetestcoaches. It is the king of machines ;and a permanent realization of the geniiof eastern fable, whose supernaturalpowers were occasionally at the commandof man."Watt had, however, another difficultyto surmount ; that of bringing his inventioninto practice. Having no pecuniaryresources of his own, he appliedto Dr. Roebuck, who had just establishedthe Carron iron works, toadvance the requisite funds ; which heconsented to do, on having two-thirdsof the profits made over to him. Apatent was accordingly obtained in1769, and an engine soon after erected ;but the failure of Dr. Roebuck, thwartedthe project, for a time, and the subjectof our memoir returned to hisbusiness of a civil engineer. At length,in 1774, a proposal was made to him,to remove to Birmingham, and enterinto partnership with the celebratedhardware manufacturer, Mr. Boulton.Dr. Roebuck's share of the patent wasshortly afterwards transferred to Mr.Boulton, and the firm of Boulton andWatt commenced the business ofmaking steam-engines, in the year1775. From this date, Mr. Watt obtainedfrom parliament an extension ofhis patent for twenty-five years, in thecourse of which he added several newimprovements to the mechanism of hisengine. In particular, he exerted himself,for many years, in contriving thebest methods of making the action ofthe piston communicate a rotatory motionin various circumstances; and,between the years 1781 and 1785, hetook out four different patents, for inventionsrelating to this object.The invention of Watt was fullyappreciated in the scientific world. In1785, he was elected a fellow of theRoyal Society ; in 1806, LL.D., by theUniversity of Glasgow ; and, in 1808, amember of the French Institute. Hedied on the 25th of August, 1819, in theeighty-fourth year of his age, leavingbehind him a name that will descend topolity, in connexion with an inventionria has already gone far to revolutionizethe whole domain of humanindustry. " The trunk of an elephant,"it has been truly said of this machine,that can pick up a pin, or rend anoak, is as nothing to it. It can engravea seal, and crush masses of obduratemetal like wax before it ; draw out,without breaking, a thread as fine asgossamer ; and lift a ship of war, like abauble, in the air. It can embroidermuslin, and forge anchors ; cut steel intoribands, and impel loaded vessels againstthe fury of the winds and the waves."THOMAS Martin.THOMAS, son of the eminent botanicalprofessor, John Martyn, wasborn at Chelsea, in 1736. At the ageof five years and a half, he first went toschool with Mr. Robbery, with whomhe continued till seventeen, when hewas entered a student of EmmanuelCollege, Cambridge. He graduatedB. A. in 1756, when he obtained themathematical honour of senior optime ;and, shortly after, he was elected oneof the new fellows of Sidney SussexCollege, on the reforming of that Society,by Dr. Paris, who had beenSCIENCE.compelled to sequestrate some of thefellowships, in order to procure fundsfor repairing the college. As such hegraduated M. A. in 1759, and, aboutthe same time, he was ordained. On hisfather resigning the botanical chair, in1761, though powerful interest wasmade in favour of the late Sir JamesSmith, president of the Linnaean Society,the university appointed thesubject of our memoir to the vacancy.Upon his election, he showed his goodsense, by deviating from the commoncourse, and announcing a course ofpublic lectures, in English, instead ofLatin. They were received with greatapplause, and he further distinguishedhimself by voluntarily adding to hisduties, illustrations of the animal andmineral kingdoms, as far as they wereconnected with botanical science. Hisconduct and abilities gave so muchsatisfaction to government, that theyallowed him ^100 a-year salary, oncondition that a course of lecturesshould be delivered annually : and, onthe accession to office of Mr. Pitt, thesalary was raised to 200, the officemade a patent one, and Martyn appointedthe first regius professor. Inthe interim, in 1763, he published hisFlan toe Cantabrigienses, which growwild in the county of Cambridge, disposedaccording to the system of Linnaeus.This was followed by hisHerbationes Ca-itabrigienses, or directionsto the places where the foregoingmay be found, comprehended in threebotanical excursions ; to which wereadded, lists of the more rare plantsgrowing in many parts of England andWales; and a short account of Dr.Walker's donation to the BotanicGarden, at Cambridge, the first one therefounded. In 1764, he succeeded the lateDr. Ellison, as tutor of Sidney SussexCollege ; and, in the same year, he servedthe university office of proctor. In 1766,he graduated B. D. ; and, in 1771, appearedhis Catalogus Forti BotanicCantabrigiensis ; to the second editionof which, he added his Botanical Lectures.He had previously undertaken,in conjunction with Dr. Lattice, totranslate, from the Italian, The Accountof the Antiquities of Herculaneum ; andthe first volume was published in 1773,containing the pictures: but the reductionof the price of the original, by orderof the King of Naples, and the want ofencouragement at home, put an end tothe further progress of the work. Mr.Martyn, about this time, came intopossession of the family living of Lud-marshall,in Wiltshire ; and, in 1776, waspresented, by one of his pupils, SirJohn Borlase Warren, to the vicarageof Little Marlow, in the samecounty. Another of his pupils wasMr. Hartopp Wigley, of Leicestershire,with whom he travelled through France,Switzerland, and Italy, from whichoriginated his Sketch of a Tour throughSwitzerland, France, and Italy, in threeseparate publications. In the interval,he printed, in 1775, Elements of NaturalHistory; and, in 1785, Rousseau'sLetters on the Elements of Botany,translated from the French ; of thisa second edition appeared in 1787, inwhich year he was preferred to theliving of Edgeways, by the Earl ofCoventry. After his return fromabroad, he resided on his living atLittle Marlow for about three years ;at the expiration of which period, heremoved to London, on accepting theoffice of honorary secretary to theSociety for the Improvement of NavalArchitecture.In 1793, appeared his Language ofBotany, a dictionary of the terms madeuse of in that science, of which a quartoedition was printed in 1807. This wasfollowed by his Flora Rustica, in fourvolumes, octavo ; Description of theRhadamanthus Multiflos ; and, lastly, byhis edition of Miller's celebrated Gardener'sand Botanist's Dictionary, whichhe dedicated to Sir Joseph Banks.This was his greatest work, in connexionwith his favourite science, andto which he added a complete enumerationand designation of all plantshitherto known, with their generic andspecific characters, places of growth,times of flowering, and uses, both medicinaland economical. It was publishedin four folio volumes, the first ofwhich was finished in 1803, and thelast in 1807. In 1818, he removed tothe rectory of Pertenhall, in Bedfordshire,to which he was preferred byone of his relatives ; and he continuedto reside there till his death, which tookplace on the 3rd of June, 1825. Heleft one son, a Moravian minister, bythe sister of the master of his collegeCHARLES HUTTON.Dr. William Ellison, whom he hadmarried about 1771. He was a man oflearning, ability, and singular patience ;and it was to the great regret of themembers of the University of Cambridge,that this botanical patriarchwas for a long period prevented lecturingby the infirmities of age. Asapreacher, he was distinguished bystrong sense, accurate knowledge ofhuman nature, and comprehensivescriptural learning. He contributedObservations on the Language of Botany,to the Transactions of the LinnaeanSociety, of which he was a member ;and besides the works already mentioned,published The English Connoisseur,and an edition of his father'sDissertation on the Mneid, with a lifeof the author.CHARLES HUTTON.CHARLES HUTTON, the youngestson of a viewer of mines, was born atNewcastle-upon-Tyne, on the 14th ofAugust, 1737. Having received aninjury in his right arm, which preventedhim from following the occupationof his brothers in the mines, hewas kept at the village school of Ben-well,until he was able to read andwrite. The only subsequent educationhe received was at Desmond, under thetuition of the Rev % Mr. Ivison, and athis native place, where he attended anevening school, kept by Mr. James, forthe purpose of advancing his knowledgein mathematics, for which science hehad manifested an early predilection.On the retirement of both his instructorsfrom their respective schools, he,successively, occupied their situations;but, although he had many pupils atDesmond, his success did not hinderhim from devoting much of his time toa sect of methodists, of which he becameso enthusiastic a member, as tocompose sermons, and preach for them.His zeal, however, abated on his removalto Newcastle, in April, 1760,when he put forth an advertisement ofhis school, in which he stated thatsuch as intend to go through a regularcourse of arts and sciences, may becompletely grounded therein at large."The number of his pupils rapidly increased; and, among others, was thefuture Lord Eldon, who, in a letter toGeneral Mutton, the son of the subject ofour memoir, observes, " full sixty yearshave passed since I received the benefitof your venerable father's instructions,and that benefit I regard as one of themany blessings I have enjoyed in life."Continuing to advance in mathematicalknowledge, Hntton, in March, 1764,published a treatise on arithmetic ; and,in the same year, he made his firstappearance in The Ladies' Diary ; awork with which he remained connectedas contributor, or editor, for fifty-sixyears.In 1770, he published, by subscription,in fifty sixpenny numbers, quarto,A Treatise on Mensuration, which isby far the best existing work on thesubject, and was, at the time of its publication,a desideratum in the science.He was engaged, during the same year,by the corporation of Newcastle, tomake a survey of the town, which wasexecuted with great skill and accuracy.The fall of the Newcastle bridge andothers, by the great flood, in November,1771, drew Mutton's attention to thesubject of their construction ; and, inthe same year, he published The Principlesof Bridges, containing the mathematicaldemonstrations of the propertiesof the arches, the thickness of the piers,the force of the water against them, &c. ;together with practical observations anddirections drawn from the whole. Ofthis work, which laid the foundation ofhis future fame, and became a standardone with architects, a new edition waspublished, a few years ago, in consequenceof the projection of a new Londonbridge ; and the doctor, in referenceto a letter received from the bridgehouse committee, held a conferenceupon the subject only three days priorto his death.In 1773, the professorship at theRoyal Military Academy at Woolwichbecoming vacant, Mutton, at the sug-SCIENCE.gestion of a friend, travelled to London,for the purpose of entering himself acandidate for the situation, which theMarquess Townshend had determinedto bestow on the individual who shouldappear most fit for it, at a public examination.On this occasion, says Dr.Gregory, one of his biographers, hebore away the prize from no less thanten competitors, and received, at histemporary lodgings, the notice of hisappointment from the master-general ofthe ordnance, who had never before somuch as heard his name. He received hisappointment on the 24th of May, 1773;was soon afterwards elected a fellow ofthe Royal Society ; and, about the sametime, became editor to all the almanacpublished in England, except The Gentleman'sDiary and Poor Robin. In1776, he published, in the PhilosophicalTransactions, a paper relative to A NewMethod of finding Simple and QuicklyConverging Series ; and, in 1778, anotheron the Force of Exploded Gunpowder,and the Velocities of CannonBalls, which was rewarded with the Copleygold medal, and gained him muchdistinction, both at home and abroad.In 1779, the degree of LL.D. was conferredupon him by the University ofEdinburgh; and, about the same period,he was appointed foreign secretary tothe Royal Society ; to the Transactionsof which he shortly afterwards communicatedAn Account of the Calculationsmade from the Survey and Measures,taken at Mount Schehallien, in Perth-shire,in order to ascertain the meanDensity of the Earth. His last paperwritten for the Society was in 1783,entitled A Project for a New Divisionof the Quadrant. In 1784, he secededfrom that body, together with Dr.Horsey and others, in consequence ofa quarrel with Sir Joseph Banks.In 1785, he published his MathematicalTables, with a preface, containingan original and valuable history of thesubject, a work which has reached fiveeditions ; and, in the two followingyears, he brought out his Tracts onMathematical Subjects, and Conic Sections,for the use of the academy atWoolwich. The latter was so highlyapproved of by the Duke of Richmond,then master general of the ordnance,that he took occasion to present thedoctor at court to his majesty. In 1795he published A Mathematical and PhilosophicalDictionary, in two volumes,quarto ; which was followed by A Courseof Mathematics, and a translation, withnotes, of Ozanam's Philosophical Re-creations. From 1803 to 1809, he wasengaged, in conjunction with Drs. Shawand Pearson, in completing An Abridgmentof the Philosophical Transactions,which was published in eighteen thickquarto volumes. The doctor received,for his share of the labour, 6,000, andthe publishers lost by the work nearlydouble that sum. In 1807, he resignedhis professorship, and was assigned apension of 500 per annum. In retirementhe carried on an extensivecorrespondence with English philosophers,and with Laplace, and othereminent foreign mathematicians. Hewas also long and usefully employed inbringing out new and improved editionsof his works ; and, at the age of eighty-four,he accomplished a laborious correctionof the computations in Mr.Henry Cavendish's papers, on the meandensity of the earth. Although thelatter years of his life were passed incontinual ill health, he retained hischeerfulness and faculties to the last,and was often heard to declare, duringthe last twelvemonth of his life, that itwas the happiest he had ever experienced.He died on the 27th of January,1823, leaving a son and twodaughters, by the first of his wives, whowas a dress-maker, and his own cousin.Dr. Mutton's scientific attainmentswere of a very high order, and wereaccompanied no less by a desire of acquiring,than of conveying, instruction,n private life he possessed manyamiable feelings, and performed manybenevolent actions ; although he ischarged with an over-fondness formoney, and with having lived in a mannermore consonant to the dictates ofpassion, than of morality. After theviolent temper of his first wife had inducedhim to leave her, he formed aconnexion with two other women, thelast of whom became his second wife.Few men, whose success in life hasbeen dependent upon their talents andindustry, have been more fortunatethan Dr. Mutton. At one period, hepossessed 60,000. His works broughthim in large sums ; and it may be observedthat the sale of them was muchSIR WILLIAM HERSCHEL.facilitated by his possessing the editorshipof The Ladies' Diary : it being apractice with a class of contributors tothat publication, to make references,upon every possible occasion, to thedoctor's treatises : an affront to hismodesty which he was at all times disposedto forgive. He made, latterly,some injudicious investments in bridgecompanies, which caused a considerablereduction in the amount of hisformer property. Considering theaffluent circumstances to which heattained, he certainly did not makethat liberal distribution of his moneywhich might have been expected ; butthe following anecdote, related by hisbiographer, Dr. Olynthus Gregory,sufficiently proves the generosity ofhis heart, if not of his hand : " Onpaying him one of my periodical visits,about five years ago, I found himreading a letter, the tears tricklingdown his cheeks. Read this,' said he,putting the letter into my hand. Itwas from the wife of a country schoolmaster,describing how, by a series ofmisfortunes, he had been reduced topenury, and had just been hurried offto gaol, whilst the sheriff's officers hadseized his furniture, leaving her andher children without a shilling. ' Canyou rely upon this statement?' I asked.Yes,' said he; 'I have informationfrom another quarter, which confirmsits truth.' ' Then, what do you meanto dp ?' 'I mean,' replied the doctor,smiling, 'to demand a guinea from you,and the same sum from every friendwho calls upon me to-day ; then tomake up the sum twenty guineas, andsend it off by this night's post.' "SIR WILLIAM HERSCHEL.i. HIS eminent astronomer, the son ofa musician, of Hanover, was born thereonthe 15th of November, 1738. Hewas brought up to his father's profession,and, at the age of fourteen, enteredthe band of the Hanoverianguards, with a detachment of which hecame to England, about the year 1757.By his own wish he remained in themetropolis, in the hope of pushing hisfortune, which he did in the midst ofmany difficulties. The lessons whichhe gave in music gained him but aprecarious subsistence, until the year1765, when a gentleman, who admiredhis abilities, procured him the situationof organist, at Halifax. In the followingyear, he was appointed to the sameoffice in the octagon chapel at Bath,where a good salary, an addition ofpupils, and numerous musical engagements,at private and public concerts,held out to him a fair prospect of fortune,if not of fame.A change, however, took place in thenature of his studies, which ultimatelyturned his thoughts altogether from hisprofession. He had already made himselfmaster of the Latin, Italian, and ofthe elements of the Greek language,when he set down to the perusal ofDr. Robert Smith's celebrated Treatiseon Harmonics. Finding that he couldnot properly understand it without aknowledge of mathematics, he appliedhimself to the study of that sciencewith such zeal and partiality, that itsoon became the engrossing pursuit ofall his leisure hours. Frequently, wearetold, after a fatiguing day's work,of fourteen or sixteen hours, among hispupils, he would, on his return homeat night, repair to his mathematics, bywayof relaxation. He was thus soonin a situation to enter upon the differentbranches of science depending uponthe mathematics, and the first that hefixed on were astronomy and optics.Having viewed the heavens with a two-feetGregorian telescope, which he hadborrowed, he was so much interestedwith the instrument, that he commissioneda friend in London to purchasehim one of a larger size. The price,however, being more than he couldafford, he resolved to attempt the constructionof one with his own hands.He succeeded; a five-feet Newtonianreflector, which he completed in 1774,was the commencement of that brilliantseries of discoveries and improvementswhich he afterwards effected.SCIENCE.He now became so much attachedto his new pursuits, that he begangradually to decline pupils and professionalengagements. In a very shortperiod of time, he produced telescopesof seven, ten, and even twenty feet focaldistance. His perseverance in makingthe mirrors was astonishing; he wouldwork at one for twelve or fourteenhours without quitting it, not even liftinghis hand to take his food, which wasEut into his mouth, on these, occasions,y his sister. It was more by naturaltact than rule that he gave them theirproper shape ; and he would reject oneafter the other, after having completedthem, if they did not quite suit his ideas.For his seven-feet reflector, he is said tohave finished and tried no less than twohundred mirrors, before he found onethat satisfied him.Herschel had been engaged for abouta year and a half in making a regularsurvey of the heavens, when, on theevening of the 13th of March, 1781, hediscovered, among other stars, one ofunusually steady radiance. Continuingto watch it, he found, in the course ofa few hours, a perceptible change in itsposition ; and, after having repeated hisobservations for some nights, he cameto the conclusion that it was a hithertoundiscovered planet. Dr. Masklelyne,when informed of it, imagined it to benothing else than a comet, but furtherinvestigation completely dissipated thiserror, and established the opinion ofthe subject of our memoir. The newplanet was called after him, GeorgianSitus; though Herschel, or Uranus, isthe name usually applied to it by continentalastronomers. " Subsequent observations,"says one of his-biographers,"made chiefly by Herschel himself, haveascertained many particulars respectingit, some of which are well calculated tofill us with astonishment at the powersof the sublime science which can wingits way so far into the immensity ofspace, and bring us back informationso precise and various. In the firstplace, the diameter of this new globelias been found to be nearly four and ahalf times larger than that of our own.Its size altogether is about eighty timesthat of our earth. Its year is as longas eighty-three of ours. Its distancefrom the sun is nearly eighteen hundredmillions of miles, or more than nineteentimes that of the earth. Its density,as compared with that of the earth, isnearly as twenty-two to one hundred;so that its entire weight is not far fromeighteen times that of our planet.Finally, the force of gravitation near itssurface is such, that falling bodies descendonly through fourteen feet duringthe first second, instead of thirty-twofeet, as with us. Herschel afterwardsdiscovered, successively, no fewer thansix satellites, or moons, belonging tohis new planet."The discovery of the Georgian Situsmade Herschel's name universallyknown, and he was rewarded, by theking, with a pension of 300 perannum. This enabled him to give uphis engagements at Bath, and to devotehimself entirely to science, for whichpurpose he removed to Slough, nearWindsor. In 1783, he discovered avolcanic mountain in the moon ; and,with the aid of his famous telescope offorty feet long, which he completed forthe king in 1789, two others wereplainly distinguished, emitting fire fromtheir summits. In the same year, hediscovered a new satellite of Saturn,being the sixth that had been observedattendant upon that planet, and aseventh was subsequently detected bythe same instrument. In 1802, he laidbefore the Royal Society a catalogue offive thousand new nebulae, nebulousstars, planetary nebulae, and clusters ofstars, which he had discovered. He alsocontributed to the Philosophical Transactions,the result of his observations(in which he is said to have beenassisted by his sister Caroline), till 1816,in which year he was made a knightof the Guelph order, having beenpreviously created LL. D. by the Universityof Oxford. He continued topursue his astronomical researches tillwithin a few years of his death, whichtook place at Slough, on the 23rd ofAugust, 1822.A more ingenious, profound, andoriginal cultivator of astronomicalscience than Herschel, has seldom appeared.The ardour with which hedevoted himself to it, has certainlynever been exceeded. He is said, formany years, never to have been in bedat any hour during which the starswere visible, and to have made all hisobservations in the open air, whateverJOHN Robinson.was the season of the year. The mannerin which he made use of his telescopeswas no less peculiar, than hismode of fabricating them. He seemsto have verified Ramsden's observationto his workmen after having completedone of his best telescopes : " This. Ibelieve, is the highest degree of perfectionthat we, opticians by profession,will ever arrive at ; if any improvementof importance shall ever, afterthis, be introduced in the making oftelescopes, it will be by some one whohas not been taught his art by us."The forty-foot telescope of Herschel, atSlough, has been taken down, and replacedby another of half the length,constructed by Mr. J. Herschel, theson of the subject of our memoir,and scarcely less eminent. Indeed,Herschel himself is said to haveultimately been of opinion, that notelescope could surpass, in magnifyingpower, one of from twenty to twenty-threefeet in length. Lalande, theFrench astronomer, states, in his continuationof Montucla's History of theMathematics, that he was informed, byGeorge the Third, that it was at hisdesire that Herschel was induced tomake the telescope, at Slough, of theextraordinary length he did; his ownwish being that it should not be morethan thirty feet long.JOHN Robinson.JOHN Robinson, the son of a merchant,who had retired upon his fortune,was born at his father's estate atBoghall, in the county of Stirling, inthe year 1739. He received both hisschool and academical education atGlasgow, where he was remarkable forgreat quickness of apprehension, andretentiveness of memory. He soonbecame a proficient in the classics,and made considerable progress in thevarious branches of science which hestudied under Professor Moore, Smith,Dick, and Leechman. His instructorin mathematics was Dr. Robert Simson,under whom he became profoundlyskilled in the different departments ofthat science, for which he had formed aparticular predilection. But, as was tobe expected, under the tuition of sostaunch a geometrician as Dr Simson,Robison, though well acquainted withthe modes of algebra, soon began toprefer to them the more accurate,though less comprehensive, method ofancient geometry ; assigning, as hisreason, that in the longest demonstration,the geometrician has always clearand accurate ideas, which the most expertalgebraist can very seldom have.He informed Dr. Gleig that he firstattracted the regard of Dr. Simson byowning his dislike of algebra, and byreturning a neat geometrical solution ofa problem, which had been given out tothe class in an algebraic form. It shouldbe observed, however, that he acknowledgedto have adopted this mode ofsolution, only because he could notsolve it in the manner required of theclass.Mr. Robison had been intended byhis father for the church ; but some conscientiousscruples interfering with hispursuit of that profession, he sought foranother, in which he might apply hismathematical knowledge. He relinquishedall thoughts of a clerical life,not, says his biographer, out of any scepticismconcerning the truth of Christianity,nor because he did not entertainjust notions of the importance oftheological knowledge, but because hisinquiries had led him to be dissatisfiedwith some tenets in the establishedcreed, and he was too honest to subscribewhat he could not believe.In 1756, Mr. Robison graduatedM. A. ; and, in 1757, upon the death ofDr. Dick, jun., who had been hisfather's assistant in the professorship ofnatural philosophy, the subject of ourmemoir offered himself as a temporarycoadjutor to the professor. He wasstrongly recommended, as a fit personto fill this situation, by the celebratedAdam Smith ; but the professor thoughthim too young for the place. In declininghis services, however, he expresseda high opinion of his abilities,SCIENCE.and shortly after joined with Dr. Simon,in recommending him to Dr. Blair,prebendary of Westminster, whom theyunderstood to be in quest of a youngman to accompany Edward, Duke ofYork, to sea, in the capacity of hismathematical tutor. With a view ofobtaining this situation, Mr. Robisonwent to London, in 1758 ; but wasmuch disappointed and disconcerted,on his arrival, to find that his hopeswere built " upon no other foundationthan some vague scheme of Dr. Blair's,on the supposition that the Duke ofYork should go to sea during the ensuingsummer." instead, however, of returningto Glasgow, he embraced theopportunity of going to sea, as mathematicaltutor to the duke's intendedcompanion, Mr. Knowles, the eldestson of Admiral Knowles, with whomhe embarked for Quebec, on board theNeptune, of ninety guns. In the courseof the voyage, Mr. Knowles was appointedlieutenant on board the RoyalWilliam, into which ship he was accompaniedby Mr. Robison, who, athis own request, was rated midshipman.In this ship, he used to say, he hadspent the three happiest years of hislife ; and it was here that he acquiredthat knowledge of the art of seamanship,which he has displayed, in thearticle drawn up by him on the subject,in The Encyclopaedia Britannica. Whilein the river St. Lawrence, he noticed aconnexion between the aurora borealisand the direction of the magnetic needle,an account of which was afterwardsinserted in some of the London newspapers,with an invitation to navigatorsto pay attention to the subject, andcommunicate their observations to theRoyal Society. " An anecdote whichMr. Robison used to tell," says Mr.Playfair, " deserves well to be mentioned:He happened to be on duty inthe boat in which General Wolfe wentto visit some of their posts the nightbefore the battle, which was expectedto be decisive of the fate of the campaign.The evening was fine, and thescene, considering the work they wereengaged in, and the morning to whichthey were looking forward, sufficientlyimpressive. As they rowed along, thegeneral, with much feeling, repeatednearly the whole of Gray's Elegy(which had appeared not long before,and was yet but little known) to anofficer, who sat with him in the sternof the boat ; adding, as he concluded,that he would prefer being the authorof that poem, to the glory of beatingthe French tomorrow." On the morrow,the general lost his life.Mr. Robison saw much active service,both on land and sea, during thesiege of Quebec, and he was also employedin taking surveys of differentparts of the river. After the surrenderof the city, he sailed with his pupil, inthe Royal William, for about a yearand a half, the chief part of which timewas passed in the Bay of Biscay, andon the coast of Spain and Portugal.Lieutenant Knowles was shortly afterwardsappointed commander of thePeregrine sloop-of-war, in which shipMr. Robison remained with him until1762. In that year he was engaged,by Lord Anson, then at the head ofthe Admiralty, with a promise of futurepreferment, to proceed to Jamaica, forthe purpose of trying Harrison's timekeeper.Having performed the objectof his voyage, he returned to England,where news, equally distressing and unpropitious,awaited him. Intelligencehad been received of the loss of thePeregrine, together with that of CaptainKnowles, and the whole crew ; LordAnson was dead, and peace seemed tobe at no great distance : thus puttingan end to all his hopes of immediateadvancement in the navy. Under thesecircumstances, he determined upon returningto Glasgow, whither Admiral(then Sir Charles) Knowles, soon afterwardssent his remaining son, to beplaced under his care. Mr. Robisonresumed his academical studies withgreat assiduity ; so that, in a short time,he had not only considerably improvedhimself in mathematics and philosophy,but also made himself acquainted withastronomy, civil law, and chemistry.This last he studied under Dr. Black,and with such success, that when thateminent professor removed to Edinburgh,in 1767, the senate of the Universityof Glasgow appointed the subjectof our memoir to succeed him aslecturer; of this office he continued toperform the duties for three years, andm such a manner as to extend both hisown reputation and that of the university.JOHN Robinson.He resigned his professorship, in1770, in consequence of an offer fromSii Charles Knowles, who had been invitedto St. Petersburghh, by the EmpressCatherine, to assist in improving hermarine, to accompany him to the Russiancapital, in the capacity of his officialsecretary, with a salary'of 200 perannum." They set out for Petersburg),overland, and stopping in their way atLarge, Mr. Robison was there admittedinto a lodge of freemasons, and, in processof time, he attained the rank ofScotch master. He had been about twoyears at St. Petersburghh, when theRussian board of Admiralty appointedhim inspector-general of the corps ofmarine cadets ; an academy, consistingof about four hundred young gentlemenand scholars, under the tuition of fortyteachers. Before entering upon theduties of this office, which gives to theperson filling it, the rank of lieutenant-colonel,Mr. Robison was required, accordingto the custom of Russia, to provehimself a gentleman, or what is therecalled, a dvoranin. His duty was tovisit daily every class of the academy ;to receive weekly reports from eachmaster, concerning the diligence andprogress of every person in his class ;and to advance, twice yearly, the pupilsinto higher classes, according to theirrespective merits. The military headof the academy was General Kutuzoff,who, Mr. Robison says, approved of allhis decisions, adopted all his measures,supported his authority against intrigueand opposition, and even introducedhim to the grand duke, as an admirerof the Russian language, of which hisimperial highness was the declaredpatron. The academy, over which Mr.Robison presided, was at Cronstadt,the dreariness of which place in winter,made him come to the resolution of resigninghis situation, after he had heldit for four years. He was also inducedto take this step in consequence of aninvitation he had received from themagistrates and town-council of Edinburgh,to be professor of natural philosophyin their university. Before leavingCronstadt, he presented to theAdmiralty College a plan for renderingthe superb docks at that place of someuse, by means of a steam-engine, whichwas subsequently adopted with success.At his departure from Russia, the grandduke requested him to take with himsome young men from the corps ofcadets, to receive the benefit of his instructionsin Scotland; promising hima pension of four hundred rubles (about80 per annum). This pension, however,was only paid during the threeyears in which his Russian pupils residedin Edinburgh ; being afterwardswithheld, because, as Mr. Robison toldDr. Gleig, he did not continue a correspondencewith the academy, andneglected to communicate to them allthe British improvements in marineeducation.The expectations which had beenraised of Mr. Robison's lectures fromthe chair of natural philosophy were notdisappointed. " In accuracy of definition,"says his biographer, " clearness,brevity, and elegance of demonstration ;in neatness and precision in experiments;in the comprehensiveness of hiscourse, extending to every branch ofphysics and of mixed mathematics, andeven in fulness of detail in each particulardivision, a more perfect system ofacademical instruction is not easily tobe imagined. With respect to the complaintsmade by some of his pupils, thatthey could not always pursue him, withclearness of understanding, through hisscenes of demonstrations, they are to beascribed, not to the want of order orperspicuity in the tutor, but to the deficiencyof the pupils in that preparatoryacquaintance with the pure mathematics,without which they could not bequalified to enter on the study of naturalphilosophy."Mr. Robison was not only indefatigablein the discharge of his duties asprofessor, but employed much of hisleisure time in the promotion of mathematicalscience by his literary exertions.Too . close an application at lengthbrought on ill health, accompanied bysuch a depression of spirits, as preventedhim, for some years, from delivering lectures,though he was enabled to resumethem towards the latter part of his life.In 1783, he was chosen general secretaryto the Royal Society of Edinburgh, onits incorporation by charter, in that year,with the Royal Society, a situationwhich he held till within a few years ofhis death. In 1798, he was presentedwith the diploma of LL.D. by the AmericanCollege, in New Jersey; and, inSCIENCE.the following year, he receive-d the samedegree from the University of Glasgow.In 1800, he was unanimously electedforeign member of the Imperial Academyof Sciences at St. Petersburghh, inthe room of Dr. Black. His death tookplace on the 30th of January, 1805.In person, Dr. Robison was considerablyabove the middle stature ; he haduncommonly handsome features, a physiognomynoble and dignified, but subduedby a tenderness of expression,characterising the usual benevolence ofhis nature, and deepened with a tingeof sorrow, which his countenance hadgradually derived from his bodily infirmities.His manners were elegant,and his powers of conversation considerable; and from his, having mixedmuch with the world before he beganto write, his works partook a little of theease and fluency, and diffuseness ofconversational language.- After his death, Professor Playfairundertook to draw up an account of thelife and writings of the subject of ourmemoir, but could only find time toperform the biographical part of his undertaking; and the editing of Dr. Robinson'sworks, in consequence, devolvedupon Dr. Brewster. The separate publicationsof Dr. Robison are, a treatise insupport of the ministerial politics of theday, entitled Proofs of a Conspiracyagainst all the Religions and Governmentsof Europe, carried on in the SecretMeetings of Freemasons, Illuminati,and Reading Societies, &c. ; Elementsof Mechanical Philosophy, and Dr.Black's Lectures on the Elements ofChemistry, with valuable notes of hisown. In the first work, which wentthrough four editions in two years, heattempts to show the existence of a conspiracyon the part of the foreign lodgesof freemasons ; and adduces, in supportof the supposed fact, the statementsand allegations of several French andGerman writers. Many of them, however,he would, in all probability, nothave implicitly admitted, had not hismind been powerfully influenced at thetime by credulity, terror, or that depressionof spirits to which we have beforealluded. A copy of his edition of Dr.Black's Elements was sent by him tothe Emperor of Russia, in return forwhich that monarch presented him witha box, set with diamonds. He alsocommunicated several papers to theEdinburgh Philosophical Transactions ;and wrote, for The Encyclopaedia Britannica,the greater part of the articlesin mixed and pure mathematics, whichare considered the best of the originalarticles in that compilation. The chiefof them are included in his System ofMechanical Philosophy, of which thefirst volume appeared in 1804, and towhich three were added and publishedby Dr. Brewster, in 1822, with a volumeof plates. His articles in The EncyclopaediaBritannica are, Physics, Pneumatics,Precession, Projectiles, Pumps,Resistance, Rivers, Roof, Speaking,Relation, Seamanship, Signal, Sound,Specific Gravity, Statics, Steam, SteamEngine, Steelyard, Strength of Materials,Telescope, Tide, Trumpet, Variation,and Water Works: and, in theSupplement to the third edition of theEncyclopaedia, Arch, Astronomy, Bos-conch'sTheory, Carpentry, Centre,Dynamics, Electricity, Impulsion,Machinery, Magnetism, Mechanics,Percussion, Piano-Forte, Position,Temperament, Thunder, Trumpet,Tschirnahus, and Watch-work. Thesedissertations were composed under theinfluence of that painful disease, withwhich their author was afflicted for along period of years; yet they everywheredisplay a knowledge of mechanicalphilosophy at once practical andprofound; and are frequently enrichedwith the most original views, and ingeniousinventions.Although," says Dr. Brewster, in hispreface to the work above-mentioned,Dr. Robison' s name cannot be associatedwith the greatest discoveries ofthe century which he adorned, yet thememory of his talents and virtues willbe long cherished by his country. Imbuedwith the genuine spirit of thephilosophy which he taught, he wasone of the warmest patrons of genius,wherever it was found. His mind wasnobly elevated above the mean jealousiesof rival ambition ; and his loveof science and of justice was too ardentto allow him either to depreciate thelabours of others, or transfer them tohimself. To these great qualities, as aphilosopher, Dr. Robison added all themore estimable endowments of domesticand social life. His friendshipwas at all times generous and sincere ;SIR JOSEPH BANKS.his piety was ardent and unostentatious; his patriotism was of the mostpure and exalted character; and, likethe immortal Newton, whose memoryhe cherished with a peculiar reverence,he was pre-eminently entitled to theappellation of a Christian patriot andphilosopher." Dr. Robison was survivedby his wife, and a family of threesons and one daughter.SIR JOSEPH BANKS.THIS distinguished naturalist wasborn in Argyle Street, London, on the13th of February, 1743. Such, at least,is the date and place of his birth givenin the Elope Historique, by the BaronCuvier, which was read to the RoyalAcademy of Sciences, at Paris, and issaid to contain the only authentic particularsthat have appeared respectinghis life. Most of his English biographers,however, assert that he was born onthe 13th of December, in the aboveyear, at bis father's seat, RevelryAbbey, Lincolnshire. He was the sonof a gentleman of fortune, and receivedhis education at Harrow, and Christ'sCollege, Oxford. At the university heattained considerable proficiency in theclassics, but the chief object of his pursuitwas natural history, and, in particular,botany. For this science, heevinced a most ardent predilection,reading various works connected withit, and making frequent excursions inthe neighbourhood for the purpose ofcollecting plants. In one or these peregrinations,he fell asleep, from fatigue,under a hedge, and being surprised inthat condition, was taken before a magistrate,on suspicion of being a thiefor a poacher. The large property intowhich he came, at the age of eighteen,on the death of his father, did notentice him from his favourite pursuits,but rather encouraged him to pursuethem with redoubled ardour. He quittedthe university on coming of age,and, soon after, set out on a voyage toNewfoundland and the Labrador coast;in the course of which he made a mostvaluable collection, not only of plants,but also of insects, and other naturalproductions. The zeal and ability hethus manifested in the cause of science,were, on his return, called into actionon a more important expedition. Hewas appointed to accompany the celirated Captain Cook in his first voyageround the world ; on which occasion,as we have stated in our memoir of Dr.Solander, he chose that eminent pupilof Linnaeus to be his assistant. Healso engaged draftsmen and painters, todelineate such objects of interest asshould not admit of transportation orpreservation ; and, in fact, did everythingin his power to give effect to thecharacter in which he was to accompanythe expedition. He sailed fromEngland in August, 1768, and returnedin June, 1771, with a most valuablecollection of specimens, some of whichhe had procured at the hazard of hislife.The reader may form some idea ofthe enthusiasm with which he carriedon his researches, and of the perils intowhich it led him, by reading the accountof his excursion in Terra del Fuego, asrelated in Dr. Hawkesworth's accountof Cook's first voyage, and to which wehave alluded in our memoir of Dr.Solander. Two of their party actuallyperished from cold ; and both the doctorand the subject of our memoir mustinevitably have shared the same fate,had they yielded to the inclination tosleep which affected them. Mr. Banks'sornithological acquisitions in his routeto the north-west were very considerable,as, some days, he killed no lessthan sixty-two birds with his own hand.During his stay at Otaheite, his judiciousconduct and pleasing mannersdid much to conciliate the natives, andwith the females in particular, he appearsto have been a great favourite.Malignity and levity," says one ofhis biographers, " did not fail to interpretthose attentions not exactly inthe most innocent or charitable manner.As an instance of this may be mentionedthe Poetical Epistle, feigned tobe addressed to Sir Joseph from herSCIENCE.majesty of Otaheite ; the credit ofwhich piece of satire was attributed,whether justly or not, to the late ProfessorPerson." Be this as it may, alltie Otaheitans witnessed his departurewith regret ; and Tupia, prime ministerto the Queen Oberea, insisted onaccompanying him to England. Heaccordingly embarked with Mr. Banks,but died before the vessel reached itsdestination.The subject of our memoir's principalcollection of specimens was broughtfrom Otaheite, New Zealand, andAustralia, but he had the misfortuneto lose a considerable part of thoserelating to the latter country. WhenCaptain Cook's second expedition wasresolved upon, Mr. Banks expressed adesire again to accompany him, andhad made all the necessary preparationsfor embarking, when he discoveredthat some intrigue, set on footby Sir Hugh Palliser, had occasionedthe employment of other parties by theAdmiralty. Under these circumstances,he resolved to equip a vessel at his ownexpense; and having done so, he setsail, accompanied by Dr. Solander, Dr.Lind, and De Toil, a Swedish naturalist,for Iceland, in July, 1772. Hisvoyage was as productive, in a scientificpoint of view, as his former one, andgained him a proportionate accession ofreputation. In the course of it, hevisited the island of Staffa, where hediscovered the cave of Fingal, andreached the summit of Mount Declaringthe first traveller that had doneso. We should have stated, that, in17G6, Mr. Banks was elected a fellowof the Royal Society ; of which hesucceeded Sir John Pringle, as president,,in 1778; and continued to fillthat honourable station for more thanforty years. In 1781, he was createda baronet ; invested with the order ofthe Bath, in 1795; and, in 1797, wasmade a member of the privy-council.The last appointment does not seem tohave been very appropriate, for SirJoseph seldom, if ever, mingled inpolitics. He died at his house in SohoSquare, London, on the 19th of March,1820.The character of Sir Joseph Banks,as a man of science, was called inquestion both before and after hisdeath ; and he was ridiculed by PeterPindar and others, as a mere childishcollector of curiosities, brought togetherwithout knowledge, and storedup without any purpose. That he haduseful aims in view, however, is not tobe doubted ; though we are inclined tothink his chief merit consisted in theencouragement he gave to those concernedin similar pursuits, and in theunreserved admission of them to hisvaluable collections. It was by hisaid, that Patricius and Brousonnetwere enabled to prosecute, in a greatmeasure, their respective researches;and it was from the stores of hisHerbarium, that Gcertner obtained themost valuable materials for his excellenthistory of fruits and seeds. In England,he was looked up to as the patronof science and talent in every department.He assisted Sir John Sinclairin preparing and collecting the StatisticalAccount of Scotland ; was one ofthe most active members of the boardof Agriculture ; assisted in the formationof the Horticultural Society ; andwas one of the founders and principalpromoter of the objects of the AfricanSociety. Towards other men of science,Sir Joseph's conduct was actuated bythe most liberal and honourable feelings; and by foreigners, at least, hisname must always be venerated. Whenthe collection of the French naturalist,Labillardiere, was captured and broughtto England, he successfully intercededwith the English government for itsrestoration. He declined to inspect itscontents, lest, as he expressed himselfin a letter to Jussieu, any part of thatknowledge, to the acquisition of whichso eminent a naturalist had devoted thebest years of his life, should becomealienated from its rightful owner. Thisdisinterested act procured his electioninto the National Institute of France.He was, indeed, a member of most ofthe learned societies in Europe andAmerica, besides those in his owncountry. To the British Museum, ofwhich he was a trustee, he left hisvaluable library and botanical collection; a legacy that will ever be rememberedwith gratitude by the friendsof science.The long period during which he presidedover the" Royal Society, was notaltogether one of such harmony as thecourtesies of his private character mightSIR JOSEPH BANKS.have been expected to insure. Somemembers thought that they perceived intheir president a disposition to prefer thepretensions of rank, in his recommendationof candidates, to the unobtrusive,but undoubted claims, of eminent ability.One of them, a very distinguishedmember of the church, and equallycelebrated for his mathematical learning,went so far as to threaten hisresignation in the following terms :If other remedies fail, we can at leastsecede. When the hour of secessioncomes, the president will be left withhis train of feeble amateurs, and thattoy upon the table, the ghost of thatsociety, in which philosophy oncereigned, and Newton presided as herminister." Whether or not, that unionof rank with talent which Sir JosephBanks encouraged, had a beneficialinfluence over the interests of science,we will not pretend to say ; but, undoubtedly,since the secession of SirJohn Pringle from the chair of theRoyal Society, the honour formerlyattached to an admission into that bodyhas been considerably diminished.In person, Sir Joseph was tall andwell-shaped, with a countenance expressiveof dignity and intelligence.His manners were polite and urbane,whilst the extent of information hepossessed upon almost every subjectwithin the range of art or nature, renderedhis conversation at once engagingand instructive. He left no issue byhis wife, whom he married in 1779,and who survived him. She was thedaughter and co-heiress of WilliamWeston Largesses, Esq., of Provender,in the parish of Norton, Kent.Sir Joseph Banks's separate publicationsare, A Journal of a Voyage roundthe World in his Majesty's Ship Endeavour,in the years 1768, 1769, 1770,and 1771, &c., with a concise vocabularyof the language of Otaheite, anda short account of the causes of thediseases in corn, called, by farmers,the blight, the mildew, and the rust,printed for private distribution. In theTransactions of the Horticultural Society,the following papers are by him :An Attempt to ascertain the Timewhen the Potatoes (Solanum Tube-rerum)was first introduced into theUnited Kingdoms, with some Accountof the Hill Wheat of India ; Hintsrespecting the inuring Tender Plantsto our Climate ; On the Revival of anObsolete mode of Managing Strawberries; An Account of the Method ofCultivating the American Cranberry atSpring Grove ; On the HorticulturalManagement of Sweet or SpanishChestnut Trees; On the Forcing-housesof the Romans, with a List of Fruitscultivated by them now in our gardens ;Account of a New Apple, called theSpring Grove Codlin ; On Ripening theSecond Crop of Figs that grow on thenew shoots ; Horticultural Observationsselected from French Authors; Noticefrom a work of Monsieur Leliur, onthe Hereditary Diseases of Fruit Trees ;and Notes relative to the first appearanceof the Aphis Langer, or theApple Tree Insects in this country. Tothe Archaeologia for 1756, he communicatedAn Account of a RomanSepulchre lately found in Lincolnshire ;and, to the sixth volume of Nicholson'sJournal, A Report of the State of hisMajesty's Breed of Fine-woollen SpanishSheep, for the year ending Michaelmas,1803. His Account of Staffa will befound in the first part of Pennant'sTour in Scotland, and in Toil's Letterson Iceland.JOHN Mayfair.JOHN Mayfair, the eldest son ofthe Rev. James Playfair, minister ofthe united parishes of Liss and Benvie,in Forfarshire, Scotland, was born atBenvie, on the 10th of March, 1748.He was educated by his father up to theage of fourteen, and, subsequently, atthe University of St. Andrew's, wherehe prosecuted his general studies withthe intention of qualifying himself forthe church. His ardour of applicationand propriety of conduct soon attractedthe regards of his preceptors ; and suchwas his progress in the mathematicalSCIENCE,sciences, that Professor Wilkie, whenconfined by illness, selected him tooccupy his place. Another testimonyto his great talents, at this time, isthe following declaration of PrincipalGeorge Hill, at that time oi\e of hisfellow-students, who says, in one of hisletters to his mother: " Playfair hasvery great merit, and more knowledgeand a better judgment than any of hisclass-fellows. I make no exceptions ;my parts might be more showy, andthe kind of reading to which my inclinationled me, was calculated toenable me to make a better figure atSt. Andrew's ; but, in judgment andunderstanding, I am greatly inferior tohim." In 1766, when he was onlyeighteen, he became a candidate for theprofessorship of mathematics, in theMarischal College of Aberdeen, vacantby the death of Dr. Stewart. He hadsix competitors to contend with ; who,together with himself, were, accordingto the terms of the foundation,(which was a private one, by Dr.Liddell,) subject to an examination, towhich, it was considered, none but themost able mathematicians would beequal. The examination lasted a fortnight,and terminated in favour of Dr.Trail ; who, however, was the onlycandidate, besides Dr. Hamilton, thatexcelled the subject of our memoir ; andDr. Trail afterwards confessed that heattributed his own success solely to thefact of his being two years older thanMr. Playfair. He quitted the universityin 1769 ; and, for the next year ortwo, spent most of his time in Edinburgh,when he became intimate withDr. Robertson, Adam Smith, Dr. Black,and Dr. Mutton.In 1772, he became a candidate forthe professorship of natural philosophyin the University of St. Andrew's, vacantby the death of his friend Dr.Wilkie ; but in this also he was disappointed; " the situation," to use thewords of Dr. Cook, " being conferredupon another gentleman, one of theirown number, who had so powerful aclaim upon them, that Lord Kinnoulmentions to Mr. Hill, that, had Mr.Playfair known of the wish of thisgentleman to succeed Dr. Wilkie, hewould not have become a candidate."The death of his father, soon after,made him feel this disappointment stillmore strongly, as he was left with thecharge of his mother and family, whilsthe was yet wavering between mathematicsand divinity, in the hope thathis success in the former might renderit unnecessary for him to follow thelatter as a profession. This, however,he now determined to do ; but thoughhe was immediately presented, by LordGray, to his father's livings, it was nottill August, 1773, that he obtained possession,in consequence of a disputerespecting the right of patronage.Mr. Playfair entered upon the dutiesof his pastoral charge with the samezeal that he had evinced in his formerpursuits, composing for it sermons inthat simple and convincing style ofeloquence, by which his writings are,for the most past, characterized. Hisleisure hours were devoted to the educationof his brothers, and, in a greatmeasure, to a correspondence with Mr.(afterwards Lord) Robertson, whichshows a most extraordinary extent ofreading. His nephew and biographer,who was favoured by Lord Robertsonwith a perusal of these letters, says thatthey contain a discussion of the meritsand opinions of Machiavelli, Locke, Leibnitz,Reid Plato, Bacon, Price, Priestley,&c. ; an account and refutation ofthe attempt to explain gravitation byan ethereal fluid ; and many ingeniousobservations upon the geography andthe singular social institutions of theSouth Sea Islands, then recently discovered.In 1774, Mr. Playfair made an excursionto Perthshire ; and, during ashort stay at Schehallien, formed anacquaintance with the celebrated astronomer,Dr. Masklelyne, who wascarrying on there his interesting experimentson the attraction of themountains. It was under his auspicesthat he communicated, in 1779, to theRoyal Society of London, An Essayon the Arithmetic of Impossible Quantities,pointing out the insufficiency ofthe doctrine of negative quantities givenby John Bernouilli and Maclaurin, viz.that the imaginary characters whichare involved in the expression, compensateor destroy each other. Heattempted, also, to show, in this ingeniouspaper, that the arithmetic ofimpossible quantities is nothing morethan a particular method of tracing theJOHN Mayfair.affinity of the measures of ratios andof angles ; and that they can never beof any use as instruments of discovery,unless when the-subject of investigationis a property common to the measure ofratios and of angles.In 1782, he resigned his livings toaccept a very advantageous offer ofsuperintending the education of the twoeldest sons of Mr. Ferguson, of Faith ;and, it is said, he never afterwardsresumed his clerical duties. Beforetaking up his residence with his pupils,he paid a visit to London, where liewas introduced to Mr. Cavendish, Dr.Priestley, and other eminent men ofscience. In 1785, he was appointedjoint mathematical professor, with Dr.Adam Ferguson, in the University ofEdinburgh, but continued with hispupils until 1787, when he joined hisfamily, who had been some time residentin Edinburgh. In the meantime,he became a member of the RoyalSociety, lately instituted in . that metropolis,and communicated to theirTransactions a paper On the Causeswhich affect the Accuracy of BarometricalMeasurements, and A BiographicalAccount of the Rev. Dr. MatthewStewart In 1789, he succeeded Dr.Gregory, as secretary to the physicalclass of the Royal Society ; the managementof which, and the arrangementof its memoirs for publication,devolved principally upon him, in consequenceof the indisposition of thegeneral secretary, Dr. Robison. In thesame year, a paper of his was read tothe society, entitled Remarks on theAstronomy of the Brahmins, written infurtherance and explanation of the viewsof M. Bailly, in his Traite de 1' AstronomieIndienne et Oriental. Hisnext communication was in 1792, Onthe Origin and Investigation of Porisms,in which he only gives their geometricalanalysis, promising the algebraicalinvestigation in a second part,which, however, never appeared.Mr. Playfair experienced some interruptionto his studies, in 1793, by thedeath of his brother James, in London,the affairs of whose family lie undertookto arrange, and whose eldest son,then only six years of age, he tookunder his adoption. In 1795, he publishedhis Elements of Geometry, consistingof the first six books of Euclid,with three additional ones, containingthe rectification and quadrature of thecircle, the intersection of planes, andthe geometry of solids, with plane andspherical trigonometry and the arithmeticof sines. Not the least valuablepart of this work is an appendix ofnotes, and it is no slight proof of theestimation in which the book was held,that it has gone through five editions ofa thousand copies each. In the sameyear, he communicated to the RoyalSociety, his Observations on the TrigonometricalTables of the Brahmins ;and, shortly afterwards, his Investigationof Certain Theorems relative tothe Figure of the Earth.The death of Dr. James Mutton, inthe spring of 1797, was followed bytwo important works relative to thateminent mathematician, from the penof the subject of our memoir. Withthe Huttonian theory he had madehimself well acquainted, in the courseof the various discussions which hadtaken place between him and. itsauthor; but as it was by no meansgenerally intelligible, and was muchless known than its merits deserved,Mr. Playfair determined to become itsillustrator and defender. This taskoccupied him five years, at theexpiration of which, in 1802, he publishedhis Illustrations of the Hut-ionianTheory ; and, in 1803, communicatedto the Royal Society ofEdinburgh, A Biographical Account ofthe late James Mutton. These worksadded greatly to the fame of theirauthor, and were justly considered asmodels of composition and of argument.In reference to his Illustration, a writerin the Edinburgh Encyclopaedia remarks," Though brought out underthe modest appellation of a commentary,it is unquestionably entitled to beregarded as an original work ; andthough the theory which it expoundsmust always retain the name of thephilosopher who first suggested it, yetMr. Playfair has, in a great measure,made it his own, by the philosophicalgeneralization which he has thrownaround it; by the numerous phenomenawhich he has enabled it to embrace ;by the able defences with which itsweakest parts have been sustained;and by the relation which he has shownit to bear to some of the best stabslished doctrines, both in chemistry andastronomy."In 1805, Mr. Playfair was appointedgeneral secretary to the Royal Society,on the death of Dr. Robison, whosesuccessor he also became in the chair ofnatural philosophy, and, at the sametune, resigned his mathematical professorship.His zeal in the performanceof the duties of his new office was shownby his relinquishment of many veryimportant scientific pursuits in whichhe was engaged, in order to devotehimself to the extensive subject uponwhich he was about to enter. His successwas such as might be expected ; hislectures on the appearances of theplanetary system were distinguishedfor their eloquence, whilst the mostabstruse propositions of physical astronomy,and of optics, were establishedby demonstrations of a simple andelementary nature. In 1807, he waselected a fellow of the Royal Society ofLondon, to which he communicated theAccount of the Lithological Survey ofSchehallien; and, in 1809, his paper Onthe Progress of Heat when communicatedto Spherical Bodies, was read beforethe Society of Edinburgh. In 18 14,he published, for the use of his students,Outlines of Natural Philosophy, in twovolumes ; the first relating to dynamics,mechanics, hydrostatics, hydraulics,hydrostatics, and pneumatics ;the second, to astronomy. A third wasto have been added, treating of optics,electricity, and magnetism ; but, to thegreat regret of his scientific friends, henever finished the volume.Mr. Playfair's mind was now occupiedby two important works which hehad in contemplation ; the one, A Dissertationon the Progress of Mathematicaland Physical Science, since theRevival of Letters in Europe, whichhe had been engaged to write forthe Supplement to the EncyclopaediaBritannica ; the other, a second editionof the Illustrations of the HuttonianTheory of the Earth. With a view tomaking this last more complete, ourauthor, who had acquired his geologicalknowledge principally from books,set out, on the restoration of peace,' in1815, on a tour to the continent, for thepurpose of examining, in particular, thestupendous phenomena presented inthe geology of the Alps. This expeditionoccupied him about seventeenmonths, and, shortly after his return,which took place at the end of 1816,he communicated to the Royal Societya paper on volcanoes, whichexcited great interest. On the 3rd ofDecember, 1818, he also communicated,to the same body, his Description of theSlide of Alpaca. which has been publishedas an appendix to his life. Heintended to have given, occasionally,various other detached papers relative tothe information he had acquired duringhis travels, but ill health prevented hisdoing so, as well as completing hissecond edition of the Illustration ofMutton's Theory. In the midst ofmuch bodily suffering from a diseasein the bladder, he received the proofsheets of the Dissertation above-mentioned;a compilation which, says oneof his biographers, must have been irksomein the extreme to a mind lessanxious than his, and conscious that itwas exhausting its powers on an arenawhere no laurels could be gained. He,however, executed the task with hisusual judgment and discrimination ;though his labours, in this respect, will,perhaps, suffer in comparison with thoseof Montucla, Bossuet, Laplace, Bailly,and Delamere. Such, at least, is theopinion of one biographical critic ;whilst another, the writer of his life inthe work for which his Dissertation wascomposed, describes it as not only oneof the most instructive, but one of themost interesting publications that philosophyhas ever bestowed on theworld, and sufficient of itself to carryhis name down, with distinction, to thelatest posterity. Mr. Mayfair died onthe 19th of July, 1819.The character of this amiable andhighly-gifted man has been very elaboratelydrawn by his nephew andbiographer, in a memoir prefixed to anedition of his works, which appeared,in four volumes, octavo, at Edinburgh,in 1822. The most estimable qualitiesare here attributed to him ; and as Mr.Dugald Stewart has admitted the portraitto be a perfect and faithful resemblance,we cannot do better thanquote a portion of it : " Of Mr. Play-fair'sscientific attainments, of his proficiencyin those studies to which hewas peculiarly devoted, we are butslenderly qualified to judge ; but weGEORGE SHAW.believe we hazard nothing in saying,that he was one of the most learnedmathematicians of his age, and amongthe first, if not the very first, who introducedthe beautiful discoveries ofthe late continental geometers to theknowledge of his countrymen, and gavetheir just value and true places, in thescheme of European knowledge, tothose important improvements by whichthe whole aspect of the abstract scienceshas been renovated since the days ofour illustrious Newton. If he did notsignalize himself by any brilliant ororiginal invention, he must, at least, beallowed to have been a most generousand intelligent judge of the achievementsof others, as well as the mosteloquent expounder of that great andmagnificent system of knowledge whichhas been gradually evolved by the successivelabours of so many gifted individuals.He possessed, indeed, in thehighest degree, all the characteristicsboth of a fine and a powerful understanding;at once penetrating and vigilant,but more distinguished, perhaps,for the caution and sureness of itsmarch, than for the brilliancy or rapidityof its movements ; and guided andadorned, through all its progress, bythe most genuine enthusiasm for allthat is grand, and the justest taste forall that is beautiful, in the truth or theintellectual energy with which he washabitually conversant." With referenceto his works, his style has been describedas one of great freedom, force, andbeauty, but the deliberate style of aman of thought and learning ; andneither that of a wit throwing out hisextempore with an affectation of carelessgrace, nor of a rhetorician thinkingmore of his manner than his matter,and determined to be admired for hisexpression, whatever may be the fateof his sentiments. His private characterappears to have been almostfaultless ; endowed with every qualitywhich could attract admiration andesteem, he seems to have been theidol of all who knew him. "Mr. Play-fair,"concludes his nephew, " was oneof the most amiable and estimable ofmen ; delightful in his manners, inflexiblein his principles, and generousin his affection, he had all that couldcharm in society or attach in private ;and while his friends enjoyed the freeand unstudied conversation of an easyand intelligent associate, they had, atall times, the proud and inward assurancethat he was a being upon whoseperfect honour and generosity theymight rely with the most implicit confidencein lii'e and death ; and of whomit was equally impossible that, underany circumstances, he should ever performa mean, a selfish, or a questionableaction, as that his body should cease togravitate or his soul to live."In addition to the works before-mentioned,he wrote several articles in TheEdinburgh Review, both literary andscientific ; among the former of whichmay be mentioned, a very masterlycriticism on Madame de Steel's Corne.His scientific articles attracted greatattention on the continent; and, if wemay credit one of his biographers,there is no general account of the greatfacts and principles of astronomy soclear and comprehensive and exact, norhalf so beautiful and majestic in thewriting, as his account of Laplace'sTechnique Celeste, in the eleventhvolume of the publication just mentioned.GEORGE SHAW.GEORGE SHAW, the son of a clergyman,was born at Egerton, in Buckinghamshire,on the 16th of December,1751. He was remarkable for his precociousfondness for study ; and whenbut four years of age, occupied himselfat home with reading books, and watchingthe motions and examining thestructure of insects. After receivingthe early part of his education underthe tuition of his father, he, in 1765,went to Magdalen College, Oxford,where he graduated B. A. in 1769, andM.A. in 1772. In 1774, he took deacon'sorders; but shortly afterwards renounceddivinity for medicine, which he studied,SCIENCE.for three years, at Edinburgh. Returningto Oxford, he attracted the favourablenotice of the botanical professor,Dr. Sibthorp, who, being at that timeabout to travel, appointed him hisdeputy. On the death of that professor,he became a candidate for thevacant chair ; and " would, unquestionably,have been successful," saysone of his biographers, " had not an oldstatute been found, which prohibits aperson in orders from filling the office."In 1787, he took his degree of M. D.,and commenced practice as a physicianin London, where, in conjunction withseveral others, eminent for their acquirementsin natural history, he assisted inestablishing, and was nominated oneof the vice-presidents of, the LinnseanSociety.Shortly after his arrival in the metropolis,he delivered a course of lecturesat the Leverian Museum, which werereceived with great applause. In 1789,he was elected a fellow of the RoyalSociety; and, in the same year, commencedthe publication of his Naturalist'sMiscellany, in monthly parts,which, at the time of his death, amountedto two hundred and eighty-six. Thework is described, by one of his biographers,as " a most beautiful and extensiveproduction ; comprising, in onethousand and sixty-four plates, figuresof the most curious and remarkableproductions of the three kingdoms ofNature."In 1791, he was appointed an assistant-keeperof the natural history in theBritish Museum ; and, in the followingyear, he commenced, and continued atintervals till its completion, in 1796, awork, entitled Musae Leveriani explicationAnglica et Latina. He also wroteThe Zoology of New Holland, in oneof Sir James Smith's publications ; anda work entitled Cimeiia Physical, with aview of supplying several deficienciesin Miller's Various Subjects in NaturalHistory. In 1800, he commenced hisprincipal work, General Zoology, orNatural History, with plates, from thebest authorities and most select specimens; and, in 1806 and 1807, in whichyear he was appointed keeper of naturalhistory in the British Museum, he delivereda course of zoological lectures,which he published in 1809, in twolarge octavo volumes. About the sameperiod, he was selected to edit that partof the Abridgment of the Transactionsof the Royal Society which related tonatural history. His subsequent timewas chiefly devoted to the continuationof The Naturalist's Miscellany, and TheGeneral Zoology, of which eight volumeshad been published, and a ninth was inthe press, at the time of his death,which took place on the 22nd of July,1813.As a natural historian, few have enjoyeda higher reputation, or left behindthem works more likely to render itpermanent, than Dr. Shaw. He was alsoa man, not only possessing the highestintellectual faculties, but endowed withqualities which rendered his characterequally estimable in a moral point ofview. In addition to the works alreadymentioned, he was the author of thefollowing papers, published in theTransactions of the Linnaean Society :Description of the Stylephorus Corda-tus,of the Cancer Stagnalis, of theSpecies of Materia, of the Mus Bur-darius,and Tubular Magnified ; Remarkson the Scolopendra Electricand Scolopendra Subterranea ; A Noteto Mr. Kirby's Description of the NewSpecies of Hirundo ; and Account of aminute Ichneumon: all worthy styeattention of the natural philosopher.DUGALD Stewart.DUGALD, son of the eminent mathew algebra and geometry; in logic, Dr.magician, Dr. Matthew Stewart, was | Stevenson ; and in moral philosophy,born at Edinburgh, on the 22nd of | Dr. Adam Ferguson. The bias of hisNovember, 1753. He was educated at j mind for the latter study, induced histhe high school and university of that I father to send him, at the age or eighteen,city, having his father for his tutor in to the University of Glasgow, as a pupilDUGALD STEWART,of Dr. Reid, whose lectures he attendedduring the session of 1771 2. Theprogress which he thus made in his metaphysicalstudies was considerable, and,about the same time, he composed anadmirable Essay on Dreaming, whichhe afterwards published in the firstvolume of his Philosophy of the HumanMind.In 1771, he became his father's deityin the mathematical class, in theuniversity of Edinburgh ; and, in 1774,he was appointed his assistant and successor.In 1778, when Dr. Adam Fergusonwas chosen secretary to the commissionersfor quelling the disturbanceswhich had broken out in America, Mr.Stewart undertook to supply his placein the chair of moral philosophy, duringthe ensuing session, although he hadpreviously pledged himself to deliver acourse of lectures on astronomy, in additionto the usual labours of his tenmathematical courses. The lectureswhich he delivered, attested the depthof his ethical studies, and were receivedwith great applause ; but suchwere his exertions at this time, and thedegree of exhaustion which they produced,that when he set off for London,at the close of the session, he wasobliged to be lifted into his carriage.In 1780, being much pressed to becometutor to the sons of several oi the Englishand Scottish nobility, he received acertain number into his house; one ofwhom (the Marquess of Lothian), he accompaniedin a tour to the continent in1783. On his return, he married a MissBannatine, daughter of Neil Bannatine,Esq., a merchant in Glasgow ; but wasleft a widower, four years after, withone son.In 1784, he exchanged his mathematicalprofessorship, with Dr. Ferguson,for that of moral philosophy ;and, in 1790, he took, for his secondwife, Miss Cranston, daughter of theHonourable George Cranston. In1792, he published the first volume ofhis Elements of the Philosophy of theHuman Mind, in which, as well as inthe succeeding volumes, his great aim isto vindicate the principle of humanknowledge against the attacks of modernsceptics, and to lay a solid foundationfor a rational system of logic.Accordingly he has, in this work, treatedthe science of the human mind with asmuch clearness, as depth of mathematicaltalent; at the same time that hehas enriched his speculations with thestores of his varied learning, andadorned them with all the eleganciesof his classical taste. The first volume,however, of Mr. Stewart's work, sayshis biographer, " did not excite that noticeto which its own merit, and thehigh reputation of its author, unquestionablyentitled it. The philosophyof the mind was then a subject of comparativelylittle interest; and, thoughdivested of its usual repulsive aspect,it was not considered, as it is now, anecessary branch of polite education.The long interval of twenty-one years,which elapsed between the publicationof the first and the second volumes, andthe publication of his volume of PhilosophicalEssays at an intermediateperiod, may afford us some reason forbelieving that Mr. Stewart had abandonedthe prosecution of his plan."In 1793, Mr. Stewart communicatedto the Royal Society of Edinburgh, AnAccount of the Life and Writings otDr. Adam Smith, a memoir which isconsidered one of the finest examplesof biographical composition, independentof its value on account of its luminousexposition of the principles of Dr.Smith's philosophy. Another admirablebiographical work of his was read beforethe same Society, in March, 1796,and afterwards published, in a separatevolume, entitled An Account of the Lifeand Writings of the celebrated historian,Dr. Robertson. Mr. Stewart's preceptorscareer became memorable tlii-,year by an accession of pupils, whosenames have since ranked with the mostdistinguished of the age : among themwere the present Lord Palmerston,Marquess of Lansdowne, Lord Dull y,Mr. Brougham, and Mr. Homer.About this time, he turned his attentionto political economy, and, in 1800, gavea course of lectures on the science; butthey did not meet with sufficient encouragementto induce him to repeatthem the following session.In 1806, when Lord Lauderdale wasdeputed to proceed to Paris, to adjustthe preliminaries of a general peace, herequested Mr. Stewart to accompanyhim, and they accordingly spent sometimein the French metropolis. Soonafter his return, the Fox and GrenvilleSCIENCE.administration created, or rather revivedfor his benefit, the office of gazettewriter for Scotland, in lieu of a pension.The emoluments of this situation wereconsiderable, and imposed upon himno labour that could not be performedby deputy. It also enabled him todevote himself more entirely to philosophicalpursuits, for which purpose heaccepted of the services of a joint professorin Dr. Brown ; on whose death,some years afterwards, he resigned thechair of moral philosophy altogether.He now removed to a country house,about twenty miles from Edinburgh ;and, in 1810, he brought out the volumeof the Philosophical Essays, to whichwe have before alluded, a work whichwent through three editions, and addedgreatly to his reputation. In 1812, hecommunicated to the Royal Society ofEdinburgh, a paper, entitled Some Accountof a Boy born Blind and Deaf, &c.,being the case of one James Mitchell,respecting which, Mr. Stewart hadcollected all the facts, affording him aprospect of establishing the distinctionbetween original and acquired perceptions.To ascertain this more completely,he proposed to the council ofthermal Society, that Mitchell shouldbe brought to Edinburgh, and educatedunder the superintendence of personscapable of studying the developmentof his mental powers. The idea wasapproved of by the council, who madean application to government for theallowance of a small pension, to enableMiss Mitchell and her brother to bebrought to Edinburgh. This was notonly refused, but the official answer insinuatedthat the unfortunate object ofthe Society's patronage was not likelyto be benefited by the design whichthey had in view. " The writer ofthese lines," says Mr. Stewart's biographer,in The Edinburgh Encyclopaedia," was one of the five members ofcouncil to whom this answer was read ;and he will never forget the impressionwhich it made upon the meeting, thesuppressed feeling of mortification andshame which was visible on everycountenance. The guardian of theBritish treasury was entitled to refusethe application which had been madeto him ; but he had no right to questionthe humanity by which that applicationwas dictated. The character of Mr.Dugald Stewart should have been asufficient guarantee that the personalcomfort and happiness of Mitchellwould be the first object of his solicitude."In 1813, he published the secondvolume of his Elements of the Philosophyof the Human Mind. It relates entirelyto reason, or the understanding,properly so called ; and, as the authorhimself observes, the subjects of whichit treats are, of necessity, peculiarly dryand abstruse ; but he regarded them asso important, that he prepared the materialswhich compose it with thegreatest care and diligence. In January,1822, he was struck with palsy, but hisbodily faculties alone felt the shock;and, with the assistance of his daughter,who acted as his amanuensis, he wasenabled to prepare his works for publicationwith the same ardour of mind,and freshness of intellect, that he hadbefore displayed. The third and fourthvolumes of his Philosophy of the HumanMind, were completed by iii, successively,in 1827 and 1828 ; in the Aprilof which latter year he received anotherparalytic attack, and died on the llthof June following.Mr. Stewart was survived by a widowand two children, a son and daughter.In person, he was about the middlesize, with a countenance distinguishedby an expression of benevolence andintelligence. His private character wasunimpeachable; and a testimony to itsworth appears in the fact of the generalregret which his death occasioned inEdinburgh. Though so distinguished byhis works, he is said to have been yet lesseminent as a writer than a teacher, inwhich character he was unequalled, andhis success corresponded to his merits.He had acquired," says a writer inBlackwood, " the most extensive information,as profound as it was exact ;and he was, like many, or we mayrather say, like all, great philosophers,distinguished by the faculty of memoryto a surprising degree ; by which we donot, of course, mean that sort of mechanicalmemory, frequently to be seen inweak minds, which remembers everythingindiscriminately, but that higherfaculty which is connected with, anddepends on, a strong and comprehensivejudgment; which, looking abroadfrom its elevation on the various fieldJOHN SIBTHORP.of knowledge, sees the exact positionand relation of every fact, to the greatwhole of which it forms a part ; andexactly estimating its importance, retainsall that is worth retaining, andthrows away what is useless. For thisgreat quality of a philosophical mind,Mr. Stewart was remarkable ; and hedispensed his stores of knowledge eitherfor instruction or amusement, as suitedthe occasion, in the most agreeablemanner. He was of a most companionabledisposition, and was endeared tothe social circle of his friends, as muchby his mild and beneficent character,which was entirely free from everytaint of envy or jealousy, as he wasadmired for his talents."Mr. Stewart was, at the time of hisdeath, a fellow of the Royal Societies ofLondon and Edinburgh an honorarymember of the Imperial Academy ofSciences at St. Petersburg), a memberof the Royal Academies of Berlin andNaples, of the American PhilosophicalSocieties of Philadelphia and Boston,and honorary member of the PhilosophicalSociety of Cambridge. He wrote,besides the works before-mentioned,A Dissertation on the Progress of Metaphysicaland Ethical Philosophy, forthe Supplement to The EncyclopaediaBritannica; two pamphlets on a localcontroversy; and Outlines of MoralPhilosophy, which have been translatedinto French.JOHN SIBTHORP.THIS eminent botanist, the youngestson of Dr. Humphrey Sibthorp, professorof botany at Oxford, was born inthat city on the 28th of October, 1758.After having completed his school education,he became a member of Lincoln,and, subsequently, of University College,to which he removed on obtainingthe appointment of the Radcliffe travellingfellowship. He then went toEdinburgh, and studied medicine andbotany, and proceeding afterwards toFrance and Switzerland, made somebotanical discoveries in the neighbourhoodof Montpellier, which were themeans of his introduction to the celebratedBroussonet, and of his being electeda member of the Academie des Sciences,of that place. In 1783, he succeededhis father, as professor of botany, atOxford, on which occasion he wasobliged to take his doctor's degree ; but,about the same time, receiving an importantaddition to his pecuniary expectations,he declined entering on thelabours of a physician, and determinedto apply himself wholly to botanicalpursuits. He spared neither labour norexpense in his investigations ; and, inthe winter of 1783, made an attempt,whilst in London, to purchase themuseum and library of the celebratedLinnaeus, which was, however, sold byprivate contract to the writer of his lifein Rees's Cyclopaedia (Sir James EdwardSmith).In 1784, he visited Germany, andresided some time at Vienna, whence,after having formed an intimacy withProfessor Tarquin, and carefully studiedthe celebrated manuscript of Dios-cortes, he set out, by way of Italy, forGreece, where he had long contemplatedmaking certain botanical researches.He was accompanied, in hisexpedition, by Mr. Ferdinand Bauer,an excellent draughtsman, with whomhe set out from Vienna on the 6th ofMarch, 1786. They first visited Naples,Messina, Crete, and Milo; and, afterhaving narrowly escaped shipwreck offthat island, touched at several islandsof the Archipelago, in their way toAthens and Smyrna. Here Dr. Sib-thorppassed some time, in pursuit ofhis botanical researches ; in the courseof which he traced the steps of Sherardand Hasselquist, proceeded by land toBursa, and climbed the BithyniaOlympus. He spent the winter at Constantinople,occupying himself, duringthe greater portion of it. in the study ofmodern Greek. In February, 1787, hemade a botanical excursion to Belgrade ;and, in the following month, another toBujuckderi, where he found the plantsin flower to be almost the same as aremet with, at the same season, in Eng-SCIENCE.land. Previous to leaving Constantinople,he visited the neighbouringisle of Karki, where his investigationsof the fishes and birds of those regionsenabled him to throw much light onthe writings of ancient naturalists.He left Constantinople at the commencementof the spring, and sailed,by way of Scio, Cos, and Rhodes, forCyprus, where he made a stay of fiveweeks. During this time, he was engagedin drawing up a Fauna andFlora of the island, the former consistingof eighteen mammalia, eighty-fivebirds, nineteen amphibia, andone hundred fishes ; and the lattercomprehending six hundred and sixteenspecies of plants. Of these, theparticular stations, domestic and medicaluses, and reputed qualities, areamply recorded ; and the vernacularnames of the animals, as well as of theeconomical plants, are subjoined. Severalof the plants which he met withinGreece, he found to be synonymouswith those described by Dioscorides,the illustration of whose writings wasone of the principal objects of his travels.The first sketch of his FloraGraeca, which comprises about eighthundred and fifty plants, " may beconsidered," says the author, " as containingonly the plants observed by meinthe envious of Athens, on thesnowy heights of the Grecian AlpParnassus, on the steep precipices ofDelphi, the empurpled mountains ofHymettus, the Gentle, the lower hillsabout the Piraeus, the olive groundsabout Athens, and the fertile plains ofBoeotia. The future botanist, whoshall examine this country with moreleisure, and at a more favourable seasonof the year, before the summer sun hasscorched up the spring plants, maymake a considerable addition to thislist. My intention was to have travelled,by land, through Greece; butthe disturbed state of this country, theeve of a Russian war, the rebellion ofits bashaw, and the plague at Clarissa,rendered my project impracticable."Dr. Sibthorp, subsequently, made numerousadditions to the above catalogues,so that the number of speciescollected from an investigation of all hismanuscripts and specimens for the materialsot iiir> Prodromus Florae Graeca,amounts to about three thousand. Onthe 19th of June, 1787, he arrived atAthens, and from thence made variousexcursions in search of plants. On the3rd of August, he ascended MountDelphi, in Negropont, in a storm ofwind and rain ; which, he says, was oneof the most laborious, if not perilous,adventures, though his botanical harvestwas abundant.The subject of our memoir returnedto England in December, and, afterhaving recruited his health, which hadsuffered much during his travels, resumedthe duties of his professorship.His great reputation soon procured himan increase of his salary, with the rankof a regius professor. He was amongthe first members of the Linnaean Society,founded in 1788; and, in thefollowing year, he was elected a fellowof the Royal Society.On the 20th of March, 1794, he setout on his second tour to Greece, andarrived at Constantinople in the followingMay. Towards the end of August,he made an excursion to Bithynia, andclimbed to the summit of Olympus,where he made a fresh botanical collection.At Fanar, he discovered anaged Greek botanist, Dr. DhnetriArgyrami, who was possessed of someworks of Linnaeus. Sailing down theHellespont, he visited the plains ofTroy, and subsequently proceeded toMount Athos, where he passed tendays in examining some of the conventsand hermitages, and the romanticscenery and botanical rarities of thatsingular spot. The winter of 179-1-5was passed by him at Zante ; and, inthe February of that year, he set out onan excursion to the Morea, of which hemade the complete circuit in twomonths. Here he found ample materialsfor botanical observations ; butinvain' says his biographer, " didour classical traveller look for thebeauty of Arcadian shepherdesses, orlisten for the pipe of the sylvan swain.Figures emaciated, and features furrowedwith poverty, labour, and care,were all that they met with." Dr.Sibthorp returned to England in theautumn of the year last-mentioned,with a rich botanical harvest, but witha constitution irreparably impaired bythe effects of a severe cold, which hehad caught during the progress of histravels. To arrest its effects, he, inWILLIAM ROXBURGH.vain, tried the climates of Devonshireand Bath, and died at the latter placeon the 8th of February, 1796. Heleft, by his will, a freehold estate tothe University of Oxford, for the purposeof first publishing his Flora Graeca,in ten folio volumes, with one hundredcoloured plates in each, and Prodromusof the same work, in octavo, withoutplates. When these were published,the annual sum of 200 was to be paidto a professor of rural economy, andthe remainder of the rents of the estatewas to be applied to the purchase ofbooks for the professor. He also left,to the university, the whole of his collections,drawings, and books of naturalhistory, botany, and agriculture.The only work which he published inhis lifetime, was a Flora Uxoniensis,which has the merit of being foundedentirely on his own personal observation.Dr. Sibthorp, though in affluent circumstances,and passionately fond ofagricultural pursuits, never sufferedhimself to be turned aside from thepursuit of his favourite studies ; butsteadily and constantly kept in view thegreat object of his life, to which he maybesaid to have sacrificed life itself.No name," observes his biographer,(Sir James Edward Smith,) " has afairer claim to botanical immortalityamong the martyrs of the science thanthat of Sibthorp."WILLIAM ROXBURGH.WILLIAM ROXBURGH was bornat Underwood, near Lymington, inScotland, on the 29th of June, 1759;and, after completing his medical studiesat Edinburgh, made two voyagesto the East Indies, in the capacity ofsurgeon's mate, and settled at Madrasabout 1781. Here he chiefly distinguishedhimself by his botanical skill,and invented a new mode of conveying,to England, the seeds of Asiaticplants, without damage, by whichmeans several mimosas were broughtto London in a state of soundness neverbefore witnessed. While at Madras,he also discovered the existence ofaerial tides, or the two daily changes ofthe barometer in low latitudes; his accountof which was printed in thePhilosophical Transactions, and hasbeen since confirmed by other meteorologists.From Madras he removed toCalcutta, to superintend the botanicalgarden newly established there ; and,whilst pursuing his researches, becameintimately acquainted with the celebratedGerman botanist, Koenig, who,like himself, was a zealous disciple ofthe Linnaean school. He was one ofthe original members of the AsiaticSociety ; and, in that capacity, contributed,in 1790, a singular andvaluable paper respecting the luccainsect ; and containing suggestions ofequal importance to natural history,and to manufactures and commerce.One of his conjectures, was that thecolouring matter might be separatedfrom this insect whilst alive, which wassubsequently proved to be practicable,and a great quantity of the liquid thusobtained, continues, at this day, to beexported to England, under the nameof lac-lake, where it is chiefly used asasubstitute for cochineal, in the dyeingof scarlet. In 1797, he revisitedEurope, and, after staying there twoyears, in the course of which time hemarried ; returned to Bengal, whence hetransmitted to London a series of letters,containing most valuable botanicalinformation relative to East India production,and for which the Society forthe Promotion of Arts decreed him theirgold medal, in 1805. In this year, hecame to England, and resided sometimeat Chelsea; after which, he proceededto Scotland in the hope of benefitinghis health, then in a very precariousstate ; and, about 1807, returnedto Calcutta. Here he continued tocommunicate his discoveries to the Societyof Arts; and, in 1813, obtained asecond gold medal, for his interestingand important observations on thegrowth of Indian trees. In 1813, heagain came to England, and. in theMay of the following year, attended, inSCIENCE,person, the hall of the Society of Arts,where he excited much interest andattention, and was presented, by theDuke of Norfolk, the president, with athird gold medal. After this, he tookup his abode at Edinburgh, where thebaneful effects of the climate of the eastagain operating on his constitution, hebecame gradually weaker, and died onthe 10th of April, 1815.Dr. Roxburgh must always be mentionedwith eulogy, as the introducerof several new discoveries practicallyconducive to the interests both of commerceand the arts. He extracted fromcertain plants, an indigo equal to thatobtained from the Indigofera tinctoria ;found out new substitutes for hemp andflax, strong enough for the formation ofcables; and enabled the Indians to makethree different kinds of durable silks,from the same number of wild silkworms,of which he was the discoverer.As a physician, he distinguished himselfas the introducer of the Swieteniafebrifuga, or East India fever bark;which he successfully used, instead ofthe Peruvian, for the space of twentyyears, and which is now admitted intoour pharmacopoeia. The extraordinaryzeal and industry with which hepursued his researches in natural history,can only be appreciated by areference to his works, of which thefollowing are the principal : Plants ofthe Coasts of Coromandel, with plates,two volumes, quarto ; A BotanicalDescription of Sweetens, quarto ; andAn Essay on the Natural Order of theScitamineae, quarto. Nearly threethou-sand plants are contained in the first ofthese works, and their splendour andnovelty are as conspicuous as theirquantity is astonishing. In addition tothe publications already mentioned, hecommunicated a large number of papersto the Philosophical Transactions ;The Asiatic Researches, printed at Calcutta;Dalrymple's Oriental Repository;and the Transactions of the Society ofArts, in the thirty-eighth volume ofwhich, is an engraving of him, from aminiature in the possession of his secondwife.The following anecdote is related ofhim in The Annual Obituary: Whilstresiding at Chelsea, and overwhelmedwith a disease that afterwards provedfatal, Mr. Salisbury, of the botanicalgarden in Sloane Street, carried a finespecimen of a new plant, in full bloom,to shew him : it was the Lilium tigris(tiger lily), which he had nursedfor two years, with great care, in theCompany's garden at Calcutta, but hadnever as yet seen it in flower. Nosooner was the fact communicated tohim, than suddenly starting from a bedof sickness to which he had been confinedduring three whole days, Dr.Roxburgh eagerly seized the preciousplant, and, forgetting all his maladies,hastened to the window to contemplateand expatiate on its beauties.SIR JAMES EDWARD SMITH.THIS eminent naturalist was born onthe 2nd of December, 1759, in the cityof Norwich, where his father carried ontrade in the woollen line. He was educatedwith a view to the profession ofmedicine ; and on being sent to theUniversity of Edinburgh, distinguishedhimself particularly in botany, for hisproficiency in which he obtained thegold medal. On his removal to London,he became acquainted with SirJoseph Banks; and, upon his recommendation,purchased, in 1784, the celebratedLinnaean collection, comprisingthe epistolary correspondence of Linnaeusand his son, together with a quantityof valuable matter relating to naturalhistory, medicine, &c. The King ofSweden, it is said, sent off" a vessel afterthe one in which this treasure was beingconveyed to England, and ever regrettedthe sale of it. Mr. Smith nowdevoted himself to the study of naturalhistory, with a zeal and ardour whichfew have displayed, and which is sufficientlytestified by the numerous worksthat came, at intervals, from his pen.He settled at London, in 1786; andsoon after graduated M. D. at Leyden,whilst on his return from a tour throughSMITHSON Tenant,France and Italy, an account of whichhe published, in three volumes, octavo.In 1788, took place the first meetingof the Linnaean Society, of which hewas one of the principal founders, andwas appointed president. He read, onthe occasion, an Introductory Discourseon the Rise and Progress of NaturalHistory, which forms the first articlein the Transactions of the LinnaeanSociety. In 1792, he was invited toFrogmore, to read lectures in botanyto the queen and the princesses, avocation for which his talents peculiarlyfitted him, and in which capacity heattracted admiring audiences at theRoyal Institution, at Liverpool, Bristol,&c. In 1796, he married a MissReeve, of Lowestoft, in Suffolk ; and,in the following year, he took up hisresidence in his native town. He receivedthe honour of knighthood, in1814; and died, highly respected, onthe 17th of March, 1828; being, at thetime, president of the Linnaean Society,honorary member of the HorticulturalSocieties of London and Chelmsford,and member of the Academies of Stockholm,Upsal, Turin, Lisbon, Philadelphia,New York, &c., the ImperialAcademy Naturae Curiosorum, and theRoyal Academy of Sciences at Paris.The principal works of Sir J. Smithare his English Botany, and EnglishFlora. The former, consisting of thirty-sixoctavo volumes, contains a descriptionand a coloured figure of everyplant known to be indigenous. It wasupon his Flora, however, that he principallyprided himself, as the workwhich would eventually redound to hisreputation as a botanist, and his creditas an author.His other separate publications are,Dissertation quaedam de generationcompletes ; Dissertation on the Sexesof Plants, from the Latin of Linnaeus ;Plantarum Icones hactenus indite,plerumque ad Plants in Herbarium Linnaeanconservators delineate; ReliquiaeRudbeckianae, &c. ; Spicilegium botanical; Linnaeus Flora Japonica ;Specimen of Botany in New Holland ;Icones Pictae Plantarum variorum, &c. ;Natural History of the rarer LepidopterousInsects of Georgia ; Tractsrelating to Natural History ; Introductionto Physiological and SystematicalBotany; Lachesis Japonica, or a Tourin Lapland, from the Manuscript Journalof Linnaeus, &c. He also publishedtwo volumes of the correspondence ofLinnaeus ; and communicated a varietyof papers, too numerous to be mentioned,to the Transactions of the linnaeanSociety, Nicholson's Journal, andother periodical publications. He alsowrote a variety of articles in Rees'sEncyclopaedia ; and those which relateto botany are almost all from his pen.The character of Sir J. Smith is representedas highly estimable, both inhis public and private capacity. As anaturalist, he is more conspicuous forhis industry and research, than for originalityand depth ; though a moreardent promoter of the science of botanyno country has produced. In the earlypart of his life, he was a member of theUnitarian dissenting congregation atNorwich ; but, latterly, he is said tohave changed his opinions, and conformedto the established church. Hispolitical and religious sentiments wereliberal ; he was no less a lover of literaturethan of science ; and occasionallyindulged in poetic composition, of whicha favourable specimen may be seen inOakham's Circle of the Seasons, andother publications.SMITHSON Tenant.SMITHSON Tenant, the son ofa clergyman, was born at Selby, inYorkshire, on the 30th of November,1761. He lost both his parents at anearly age, but not before he had madesome progress in the classics, under thetuition of his father. He was afterwardssent to three different schoolsin his native county; but learnt littleat either, paying more attention tobooks on science, and to the makingof experiments mentioned in them, thanto the usual school tasks. Newton'sTreatise on Optics was perused, amongothers, with great avidity, by him ; andDr. Priestley's publications so much in-SCIENCE.treated him, that he entertained a greatdesire to study chemistry under him.Being unable to obtain the benefit ofhis instruction, he, in 1781, became apupil of the celebrated Dr. Black,whose lectures, at the University ofEdinburgh, were then in great reputation.In the following year, he enteredas a pensioner of Christ's College,Cambridge, where he studied mathematics,but principally chemistry andbotany, as being more suited to his inclination,and to the profession of physic,which he was qualifying himself to follow.In 1784, he visited Denmark andSweden, where he was introduced toScheele ; and shortly after his return, inthe following year, he was elected afellow of the Royal Society. In 1786,he removed from Christ's College, toEmmanuel; and, in 1788, he took hisbachelor's degree in physic.Mr. Tennant had, from the time ofhis first taking up his residence at Cambridge,been known, among men ofscience, for his chemical knowledge,and, in particular, for an attempt toeconomize the consumption of fuel indistillation. In 1791, he communicatedto the Royal Society his very interestingdiscovery of a mode of obtainingcarbon from the carbonic acid. Havingobserved that charcoal did not decomposethe phosphate of lime, he concludedthat phosphorus ought to decomposethe carbonate of lime, and theresult fully justified his mode of reasoning.On his return from a third visit tothe continent, in 1792, he took chambersin the Temple, where he seems to haveabandoned all idea of medicine as aprofession, though he continued to studyits history, and philosophy. In 1796,he graduated M. D. ; and in the sameyear, he communicated to the RoyalSociety a paper On the Nature of theDiamond, in which he gives an accountof some experiments, showing that thediamond afforded no more carbonicacid than an equal weight of charcoal.The chief discoveries contained inthe subsequent papers which he communicatedto the Royal Society, havereference to the magnesian limestone,or dolomite, which he considers as rathera combination, than an accidental mixture; to emery, which he showed to beasubstance similar to the corundum,or adamantine spar of China, and notan ore of iron, as had been commonlysupposed ; and to crude platina, inwhich he discovered a singular darkpowder, containing two new metalsnamed iridium and osmium. For thishe received the Coleman medal, in1804 ; the paper, which he communicatedon the subject, being entitled, OnTwo Metals found in the Black Powderremaining after the Solution of Platina.In 1812, he gave a course of privatelectures on mineralogy ; and, in the followingyear, he was elected, withoutopposition, professor of chemistry in theUniversity of Cambridge. A new methodof procuring potassium, formedthe subject of his last communication tothe Royal Society. He was one of thecommittee appointed by this body toinquire into the degree of danger thatmight attend the general introductionof gas lights into the metropolis ; anddiscovered, in conjunction with Dr.Wollaston, the important fact, that gascontained in a small tube will not communicatethe flame. Mr. Tennantagain visited France, in the autumn of1814 ; and after having spent the winterat Paris, arrived at Cologne, on the20th of February, with the intention ofembarking for England, accompaniedby Baron Below. The wind not beingfavourable, they rode together, on the22nd, to visit Buonaparte's pillar, andon their return, went off their road toexamine a small fort. Unfortunately,the drawbridge, upon which they advanced,was not properly secured ; and,in consequence, both Mr. Tennant andthe baron were precipitated, with theirhorses, into the ditch : the former withsuch violence, that he died within anhour after.Mr. Tennant, says his biographer,Dr. Shaw, was one of those who, touse the words of Dr. Johnson, "withoutmuch labour, have obtained a high reputation,and are mentioned with reverencerather for the possession thanthe exertion of uncommon abilities."In person, he was tall and slight, witha thin face and fair complexion, and issaid to have resembled the portrait ofLocke. He possessed an amiable andcheerful temper, conversational powersof the most delightful kind, and, indeed,every requisite for securing privateesteem and the approbation andapplause of society.SIR HUMPHRY DAVY.SIR HUMPHRY DAVY.HUMPHRY DAVY, the SOB of acarver in wood, who had acquired asmall independence, was born at Penzance,in Cornwall, on the 17th of December,1778. He was first placed ata preparatory school kept by Mr.Bushell; ami, even at this early age,was capable of giving a satisfactoryaccount of the contents of a book, byhastily glancing at its pages, a qualityfor which he was ever afterwards remarkable.The most prominent of hisjuvenile traits was his fondness fororatory ; not content with addressinghis schoolfellows from the top of a tub,he would sometimes shut himself up inhis room, arrange the chairs into anaudience, and give them a lecture. Healso showed some taste for chemicalpursuits ; but as he, at the same time,composed romances, made some progressin drawing, wrote verses, andacted harlequin, in a play which he gotup, it was difficult to determine theexact bent of his mind. From Mr.Bushell's, he was removed to the gram-mareschalat Penzance; and, in 1793,went to Truro, and finished his educationunder the Rev. Dr. Carew.He was not long with me," says thedoctor, in a letter to Mr. Davies GiddyGilbert ; " and while he remained, Icould not discern the faculties bywhich he was afterwards so much distinguished; I discovered, indeed, histaste for poetry, which I did not omitto encourage."Davy lost his father in 1794, and was,in the following year, apprenticed toMr. Borlase, a surgeon and apothecaryat Penzance. His boyish elasticity ofspirits now forsook him ; he becameserious and contemplative, and showedan aversion to mingling in festive society.He had, for some time, directed hisattention to philosophical inquiries, andfrom experiments of his own, had laiddown a series of propositions on thecollision of bodies ; but, upon his introductionto Mr. Borlase, his mind receiveda decided bias in favour of chemistry,which he pursued with eTrtferoeardour, to the great annoyance of hisneighbours, and the extensive destructionof his master's galli pots and phials.In short," says his biographer, Dr,Paris, " it would appear that, at thisperiod, he paid much more attention tophilosophy than to physic ; that hethought more of the bowels of the earth,than the stomachs of his patients ; andthat when he should have been bleedingthe sick, he was opening veins inthe granite." The first of his originalexperiments was performed upon theair contained in sea-weed, in order toascertain " whether, as land vegetablesare the renovators of the atmosphere ofland animals, sea vegetables might notbe the preserver of the equilibrium ofthe atmosphere of the ocean." His instruments,which were of the rudestdescription, and of his own manufactureand contrivance, soon received an additionin a case of surgical instrumentswhich had been saved from the wreckof a vessel off the Land's End. Thesehe turned to account in an experimenton the nature of heat; his theory respectingwhich, was opposed to that ofDr. Black, who maintained that heat isa material body. The experiment towhich we have alluded was followed byseveral others of an ingenious character,which were eventually embodied in anumber of essays, On Heat, Light, andthe Combinations of Light, and published,in 1799, in a work, edited byDr. Eddies, at Bristol.Davy had not been long with Mr.Borlase, when lie attracted the attentionof Mr. Gilbert, the gentleman wehave before mentioned, who offered himthe use of an excellent library, and introducedhim to Dr. Edwards, whopossessed a well-furnished laboratory.The tumultuous delight, says Dr. Paris,which Davy expressed on seeing, forthe first time, a quantity of chemicalapparatus, hitherto only known to himthrough the medium of engravings, isdescribed, by Mr. Gilbert, as surpassingall description. The air-pump, moreespecially, fixed his attention ; and heworked its piston, exhausted the receiver,and opened its valves, with th*SCIENCE.simplicity ami joy of a child engaged inthe examination of a new and favouritetoy. Not long afterwards, Dr. Eddies,who had just established the PneumaticInstitution, at Bristol, proposed to takeDavy as his assistant in the laboratory ;and the latter, having been releasedfrom his indentures, accepted this situationin October, 1798. He enteredupon the duties of his office with ardour,and gained many friends by the originalityof his talents, and the simplicityof his manners.Among the results of his experimentsat the Institution, may be mentioned thefollowing discoveries : that the gaseousoxide of azote is perfectly respirablewhen pure; that it is never deleteriousbut when it contains nitrous gas ; andthat it supports life even longer thanoxygen gas ; that siliceous earth existsgenerally in the epidermis of hollowplants ; and that galvanism is a purelychemical process, depending wholly onthe oxidation of metallic surfaces. Butthe most extraordinary of his investigationswere those relating to the physiologicaleffects of various gases. Hisintrepidity in this matter is without aparallel : it has been truly said of him,that " he sought the bubble reputationin the very jaws of death." His repeatedinhalations of large quantities ofpure nitrous oxyde, and his experimentwith diluted hydro-carbonate, and theviolent emotions they produced, arealmost incredible ; but his appallingattempt to inspire the nitrous and carburettedhydrogen gases, has only beenequalled by the self-martyrdom of theyounger Berthollet, who inclosed himselfin a life-destroying atmosphere, andregistered his successive sensations,until the pen dropped from his hand,and he was no more. Davy's own accountof one of these experiments is toointeresting to be omitted. He says,my friend, Mr. James Robin, jun.,being present, after a forced exhaustionof my lungs, the nose being accuratelyclosed, I made three inspirations andexpirations of the hydro-carbonate. Thefi erst i inspiration produced a sort of numbnessand loss of feeling in the chest,and about the pectoral muscles. Afterthe second, I lost all power of perceivingexternal things, and had no distinctsensation, except that of a terrible oppressionon the chest. During thethird expiration, this feeling subsided, Iseemed sinking into annihilation, andhad just power enough to cast off themouth-piece from my unclosed lips. Ashort interval must have passed, duringwhich I respired common air, beforethe objects around me were distinguishable.On recollecting myself, I faintlyarticulated, ' I do not think I shalldie,' " The whole of these results werepublished, in 1800, in one volume, entitledResearches, Chemical and Philosophical,chiefly concerning NitrousOxide and its Respiration.In consequence of the recommendationof Count Rumford, Davy, on the16th of February, 1801, was appointedassistant-lecturer in chemistry, directorof the laboratory, and assistant-editorof the Journals of the Royal Institution,with a salary of one hundred guinea*per annum, an apartment, coals, andcandles. He was, at this time, uncouthin his appearance, and perfectly unacquaintedwith the sophistications offashion ; but his talents and situationsoon introduced him to the best society.He was once present at a party withFuseli, who was energetic in his praiseof Milton. Davy unluckily observed,that there were many passages in theParadise Lost, which he had never beenable to understand. " Very likely, sir,very likely, sir," said Fuseli ; " but Iam sure that is not Milton's fault."During 1801, he delivered severaldesultory lectures. On the 21st ofJanuary, of the following year, he gavean introductory lecture to a course onchemistry, which produced an amazingsensation among the members, withwhom he became a perfect idol. Coleridge,the poet, used to say, "he attendedthem for the purpose of increasinghis stock of metaphors." In May,Davy delivered six lectures on the chemistryof agriculture ; and the board ofAgriculture at once engaged his servicesas chemical professor, with a salary ofone hundred guineas per annum, withoutinterfering with his office at" theRoyal Institution. His discourses onthis subject were published, in 1813, atthe request of the members of the board.On the 17th of November, 1803, hewas elected a fellow of the Royal Society,to which he became secretary, in 1807.It is impossible, within the limits of thismemoir, to give an account of the greatSIR HUMPHRY DAVY.number of interesting and importantpapers, which, at different times, werefurnished by him for the Transactions :with few exceptions, therefore, we shallleave them unnoticed. In 1804, he wasactively engaged, with the Earl of winchester,Mr. Bernard, and other philanthropicindividuals, in the Society forBettering the Condition of the Poor.In 1805, he delivered a series of lectureson geology, at the Royal Institution ;and his salary, in consequence of anextra appointment in the laboratory,was raised to four hundred guineas ayear. In 1806, he was adjudged theCopley medal, for a paper On the Methodoaf Analysing Stones containing afixed Alkali, by means of the BoracicAcitl. On the 20th of November of thesame year, he read the Valerian lecturebefore the Royal Society, in whichwas a splendid development of themysteries of the voltaic pile. By aseries of beautiful experiments, andsubtle deductions, he arrived at the importantfact, that, in a voltaic arrangement,the intensity of the electricityincreases with the number, but thequantity with the size of the plates.He was, for these brilliant discoveries,awarded a prize of three thousandfrancs, by the Institute of France. Theacceptance of this money producedilliberal comments ; and Davy remarkedto a friend, " Some people say I oughtnot to accept this prize ; and there havebeen foolish paragraphs in the papersto that effect ; but if the two countries,or governments, are at war, the men ofscience are not."In 1807, he announced the discoveryof the metallic bases of the fixed alkalies,which was soon followed by a likedecomposition of alkaline earth andboracic acid. The laws upon whichthese discoveries were founded, areamong the most successful instances ofphilosophical deduction ; and they areasimportant an engine in chemicalscience, as the doctrine of fluxions inmathematics. It may also be remarked,tli at neither of these sublime productionsof genius was the effect of a happycombination of accidents, but the resultof laborious and patient investigation.The long and brilliant series of experiments,by which Davy established thelaws of voltaic electricity, are not onlythe brightest portion of his own career,but are among the highest efforts of thehuman mind.In consequence of his great celebrityat this period, he had almost daily invitationsto the table of persons of thehighest station, and they were as constantlyaccepted. His greatest foible,indeed, was a desire to be noticed bytitled individuals: it has been remarkedthat "an inordinate admiration of hereditaryrank was the cardinal deformityof Davy's character." Still, however,he did not permit the gratification ofhis vanity to interfere with the dutiesof his office. He continued in the laboratoryuntil the hour of dinner, resumedhis labours at his return, and did notrelinquish them until three or fouro'clock in the morning. It has beensaid, " the greatest of all his wants wastime ; and the expedients by which heeconomised it, often placed him in veryridiculous positions, and gave rise tohabits of the most eccentric description :driven to an extremity, he would, inhis haste, put on fresh linen, withoutremoving that which was underneath ;and, singular as the fact may appear,he has been known, after the fashion ofthe grave-digger in Hamlet, to wear noless than five shirts, and as many pairsof stockings, at the same time. Exclamationsof surprise very frequentlyescaped from his friends at the rapidmanner in which he increased and decreasedin corpulence !"Excessive mental application, togetherwith the indulgence of an almost insatiableappetite for sensual pleasures, atlength brought the subject of our memoirinto a state of extreme bodily debility.His health became so seriously affected,that the managers of the Royal Institutionwere obliged to appoint another individualto deliver the winter course oflectures. In 1810, his Valerian lecturerelated to the combination of oxymu-riatic gas and oxygen, and the chemicalrelations between them ; in which heestablished what is understood by thechloride theory. During the sameyear, he received an invitation from theDublin Society, to deliver a course oflectures to its members upon electro-chemicalscience. The course commencedon the 8th of November ; and,at its termination, on the 29th of thesame month, a resolution was passed,that Mr. Davy be requested to acceptSCIENCE.the sum of five hundred guineas fromthe Society." In the following year, hedelivered two courses of lectures to thesame body ; one on chemical philosophy,the other on geology, for whichhe received 1^750; and, before quittingDublin, he was presented with the degreeof LL.D. Upon his return to London,he was engaged, by the Earl of Liverpool,to furnish a mode of ventilatingthe house of lords ; but the plan whichwas adopted proved a complete failure.It was, however, some addition to hisrenown, that, on the 8th of April, inthe following year, he received thehonour of knighthood; and an accessionto his comfort, that, three days afterwards,he married Mrs. Greece, awidow, with a very considerable fortune.Shortly after this marriage, hepublished his Elements of ChemicalPhilosophy, dedicated to Lady Davy,as a pledge that he should continueto pursue science with unabatedardour."On the 9th of April, 1812, Davy hadgiven his last public lecture at theRoyal Institution, though he did notformally resign his professorship untilthe beginning of the following year,when, on the motion pf Earl Spencer,seconded by Earl Darnley, he wasunanimously elected honorary professorof chemistry. About this period, he wasengaged in the composition of an improvedgunpowder, the secret of whichhe gave to his friend Mr. Children, whoadvertised and labelled the article as"Sir Humphrey Davy's Gunpowder;"which gave him great annoyance, asmany persons supposed he was a partnerin the profits of its manufacture.He wrote several letters to Mr. Childrenupon the subject, expressly requiringthat the public should be set right uponthis point. In one of them he says, " Ihave resolved to make no profit of anythingconnected with science." Theonly mystery attached to the matter is,that there really did exist some bondor engagement of partnership in thisconcern, which it was deemed expedientto cancel. In 1813, he published thesubstance of a course of lectures on TheElements of Agricultural Chemistry; bywhich he gave to the principles of agriculturean importance which they hadnever before held in the estimation ofmen of science.After the return of Buonaparte fromElba, in 1813, several English noblemenmade application to the Frenchgovernment for passports to travelthrough France, but met with a sternrefusal. Sir Humphrey Davy, beingdesirous to visit the extinct volcanoesin Auvergne, made a similar request,and received, from Napoleon, unconditionalpermission to pass through thecountry. In the latter part of October,therefore, he embarked, in a cartel,from Plymouth, accompanied by LadyDavy, and Mr. Faraday in the capacityof secretary. They landed at Morlaix,and were immediately arrested by thelocal authorities, who supposed theirpassports were forged, as no others ofthe kind had been issued. After aweek's detention, and the return of instructionsfrom Paris, they were allowedto proceed on their route, and reachedthe French capital on the 27th of themonth.His anticipated arrival had been, forsome time, the subject of conversationwith the French savant ; and his receptionwas as flattering to him as itwas creditable to them. He was visitedby Humboldt, Guy Lussac, Cuvier,and Ampere, from whom he receivedthe highest marks of attention. On the2nd of November, he attended a meetingof the Institute, and was placed atthe right hand of the president, whoannounced to the meeting that it washonoured with the presence of Le ChevalierDavy. These honours, however,were not received with the feelingwhich they were calculated to excite.He seemed to consider them more as adebt due to his surprising genius, thanas the voluntary gifts of a liberal andenlightened body of men. He washaughty in his manners, and arrogantin the expression of his opinions. Heis said to have received one of the mostdistinguished and venerable membersof the Institute without rising from hisseat ; and, it is well known, Napoleontook occasion to observe, to another ofits leading members, that he understoodthe young English chemist held themall in low estimation."Davy quitted Paris in December,and, after visiting the principal townsof Italy, returned to England in thespring of 1815, when he turned his attentionto the subject of fire-damp,SIR HUMPHRY DAVY.23'which had been the cause of so manydreadful accidents, After various experiments,he effected three modes oflighting the mines in safety ; thesewere, the blowing lamp, the pistonlamp, and the safe lamp. The principleof safety consists in their being allextinguished when the air becomes somixed with fire-damp as to be explosive; but their being thus extinguishedwas an inconvenience which itwas highly necessary to remedy. Hehad already ascertained the importantfact, that explosive mixtures could notbe fired in metallic tubes whose diametersbore a certain proportion to theirlengths. By an obvious deduction, itfollowed that, by lessening the diameter,he might shorten the tube; andthat its length might thus be reduced tothe thickness of an ordinary metallicplate ; a number of perforations madein such a plate would be a collection ofsmall tubes ; the plate thus perforatedwould resemble wire-gauze. Wire-gauzewas tried, and Davy, with almostoverpowering joy, beheld that, whilst1'ght was still preserved, it was an impenetrablebarrier to explosion. Thislittle Hercules of science was introducedin the coal mines in 1816; and,in September, 1817, Sir HumphreyDavy was invited, by a numerous bodyof coal-owners, to dine with them, atthe Queen's Head, at Newcastle. Mr.Langton presided on the occasion, and,after certain toasts had been drunk, herose, and, in the name of the gentlemenassembled, presented to their distinguishedguest a splendid service ofplate, of the value of nearly 2000. Thisnoble tribute had been richly earned.Davy had declined to take out a patentfor the invention, by which he would,beyond doubt, have obtained from fiveto ten thousand a- year. When remonstratedwith for thus neglecting his personalinterest, he replied, " My soleobject lias been to serve the cause ofhumanity; and if I have succeeded, Iam amply rewarded in the gratifyingreflection of having done so. 1 haveenough for all my views and purposes ;more wealth might be troublesome, anddistract my attention from those pursuitsin which I delight; more wealthcould not increase either my fame ormy happiness. It might, undoubtedly,enable me to put four horses to mycarriage, but what would it avail me tohave it said that Sir Humphrey driveshis carriage and four ?"Five papers relating to fire-damp incoal mines, and the combustion of explosivemixtures, were read before theRoyal Society between the 4th of May,1815, and the 23rd of January, 1817,for which Sir Humphrey Davy wasawarded the Rumford medal. Heafterwards received, from the EmperorAlexander of Russia, a superb silver-giltvase, of the value of 200 ; and, in1818, he was created a baronet In thesame year, having made some experimentsupon a few specimens of papyrifrom the ruins of Herculaneum, he was,at his own request, sent by governmentto Naples, for the purpose of unfoldingthese records. After two months unsuccessfultrial, however, he returnedto England, in 1820; and, on the 30thof November, was elected president ofthe Royal Society. In his address tothe members upon taking the chair, heobserved, " Although your good opinionhas, as it were, honoured me with arank similar to that of general, I shallalways be happy to act as a privatesoldier in the ranks of science." Towardsthe latter part of this year, applicationwas made to the president andcouncil of the Royal Society, to furnishthe government with advice relative tothe best method of manufacturing sheetcopper, so as to preserve it, when inuse as sheathing on ships' bottoms,from the corrosive effects of oxidation.Sir Humphrey singly undertook the inquiry.After a number of experimentsconnected with voltaic action, whichappeared to him satisfactory and conclusive,he communicated to the governmentthat he had fully succeededin the required discovery of a remedyfor the corrosion of copper sheathing.On putting, however, his plan intoexecution, for which purpose he madetwo voyages to sea, it was found acomplete failure. This caused himmuch mental inquietude, from thesarcasms which were, in consequence,levelled against him, and a fit of apoplexyensuing, he was recommended torevisit Italy. From hence, so unfavourablewas the state of his health,that he sent a letter to the Royal Institution,resigning his presidentship.He returned to London in the winter ofSCIENCE.1827; but, in the spring of the followingyear, he was again advised to trythe effect of Italian air ; and he accordinglyquitted England, never toreturn. On his arrival at Rome, heamused himself with writing his Consolationsin Travel, or the Last Days ofa Philosopher. These last days werenow at hand : whilst in a very weakstate, from an attack of paralysis, herequested to be removed to Geneva,and there, in the presence of his brotherand wife, he died, on the 29th of May,1823. He left no children, and bequeathedthe bulk of his property toLady Davy and his brother, the shareof the latter being nearly ,10,000.In Sir Humphrey Davy were strikinglyunited a powerful imagination and asolid judgment : it has been said ofhim that, if he had not been the firstchemist, he would have been the firstpoet of his age. He was eminentlyfertile in invention, and remarkablypatient in investigation : " his mind wasno less logical and precise than it wasdaring and comprehensive ; nothingwas too mighty for its grasp, nothingtoo minute for its observation ; like thetrunk of the elephant, it could tear upthe oak of the forest, or gently pluckthe acorn from its branch." It is, however,certain that, notwithstanding hisown extraordinary powers, and thehigh station to which he had been elevated,he entertained an unworthyjealousy of the merits of others. Thebrilliant reputation of Faraday, whomhe had first introduced to public notice,gave him some inquietude ; he feltthere could not be two suns in the samesystem, and he knew he had passedthe meridian of his glory. To the sameunhappy temperament may possibly beattributed the circumstance of his opposing,with all his efforts, the electionof Ampere as a foreign member of theRoyal Society ; although, as we havebefore stated, he had received from thatdistinguished individual the highestmarks of attention during his visit toParis, and had, for many years, heldwith him a friendly correspondenceupon subjects of science.In youth, his temper was mild andhis disposition amiable ; but as he advancedin years and reputation, he becameoccasionally captious and irascible.When a boy, his countenance was unfavourable,his voice unpleasant, andhis figure awkward : as he becameconscious of these imperfections, hebecame also soured that Nature had notbeen more bountiful in the exteriorembellishments of his person. Fromthe first moment of his success as alecturer at the Royal Institution, heseemed ashamed of the simplicity ofhis character; because his audienceconsisted of noble personages, he feltabashed that he had not been born aduke. By some, he was accused ofaffectation in his public addresses ; butit is not unlikely that much of thisarose from a desire to disguise the discordancyof his voice. He could, unfortunately,derive but little assistancefrom his ear, which was most unmusical; he could never, in fact, catchthe simple air of God Save the King.Whilst member of a volunteer corps, hecould never keep step ; and though hetook private lessons of a serjeant, hestill trod upon the heels of the fore-rankman. He was, it would appear,as little attached to painting as tomusic ; for when taken to the Louvre,he passed hastily along the gallerywithout directing his attention to asingle painting, simply observing to hiscompanion, " What an extraordinarycollection of fine frames !" The sameapathy was shewn in the lower apartments,and not even the Apollo, theLaocoon, nor the Venus de Medicis,could extort an approving smile fromhim; but, upon observing a figure treatedin the Egyptian style, and sculpturedin alabaster, he enthusiastically exclaimed," Gracious powers ! what abeautiful stalactite !" He was, indeed,enthusiastic in everything that appertainedto his own professional pursuits,or that fell in with his own habits or !amusements : he gloried in Nelson, andwould dwell upon his name with rapture; not because he won the battle ofthe Nile, but that, after he had lost hisright arm, he used to fish with the |left, a sport of which Davy was pas isionately fond.Notwithstanding his respect for rankand fashion, as he increased in fame, itdoes not appear that he mt:ch alteredeither in the simplicity of his mannersor dress. Volta, to whom he was introducedat Paria, had attired himself infull dress to receive him, but is said toDAVID BREWSTER.have started back with astonishmenton seeing the English philosopher makehis appearance in a dress of which anEnglish artisan would have beenashamed. The following anecdote is toldof him : Whilst staying for the night,at a small inn, in North Wales, withhis friend, Mr. Purkis, a third travellerentered into conversation with both, and,as it happened, talked very learnedlyabout oxygen and hydrogen, and othermatters relative to chemical science.When Davy, who had listened withgreat composure to all that had beensaid, retired to rest, Mr. Purkis askedthe stranger what he thought of hisfriend who had just left him. " Heappears," coolly replied the other,rather a clever young man, with somegeneral scientific knowledge : praywhat is his name ? " " HumphreyDavy, of the Royal Institution, ascoolly answered the other. " Goodheavens !" exclaimed the stranger ;was that really Davy ? how haveI exposed my ignorance and presumptionI"Sir Humphrey Davy's last communicationto the Philosophical Transactionswas entitled, Remarks on the Electricityof the Torpedo, in which he makesout that the electricity of the torpedohas no effect on the most delicate galvanometer.He is also known as theauthor of an interesting work on angling,called Salmon ; which, together withhis Consolations in Travel, publishedposthumously, have procured him ahigh reputation as a writer, independentlyof his philosophical publications.DAVID BREWSTER.DAVID BREWSTER, one of themost learned natural philosophers ofthe present day, was born in Scotland,about the year 1785. The greater partof his numerous treatises are insertedin the Transactions of the EdinburghRoyal Society, of which he is secretary.He is principally celebrated as the inventorof the kaleidoscope, an instrumentconstructed for the purpose ofcreating and exhibiting an infinitevariety of beautiful and perfectly symmetricalforms. The idea of the discoveryfirst occurred to him in the year1814, when he was engaged in experimentson the polarisation of light, bysuccessive reflections between plates ofglass ; an account of which was publishedin the Philosophical Transactions,for 1815, and rewarded, by the RoyalSociety of London, with the Copleymedal. The reflectors were, in somecases, inclined to each other ; and hehad occasion to remark the circulararrangement of the images of a candleround a centre, or the multiplication ofthe sectors, formed by the extremitiesof the glass plates. In repeating, at asubsequent period, the experiments ofM. Biot, on the action of fluids uponlight, Dr. Brewster placed the fluids inatrough, formed by two platecemented together at an angle ; and,the eye being necessarily placed at oneend, some of the cement, which hadbeen pressed through between theplates, appeared to be arranged into aregular figure. The remarkable symmetrywhich it presented, led to Dr.Brewster's investigation of the cause ofthis phenomenon ; and, in so doing, hediscovered the leading principles of thekaleidoscope.Having thus brought the kaleidoscopeto a state of perfection, he, bythe advice of his friends, took out apatent for it; in the specification ofwhich, he describes the kaleidoscope intwo different forms. The instrument,however, having been shown to severalopticians in London, became knownbefore he could avail himself of thepatent, and, being simple in principle,was at once largely manufactured. Tocountenance these piratical proceedings,it was asserted that Dr. Brewster hadbeen anticipated in his invention, byProfessor Wood, and Bradley, theastronomer ; but it has been sufficientlyshown, and has been certified by ProfessorWood himself, Professor Playfair,and Mr. Picket, of Geneva, that, of thekaleidoscope as at present made andused, Dr. Brewster is the original dis-science.covered. " As to the effect," says Mr.Play fair, " the thing produced, by thekaleidoscope, is a series of figures, presentedwith the most perfect symmetry,so as always to compose a whole, inwhich nothing is wanting, and nothingredundant. It matters not what theobject be, to which the instrument isdirected, if it only be in its proper place,the effect just described is sure to takeplace, and with an endless variety. Inthese respects, the kaleidoscope appearsto begin to be singular among opticalinstruments. Neither the instrumentsof Bradley, nor the experiment, ortheorem in Wood's book, have anyresemblance to this ; they go no furtherthan the multiplication of the figure."Dr. Brewster's invention," he adds,is quite singular among optical instruments;and it will be matter ofIt should be stated, however, in connexionwith the history of the kaleidoscope,that Richer and B. Porta havesuggested a polygonal speculum ; but,undoubtedly, the practical applicationof the principle to reflectors, inclinedtowards each other at small angles, waswholly a suggestion of Dr. Brewster's.The production of the kaleidoscopeexcited a singular sensation; and it iscalculated that not less than two hundredthousand were sold in threemonths, in London and Paris together ,though, out of this number, Dr. Brewstersays, that not, perhaps, one thousandwere constructed upon scientific principles,or capable of giving anythinglike a correct idea of the power of thekaleidoscope. Dr. Brewster is theeditor of The Edinburgh Philosophicalsincere regret, if any imaginary orvague analogy, between it and otheroptical instruments, should be themeans of depriving the doctor of anypart of the reward to which his skill,ingenuity, and perseverance, entitle him j menso well." I mannJournal, and of The Edinburgh Encyclopaedia;and has published a variety oftreatises, respecting polarisation of light.He is said to possess a great fund ofgeneral information, and is not moredistinguished for his scientific attaints,than for the politeness of hismanners.LITERATURE.WILLIAM WYCHERLEY.WILLIAM WYCHERLEY, the sonof a gentleman of Cleve, in Shropshire,was born there about the year 1640.After having received a school education,he was sent to France, where, althoughonly sixteen years of age, hisfine person and engaging manners recommendedhim to the notice of Madamde Montpelier, whose charms, it issaid, induced him to adopt the Romancatholic faith. He returned home inthat persuasion, a short time previouslyto the Restoration ;. and, in the year ofthat event, became a gentleman commonerof Queen's College, Oxford ; butbeing never matriculated, he left theuniversity without taking a degree, andentered himself a student of the MiddleTemple, with a view of studying thelaw. This, however, he soon "desertedfor an occupation more congenial to hismind ; and plays being then the rage,he produced his Love in a Wood, orSt James's Park, which brought himinto notice among the first noblemenand wits of the day, and into favourwith the Duchess of Cleveland, andVilliers, Duke of Buckingham, whogave him the commission of captain-lieutenantin his own company. Histalents also procured him the especialnotice of King Charles the Second, whocalled upon him during an illness, recommendedhim to take a journey toMontpellier for the restoration of hishealth, and ordered the sum of 500to be given to him to defray his expenses.Wycherley accordingly wentto France ; but, on his return, 'he lostthe favour of the king, by his absencefrom court in the prosecution of hisamour with Lady Drogheda, the commencementof which is thus related inSpence's Anecdotes: "Wycherley wasin a bookseller's shop at Bath, or Tunbridge,when Lady Drogheda came in,and happened to inquire for The PlainDealer, which he had then written,when a friend of Wycherley, whostood by him, pushed him towards her,and said, " There's the plain dealer,madam, if you want him." Wycherleymade his excuses ; and Lady Droghedasaid, " that she loved plain dealingbest." He afterwards visited the lady,and in some time married her ; but herjealous disposition rendered his union asource of little happiness ; and thoughon her death, a few years after, shesettled her whole estate upon him, thetitle was disputed ; and he became somuch involved in his circumstances bylawexpenses and other incumbrances,that he was at length thrown intoprison.He remained in confinement forseven years, when King James theSecond, going to see his comedy of ThePlain Dealer, was so pleased with theentertainment, that he bestowed a pensionof 200 upon the author, andordered his debts to be paid. Notfurnishing, however, a full account ofthe demands upon him, he still labouredunder pecuniary difficulties for manyyears, until, in 1715, he married ayoung woman with 1,500, part ofwhich he applied to the liquidation ofhis debts. He died eleven days afterthe celebration of his nuptials, makingit his last request to his wife, that shewould not take an old man for hersecond husband. In addition to theplays before-mentioned, he wrote TheGentleman Dancing Master, and TheCountry Wife ; and his posthumousworks were published by Theobald,in 1728.LITERATURE.No wit gained so much reputationin his time, or attracted the personalnotice of the great to such a degree, asWycherley. Rochester pronouncesWycherley and Shadwell to be theonly wits who have touched upon truecomedy ; but this, says Dr. Aikin, wasone profligate judging of another.Coarseness and licentiousness, withmuch wit and strength of delineation,are to be found in his plays : he attacksvice with the severity of a cynicand the language of a libertine. It hasbeen said of his manner, compared withMoliere's, tftat.Wycherley's Plain Dealeris a Misanthrope, and Moliere's Misanthropea Plain Dealer.Many anecdotes are told illustrativeof the character of Wycherley, whoappears to have been a handsomelibertine, with a tolerable share of impudenceand conceit, joined to otherqualities of a more agreeable and captivatingnature. His intrigue with theDuchess of Cleveland, who had preferredhim to her cousin, the Duke ofBuckingham, gave great offence to thelatter, until being prevailed upon toask Wycherley to supper, he was socharmed with his wit, that he cried outin a transport, " My cousin is in theright of it!" His acquaintance withthe duchess, says Spence, commencedoddly enough. One day, as he passedthe duchess's coach in the ring, sheleaned out of the window, and criedout, loud enough to be heard distinctlyby him, " Sir, you're a rascal ! you'rea villain !" Wycherley from thatinstant entertained hopes. He did notfail waiting on her the next morning,and, with a very melancholy tone,begged to know how it was possible forhim to have so much disobliged hergrace. They were very good friendsfrom that time.His first wife was jealous of him todistraction. " Their lodgings," saysDennis, " were in Bow Street, CoventGarden, opposite the Cock Tavern,whither, if he at any time went withhis friends, he was obliged to leavethe window open, that his lady mightsee there was no woman in company,or she would be immediately in adownright raving condition." Wycherleywas extremely intimate with Pope,who tells us that he had lost his memoryforty years before he died, andthat he was latterly peevish, and soforgetful, that he did not remember akindness done to him even from minuteto minute. Their correspondenceis published in the collection of Pope'sletters, and the editor observes uponthem, that to judge by the manner ofthinking and turn of expression, onemight suppose that they were distilled,and that those assigned to theboy belonged to the man of seventy,and vice verse. One of Wycherley 'speculiarities, we are told by Spence,was to read himself asleep at night,either in Montaigne, Rochefoucault,Seneca, or Grecian ; for these were hisfavourite authors. He would peruse oneof these in the evening, and the nextmorning, perhaps, write a copy ofverses on some subject similar to whathe had been reading ; and have all thethoughts of his author, only expressedin a different mode, and that withoutknowing that he was obliged to anyonefor a single thought in the wholepoem. Pope experienced this in himseveral times, and looked upon it asone of the strangest phenomena that hehad ever observed in the human mind.SIR RICHARD BLACKMORE,RICHARD BLACKMORE, the sonof an attorney, was born at Cobham,in Wiltshire, about the year 1650. Hereceived the rudiments of education ata country school, whence he removedto Westminster ; and, in 1668, he wasentered at Edmund Hall, Oxford, wherehe graduated M. A. on the 3rd of June,1676. He remained at the universityfor thirteen years, and appears to haveafterwards kept a school ; but soonrelinquishing this business, he made atour on the continent, with a view, itis probable, of acquiring or improvinghis knowledge in medicine, in whichfaculty he took his doctor's degree atSIR RICHARD BLACKMORE.Ip-ir Ij Padua. On his return, he commencedI the practice of his profession in London,I in which he obtained high eminenceand extensive practice; and in April,1687. he became a fellow of the Collegeof Physicians. His medical skill, unimpeachablemoral character, and, ifhis own declaration be true, some sharewhich he had in the succession of thehouse of Hanover, recommended himto the favour of King William ; who,in 1697, conferred upon him the honourof knighthood, and appointed him oneof his physicians in ordinary, a situationhe afterwards held under QueenAnne.It was about this time that he attractedmuch attention as an author, bythe publication of his Prince Arthur,an epic poem in ten books, written, asherelates, " by such catches and starts,and in such occasional uncertain hours,as his profession afforded, and for thegreatest part in coffee-houses, or inpassing up and down the streets." Thesuccess of this poem, at a time, saysJohnson, when literary curiosity wasyet confined to particular classes of thenation, raised the animosity of Dryden,Pope, and, in fact, almost all the eminentliterati of the age, who exerted their utmosttalents to decry it. The book was,however, praised by Locke and Moli-deux, though not very deservedly, ifDr. Johnson were sincere in his observationthat " Dennis attacked it by aformal criticism, more tedious and disgustingthan the work itself."In 1700, Sir Richard published aParaphrase on the Book of Job, and aSatire on Wit; a proclamation of defiance,which united the poets almostall against him, and which broughtupon him lampoons and ridicule fromevery side. No less than twenty differentpieces were written by men ofeminence against this one poem, whichprove it to have been not quite so contemptibleas his adversaries pretendedto consider it. Undeterred by the censuresof his rivals, whose most vindictivepersonalities failed either inarousing the fire of his anger, or depressingthat of his genius, he, in 1705,put forth another epic poem in tenbooks, entitled Eliza ; which excitedneither praise nor blame, but droppeddead-born from the press. This wasfollowed, in 1712, by his Creation, aphilosophical poem, in which he atlength succeeded in gaining the approbationof both friends and foes. Itwas pronounced by Dennis to equal thatof Lucretius in the beauty of its versification,and infinitely to surpass it inthe solidity and strength of its reasoning: Addison called it one of the mostuseful and noble productions in Englishverse : and Johnson says, if he hadwritten nothing else, this poem wouldhave transmitted him to posterity amongthe first favourites of the English muse.On the cessation of The Spectator,he, in conjunction with Mr. Hughes,brought out a paper, called The LayMonastery, which was dropped afterforty numbers, and collected in a volume,entitled A Sequel to the Spectators.In 1716, in which year he became,successively, an elect, and acensor of the College of Physicians, hepublished two volumes of Essays uponvarious Subjects ; which are to be commendedonly as they are written forthe promotion of religion. In 1721, heproduced A New Version of the Psalms,which was recommended by the archbishopand several bishops to be used inthe churches and chapels, but it does notseem ever to have obtained admissioninto public worship. This was succeededby his third epic, under the titleof Alfred, in twelve books, which is saidto have taken its place by Eliza, insilence and darkness ; benevolencebeing ashamed to favour, and malicehaving grown weary of insulting. Thecontinued attempts, however, whichhad been previously made to sully hisliterary reputation, had, in time, theeffect of injuring his professional renown,when he employed his unwelcomeleisure in writing various bookson physic. He ( died with great resignation,on the 8th of October, 1729.The literary abilities of Sir RichardBlackmore have not been properly appreciated,either by the critics of hisown, or of the present age, who seem tohave overlooked the venom of the shaftsdirected against him, whilst admiringthe fashion of the arrow, and the skilfulnessof the archer. " This writer,"says Mr. Duncombe, speaking of SirRichard, " though the butt of the wits,especially of Dryden and Pope, wastreated with more contempt than hedeserved." And he adds, "the resent-literature.ment of these wits was excited by SirRichard's zeal for religion and virtue;by censuring the libertinism of Dryden,and the profaneness that had been attributedto Pope."It is not to be denied that there wassomething absurd in Blackmore's startingepic after epic in quick succession ;but, although he wrote too much, tooquickly, and was deficient in point oftaste, he was certainly a man of considerablelearning and abilities. Butwhatever might have been the defectsof his composition, he as far exceededhis contemporaries in purity of conduct,and rectitude of intention, as they mayhave surpassed him in malevolence andgenius : and let it be remembered, forhis honour, says Johnson, that to havebeen once a schoolmaster, is the onlyreproach, which all the perspicacity ofmalice, animated by wit, has ever fixedupon his private life. As a physician,Sir Richard is not highly spoken of bymedical authorities, nor are his medicalworks, in one of which he strongly opposesinoculation for the small-pox, deservingof much consideration. Theprincipal are A Discourse on the Plague,Treatises on the Small-Pox and theSpleen, and a Dissertation on the Gout.His other works, in addition to thosebefore-mentioned, are The Redeemer,a poem, in six books ; Modern ArianUnmasked ; Just Prejudices against theArian Hypothesis ; History of the Conspiracyagainst William the Third ;Natural Theology ; and The AccomplishedPreacher, which was publishedafter his death in 1731.MATTHEW TINDAL.MATTHEW TINDAL, son of aclergyman, at Beer-ferre, Devonshire,was born there about 1657. In 1672,he became a commoner of LincolnCollege, Oxford; graduated B. A. atExeter College, in 1676; and was afterwardselected a fellow of All Souls. In1679, he took the degree of B. C. L.,and in July, 1685, that of L. L. D. Jnthe beginning of the reign of Jamesthe Second, some of the emissariesof that persuasion converted him toRomanism; but he returned to hisprotestant principles in 1687, when hepublished, like Gibbon, a candid accountof his former conversion. Havingheartily concurred in the revolution of1688, he received a pension of 200per annum from the crown, was admittedan advocate, and sat frequentlyin the court of delegates as a judge. In1/394, he published An Essay concerningObedience to the SupremePowers, and the Duty of Subjects inall Revolutions, with some Considerationstouching the present juncture ofAffairs ; and An Essay concerning theLaws of Nations and the Rights ofSovereigns. He afterwards printed severalpolitical ad theological pieces ;amongst which was A Letter to theClergymen of the Two Universities, onthe subject of the Trinity and AthanasianCreed; and, in 1706, appearedhis celebrated treatise on The Rights ofthe Christian Church, asserted againstthe Romish and all other Priests whoclaim an Independent Power over it;with a Preface concerning the Governmentof the Church of England, as byLaw established. A gentleman callingupon him, and finding him engagedupon this work, " with the pen in hishand," says Dr. Hickes, " he told himhe was ' writing a book which wouldmake the clergy mad.' " It calledforth numerous treatises and pamphletsin answer, in which the writers attackedhim with great virulence, andcharged him with inconsistency, insincerity,and apostacy. The bookwas, however, highly spoken of by thecelebrated Le Clerc, in his BibliothecaChoisie, who was, in consequence, accusedof accepting a bribe, which heindignantly denied.In reply to his various opponents,Tindal published a defence of his book,the second edition of which was, by avote of the house of commons, orderedto be burnt by the common hangman,at the same time with Sacheverell's,whose principles were in the oppositeextreme. In his defence, Tindal thusMATTHEW T I N D A L .exculpates himself from the charge ofvariableness and mutability in mattersof religion: " Coining," he bays, " asboys do, a vast tabula, to the university,and believing (my country educationteaching me no better) that allhuman and divine knowledge was tobe had there, I quickly fell into thethen prevailing notions of the highestindependent powers of the clergy ; andmeeting with none, during my long staythere, who questioned them, they, bydegrees, became so fixed and rivettedin me, that I no more doubted of themthan of my own being. King James'semissaries," he adds, " led me to thePopish mass-house,' but discoveringthe fallacy of that faith, having first receivedtheir sacrament in the collegechapel, from the hands of the warden, Iabandoned it ; and thus, having mademy escape from errors which the prejudicesof education had drawn meinto, I resolved to take nothing on trustfor the future."In 1711 and the following year, hepublished editions of The Nation vindicatedfrom the Aspersions cast onit in a late Pamphlet, entitled A Representationof the State of Religionwith regard to the late excessiveGrowth of Infidelity, Heresy, and Pro-faneneas, as passed in the Lower Houseof Convocation. He continued for severalyears to publish various politicaland other pamphlets, now forgotten ;and, in 1730, he came forward as the impugnerof revealed religion, in the firstvolume of a work entitled, Christianityas Old as the Creation, or the Gospel aRepublication of the Religion of Nature.This was attacked by several powerfulopponents, as Conybeare, Foster, andLeland j the last of whom affected totreat Tindal with contempt, in oppositionto the opinion of Dr. Middleton,who thought the work in questionexhibited a degree of study and learning,which called for a very differentkind of refutation.Tindal died in London, on the 16thof August, 1733, leaving a secondvolume of his Christianity as Old asthe Creation, by way of general replyto all his answerers ; the publication ofwhich was prevented by Dr. Gibson,Bishop of London. He was buried inClerkenwell Church, being followed tohis grave, amongst others, by EustaceBudgell ; in our memoir of whom, wehave alluded to his supposed forgery ofthe will of the deceased. 9Tindal, who seems to have been aDeist, was undoubtedly a man of muchsound erudition and great reasoningpowers, though he was not destitute ofthe spirit of disingenuousness, w which infectedsome of the writers on his side ofthe question. " Christianity itself," hesays, " stripped of the additions whichpolicy, mistake, and the circumstances oftime have made to it, is a most holy religion; all its doctrines plainly "speakthemselves to be the will of an infinitelywise and good God." " But whoeverreads his book," says one of his biographers," will soon discover his object tobe, to show that there neither has been,nor can be, any revelation distinct fromwhat he terms ' the internal revelationof the law of nature in the hearts ofmankind.' " Like those of most of thecontroversialists of the time, his pamphlets,both theological-and political,have long since ceased to interest mankind,and are now looked upon ratheras literary curiosities than as formingany part of our standard literature.JOHN ARBUTHNOT.JOHN ARBUTHNOT, the son of aScotch episcopal clergyman, was born atArbuthnot, in Kincardineshire, Scotland,not long after the year 1660. Hereceived his education at the Universityof Aberdeen, where he studied physic,and took his doctor's degree, and afterwards,coming to London, taught thescience of mathematics. In 1695, reenteredinto a controversy with Dr.Wood ward, respecting his Essay towardsa Natural History of the Earth : hisanswer to which, under the title of AnExamination of Dr. Woodward's Accountof the Deluge, &<., laid the foundationof his literary reputation, whichLITERATUREwas considerably heightened, in 1700,by his Essay on the Usefulness of MathematicalLearning. In 1704, at whichtime he stood high in the medical profession,he was appointed physicianextraordinary to Queen Anne, and wasin the same year elected a fellow of theRoyal Society ; to whose Transactionshe contributed a paper concerning theregularity of the birth of both sexes.In 1709, he was appointed the queen'sphysician in ordinary ; and in the followingyear, he was elected a fellow ofthe College of Physicians.About this time, he became intimatewith Swift and Pope ; and, in 1714, thisbrilliant triumvirate formed the plan ofwriting a satire on the abuses of humanlearning in every branch The completionof the design, however, beingfrustrated by the queen's death, thegrowing infirmities of Swift, and thebad health of Arbuthnot, all that wehave of their labours towards it, is animperfect essay, under the title of theFirst Book of the Memoirs of MartinsScriblerus. Dr. Arbuthnot having returnedfrom Paris, whither he had goneto divert his melancholy at the deathof Queen Anne, removed, in consequenceof the loss of his situation inthe royal household, from St. James'sto Dover Street, where he continuedhis pursuit of physic and literature withequal success. In 1723, he was chosensecond censor of the Royal College ofPhysicians ; and, in 1725, narrowlyescaped death from a most unusual anddangerous distemper, an imposthumein the bowels.In 1727, in which year he was madean elect of the College of Physicians,and pronounced the Tarpeian oration,he published, in quarto, his Tables ofAncient Coins, Weights, and Measures,explained and exemplified, in severaldissertations. This work, which, consideringthe difficulty of the undertaking,was pardonably defective in a few points,which were subsequently corrected, manifestedthe wit and learning of theauthor in a very eminent degree. In1731, he wrote his celebrated Epitaphupon the infamous Colonel Chartres ;contributed towards detecting andpunishing the scandalous frauds andabuses that had been carried on underthe specious name of the CharitableCorporation ; and, shortly afterwards,published his Essays concerning theNature and Choice of Aliments, andon the Effects of Air on Human Bodies.He was led to the consideration of thesesubjects by his own case, a severeasthma, which caused him, in 1734, toretire, in the hope of relief, to Hampstead,whence he returned to London,and died in the February of the followingyear.The character of Dr. Arbuthnot wasexceedingly amiable, of which a strongproof is furnished by his uninterruptedlyretaining the precarious friendshipof such men as Pope and Swift.The former said of him that he was agood doctor for any one that was ill,and a better doctor for any one thatwas well; and the latter pays an elegantcompliment to his professional skilland liberality, in the following couplet,where he laments beingFar from his kind Arbuthnot's aid,Who knows his art, but not his trade.He was highly esteemed by the literarynoblemen of his time, and had the reputationof both writing and talkingwith the most wit, and the least gall,of any of his contemporaries. " Hisvery sarcasms," says Lord Orrery,are the satirical strokes of good-nature; they are like slaps in the facegiven in jest, the effects of which mayraise blushes, but no blackness willappear from the blows." The discontinuanceof the Memoirs of MartinsScriblerus before-mentioned, and ofwhich Arbuthnot wrote nearly thewhole, is lamented by Dr. Warburtonas an event very disastrous to politeletters ; bu, says Dr. Johnson, " if thewhole may be estimated by this specimen,the want of more will not bemuch lamented." With accomplishmentswhich, in reference to a physicalweakness, made Swift remark that hewas a man who could do everythingbut walk, Dr. Arbuthnot united apurity of mind, and a rectitude of conduct,which are very affectingly evidencedin a letter, written, as it were,upon his death-bed, to Pope. Afterhis decease, appeared, in two volumes,The Miscellaneous Works of Dr. Arbuthnot; but the greater part of theseare ascertained not to be his ; and,indeed, most of his humorous productionsare so blended with those ofDANIEL DEFOE.his confederates, that they are noteasily distinguished. Those generallyattributed to him are, the celebratedHistory of John Bull ; A Treatise concerningthe Altercation, or Scolding ofthe Ancients; and, The Art of PoliticalLying; with a few more in the samespirit.DANIEL DEFOE.DANIEL DEFOE, the son of abutcher and protestant dissenter, whosename was Foe, was born in London, inthe year 1661. Little is known of themanner in which he passed his earlyyears : he was educated at Mr. Morton'sdissenting academy, at NewingtonGreen, and appears to have had religioussentiments strongly grafted uponhis mind, both by his parents and instructors.His education, notwithstandingthe assertion of Dr. Browne andothers that he was without any, wasfar from ordinary, as we learn fromhis own confessions scattered in hiswritings, that he had been master offive languages, and that he had studiedthe mathematics, natural philosophy,logic, geography and history. Shortlyafter leaving the academy, he wasnominated a Presbyterian minister ; buthaving directed his mind to politicsmore than divinity, it was his disaster,as he himself expresses it, " first to besetapart for, and then to be set apartfrom, the honour of that sacred employ."His earliest efforts as an author,however, were in defence of the dissentersagainst the attacks of the establishedclergy, in 1682, when he publisheda lampoon, entitled SpeculumCrape-bonorum, in answer to SirRoger Estrange's Guide to the InferiorClergy.In 1683, turning his attention to thewar which then subsisted between theTurks and the Austrians, he wrote apamphlet in favour of the latter, sayinghe would rather the emperor shouldtyrannize than the Turks, as these wereopposed to Christianity itself, the emperoronly to protestantism. His zealfor that cause, and the interests of civilliberty, caused him to regard the administrationof James the Second withsuch aversion, that, on the rebellion ofthe Duke of Monmouth, he joined hisstandard, and was fortunate enough,after the duke's fall, to escape in safetyto London. Here he commenced tradeas a horse factor, in Freeman's Yard,Cornwall ; but being carried away byhis vivacity into companies who weregratified by his wit, he spent more timein the tavern than the counting-house.In 1687, he took up his freedom of thecity, by the right of patrimony, andshortly after the revolution of 1688,which he hailed as the salvation of protestantism,he attended King Williamand Mary to Guildhall, superblymounted, among an equestrian bodyof rich citizens. Continuing to payless attention to trade than to politics,and having embarked in some unsuccessfulmercantile speculations, he was,in 1692, declared bankrupt, on a commission,which was, however, soonsuperseded on the petition of his principalcreditors, who accepted a compositionon his single bond. This henot only paid, but, on his ability to doso, voluntarily discharged the whole ofhis liabilities to their original amount.About 1694," says Defoe, " I wasinvited by some merchants, with whomI had corresponded abroad, and somealso at home, to settle at Cadizz, inSpain ; and that with the offers of verygood commissions. But Providence,which had other work for me to do,placed a secret aversion in my mind toquitting England, and made me refusethe best offers of that kind, to be concernedwith some eminent persons athome in proposing ways and means tothe government for raising money tosupply the occasions of the war, thennewly begun." As a reward, probably,for his suggestions respecting the waysand means alluded to, he was, in1695, without solicitation, appointedaccountant to the commissioners of theglass duties ; in which service he continueduntil the suppression of theduties, in 1699. In the interval, he >LITERATU RE.was employed in projecting severalschemes, an account of which he publishedin 1697, entitled, An Essay uponProjects; to which he was stimulatedby the numerous inventions of thatperiod, which he designated " The ProjectingAge." His own projects relatedchiefly to politics, commerce, andbenevolence ; and among them he proposeda law for registering seamen,country banks, factories for goods, acommission of inquiry into the estatesof bankrupts, and a pension office forthe relief of the poor. The work discoversgreat versatility of genius, andis spoken of by Dr. Franklin as onefrom which he had received impressionsthat probably influenced the principalevents of his life. About the sametime, he published his Inquiry intothe Occasional Conformity of Dissentersin Cases of Preferment, which involvedhim in a contro''M v with Mr. Howe,whose arguments in favour of conformitybeing very ably answered byDefoe, the former retorted with a chargeof disaffection upon the subject of ourmemoir, who, in a very spirited replyto his opponent, observes, " I tel youI am no Independent, nor Fifth-monarchyman, nor Leveller." His Reflectionswere followed by a pamphletin favour of a standing army ; but theopinions he expresses are, in manyrespects, qualified, and are to be consideredonly with reference to the timesin which he wrote.He continued for three years to publish,in succession, a variety of pamphletsconcerning the moral and politicalstate of the country; and, in 1701, appearedhis True-born Englishman, apoem, commencing with the well-knowncouplet,WhereThe dewGod erects a house of prayer,always built's a chapel there.His object, in this work, was to reproachhis countrymen with ingratitude forabusing King William as a foreigner,and by showing to the English theirmixed descent, to ridicule the boast of atrue-born Englishman; and, accordingto his own account, such was the effectof this publication, that no one everused the term for thirty years afterwards.At the time of the confinementof the deputies who presented thefamous Kentish petition, urging thecommons to grant King William suppliesfor arming against France in caseof invasion, Defoe presented a threateningremonstrance to the commons,signed " Legion," which frightened,for a time, several of the members fromattending the house. It is said thatDefoe presented it to the speaker, disguisedin a woman's dress, whilst othersassert that he did so in his own character,guarded by about sixteen gentlemenof quality, who, if any notice hadbeen taken of him, were ready to havecarried him off by force. In the sameyear, he published, successively, T lieOriginal Power of the Collective Bodyof the People of England examinedand asserted, dedicated to King William,and his Reasons against a Warwith France, in which he argues thatthe French king's having declared theson of James the Second, who had justdied, to be his lawful successor, was nojust ground of a war. " In this piece,"says Dr, Towers, " Defoe wrote againstthe views and conduct of the court,and against what then seemed to be theprevailing sense of the nation." He appears,nevertheless, to have been perfectlyright ; to have exhibited, on thisoccasion, great political discernment;and to lu.ve been influenced by nomotives but those of public spirit.In the following year, however, wefind Defoe not only advocating a warwith France, but proposing to KingWilliam, whose confidence he hadgained by his previous publications, aplan of operations against the Spanishdominions in the West Indies; in theconduct of which, had it gone on, hewas to have had a principal share.Upon the death of the king, he publisheda satirical poem, called TheMock Mourners ; in which he eulogizedthe memory of his late sovereign, and,at the same time, satirized those whohad been the principal opposers of hisadministration. This was followed bya publication called The Shortest Waywith the Dissenters, or Proposals forthe Establishment of the Church ; inwhich he assumed, with such exquisiteirony, the tone of a high churchman,that it was not only hailed with applauseby some of the church party,but deceived even the dissenters themselves,in whose behalf it was written.It was, however, sufficiently understoodDANIEL DEFOEby the leaders of the former party, tocause an order from the house of commonsfor the burning of Defoe's book,and a proclamation to be issued in theGazette, offering a reward of 50 forhis apprehension. At this time, he appearsto have been owner of some brickand pantile works, near Tilbury Fort,whence he absconded to avoid capture ;but on the commencement of a prosecutionagainst his bookseller and printer,he gave himself up, and was committedto Newgate for trial. This took placein July, 1703, when, yielding to theadvice of his advocates to throw himselfon the mercy of Queen Anne, hepleaded guilty, and was condemned topay a fine of two hundred marks, tostand thrice in the pillory, to be imprisonedduring the queen's pleasure,and to find sureties for his good behaviourfor seven years. This unjustsentence led to the composition of hisHymn to the Pillory; and whilst inNewgate, he wrote several spirited repliesto the various attacks made uponhim in the publications of the time.He also brought out an edition of hisown works, and, in 1704, he commenceda periodical paper, entitledThe Review, which extended to ninequarto volumes, and was continueduntil May, 1713. " It is easy to see,"says Mr. Chalmers, " that The Reviewpointed the way to The Tatters, Spectators,and Guardians ; which may beallowed, however, to have treated thesame topics with more delicacy of humour,more terseness of style, andgreater depth of learning ; yet hasDefoe many passages, both of prose andpoetry, which, for refinement of wit,neatness of expression, and efficacy ofmoral, would do honour either to Steeleor Addison."In the August of the year last-mentioned,Defoe, at the solicitation of Mr.Harley, then secretary of state, was releasedfrom confinement by order ofthe queen, who not only expressed herdissatisfaction at the severity of hissentence, but sent a considerable sumto his wife and family, and transmittedto him, in Newgate, sufficient moneyto pay his fine and the expenses of hisdischarge. After his release, he removedto Bury St. Edmund's, and publishedan Elegy on the Author of theTrue-born Englishman ; in the prefaceto which he states himself as beingmetaphorically dead," on account ofhis being compelled to give security forhis good behaviour for seven years.This was followed by several otherpieces of a political and satirical nature,and a second volume of his writings appearedin 1705 ; in the summer of whichyear he was sent abroad, by Harley,upon a secret mission. On his return,he wrote The High Church Legion,being an answer to Dr. Drake's Memorialof the Church of England; andshortly afterwards, having gone a journeyto Exeter, an attempt was made bythe Tory party to cause his apprehensionon a charge of sedition ; in additionto which, sham actions were broughtagainst him; his Reviews were stolenfrom the coffee-houses; and a variety ofother means were in vain resorted to,for the purpose of accomplishing hisruin.In 1706, having made some remarksupon Lord Haversham's speech relativeto the state of the nation, that noblemanpublished a Vindication of hisSpeech, containing a charge againstDefoe of mean and mercenary motives,which our author replied to in a strainof satire and noble indignation that hasseldom been equalled. In the sameyear appeared his Jure Divino, a satire,in twelve books; in which he attacksthe doctrine of divine right. His sentimentsin this performance are generallyjust; but, from some passages in his preface,he appears, notwithstanding theaccuracy of his ideas on the subject ofcivil liberty, to have been somewhattinctured with the spirit of religiousbigotry.The union with Scotland being incontemplation about this time, Defoewrote several works in support of it,which led to his being taken into theservice of the queen, by whom he wassent into Scotland for the purpose ofusing his exertions in reconciling thatcountry to the measure. His zeal exposedhim to some personal danger atEdinburgh, where he published a poem,entitled, Caledonia, which the Duke ofQueensberry granted him exclusive permissionto publish for the space of sevenyears. In 1707, he entered into a controversywith Webster, in vindicationof the dissenters ; and, on his returnhome, in 1708, he was rewarded with aLITE RATURE,pension from government for his exertionsin behalf of the union; of whichhe published a history in the followingyear, with a dedication to the queenand also to the Duke of Queensberry.In 1711, he" paid a visit to the north ofEngland; and, in consequence of hisobservations of the people's dispositionin that part to favour the Pretender, hepublished, on his return, A SeasonableCaution and Warning against the Insinuationsof the Papists and Jacobitesin favour of the Pretender. In 1713,he wrote some ironical pamphlets withthe same view ; but being again mistakenin his intent, he was accused ofwriting a seditious libel, and committedto Newgate ; from which he was, asecond time, liberated through the interferenceof Harley. During his confinementhe finished his Review ; sothat, as Mr. Chalmers observes, " inNewgate it began, and in Newgate itended." Towards the doss of QueenAnne's reign, our author had been reproachedwith versatility in his politicalsentiments, in consequence of havingretained his pension under every changeof administration; and " no sooner," hesays, " was the queen dead, but therage of men increased upon me to thatdegree, that the threats and insults Ireceived were such as I am not able toexpress." This determined him to bringout, in 1715, a vindication of his politicalconduct, under the title of AnAppeal to Honour and Justice ; inwhich he justifies himself with greatspirited completely removes all groundof accusation against him on the scoreof interested mutability. In allusion tothe charge of his being a creature ofLords Oxford and Godolphin, he says,I solemnly protest, in the presence ofHim who shall judge us all, that I havereceived no instructions, orders, or directionsfor writing anything, or materialsfrom Lord Oxford, since LordGodolphin was treasurer, or that I haveever shown to Lord Oxford anythingI had written or printed."The ill treatment he had experiencedso preyed upon his health, that, beforethe completion of his Appeal, he experienceda shock of apoplexy, fromwhich he with difficulty recovered. Inthe year last-mentioned appeared hisFamily Instructor ; a work intended topromote religion and virtue in all thedomestic relations, and by which, accordingto Mr. Chalmers, the family ofGeorge the First were instructed. Hisnext publication of importance was hiscelebrated Robinson Crusoe, to theorigin of which we have alluded in ourmemoir of Captain Potes Rogers. Itwas first published in 1719, and obtainedimmediate and universal approbation.The work is too well knownto need a description of its merits, which,are attested by the opinions of the firstcritics of the present and last centuries,by the numerous editions through whichit has passed, and by the various translationsit has received in other countries.No fiction in any language," saysDr. Blair, " was ever better supportedthan the Adventures of Robinson Crusoe;" and Johnson observed to Mrs.Thrale, that nothing ever yet writtenby mere man was wished longer by itsreaders, excepting Don Quixote, thePilgrim's Progress, and Robinson Crusoe.But the highest testimony in itsfavour is that of Rousseau, in the secondvolume of his Melius. "As wemust have books," runs the translation,there is one already written, which, inmy opinion, affords a complete treatiseon natural education. This book shallbe the first Melius shall read : in this,indeed, will, for a long time, consist hiswhole library, and it will always hold adistinguished place among others. Itwill afford us the text to which all ourconversations on the objects of naturalscience will serve only as a comment.It will serve us as our guide during ourprogress to a state of reason ; and willever afterwards give us constant pleasure,unless our taste be totally vitiated.You ask impatiently what is the title ofthis wonderful book ? Is it Aristotle,Pliny, or Buffon ? No ; it is RobinsonCrusoe."In order to deprive Defoe, who waswithout an enemy at no time of hislife, of the merit of this publication,several absurd stories were circulated atthe time of its appearance, and, amongothers, that it was written by Harley,Earl of Oxford, during his confinementin the Tower. Others accused theauthor of stealing the papers of AlexanderSelkirk ; but as Selkirk had nopapers to communicate, it' was impossiblefor Defoe to make use of any.The story of the former was first pub-danielDEFOE,lished in 1712; and although there isno doubt that our author borrowed fromthis and subsequent accounts his firstidea of Robinson Crusoe, the whole arrangementand execution, the filling upof incident, reflection, and character,are entirely his own. In 1722, he vindicatedhis character from the above ;aspersions in a publication called Serious IReflections during the Life of Robinson ICrusoe ; and, in the interim, appearedhis Life, Adventures, and Piracies ofthe famous Captain Singleton ; and TheFortunes and Misfortunes of the FamousMoll Flanders. This was followed byhis Religious Courtship, and his Journalof the Plague, one of the most ingeniousand celebrated of his works, inwhich he so skilfully blended fictionwith truth, that it deceived Dr. Meadinto quoting it as an authentic history.Many of the particulars, however,are from fact; their interest beingheightened by the manner in whichthey are related, and by the moral conclusionswith which they are dismissed.For the genius which Defoe has displayedin this work," says Sir WalterScott, " he would have deserved immortality,had he not been the authorof Robinson Crusoe." His next publicationswere, Memoirs of a Cavalier,The History of Colonel Jack, The FortunateMistress, A Tour through GreatBritain, The Political History of theDevil, and A New Voyage round theWorld, besides several others of minorimportance ; all having a moral tendency,and addressed, with equal felicity, tothe feelings, the reason, and the imagination.The number and excellence of hisvarious works, whilst they brought himenemies in the maturity, failed to procurehim the means of repose in thedecline, of his life; and it is melancholyto reflect, that his last days were passedin extreme wretchedness. Pecuniarydistress having driven him from hisresidence at Newington, he appearsto have wandered about from one placeto another without possessing any settledhabitation. A few months before hisdeath, he writes to his son-in-law, Mr.Baker, " I am at a distance from London,in Kent, nor have I a lodging inLondon, nor have I been at that placein the Old Bailey since I wrote you Iwas removed from it. At present, I amweak, having had some fits of fever ithat have left me low." In the sameletter, he speaks of the inhuman dealingof one of his sons, who, he says,suffers my two dear unprovidedchildren, and their poor dying mother,to beg their bread at his door, himselfliving in a profusion of plenty : it istoo much for me." Under these circumstances,he welcomed with satisfactionthe approach of his death, whichtook place in the parish of St. Giles's,Cripplegate, on the 24th of April, 1731.He died insolvent, and was buried inTindal's burial ground, now known bythe name of Dunghill Fields.The person of Defoe may be judgedof by its description in the proclamationissued for his apprehension, in 1703.At that time he is set forth as a middlesex,spare man, of a brown complexion,and dark brown coloured hair,but wearing a wig, with a hooked nosea sharp chin, grey eyes, and a largemole near his mouth, lie was twicemarried, and had seven children ; sixof whom survived him. One of them,Norton, as well as his father, is mentionedby Pope in the Dunciad. Noman was ever embroiled in such a continuousliterary warfare as Defoe ; and,perhaps, no man ever entered the fieldwith honest intentions, or with moreformidable weapons. Without any ofthe benefit, he incurred all the odiumof a political hireling, having no soonerconciliated one party by his opinions ofto-day, than he brought the same and ahost more against him by his opinionsof tomorrow. Had he written less, hewould have done more towards the accomplishmentof his wishes, and havediminished the number of his enemies,who, as it was, did not find it difficultto get up a very plausible charge ofinconsistency against an opponent, who,in the course of his literary career, hadwritten upwards of two hundred worksin reference to the revolutionary periodin which he lived. His poetical performancesare not to be compared tohis prose, particularly his political andcommercial tracts, in which he exhibitsuncommon penetration on thesubject of trade, and expresses himselfwith justness of sentiment, and in astyle at once forcible and perspicuous.His ecclesiastical pamphlets savourtoo much of bigotry and of orthodoxLITERATURE.asperity ; and his personalities in these,as well as his satirical poems, are notaltogether justifiable, nor consistentwith that spirit of Christianity whichhe, in general, seems anxious to inculcate.Upon the whole, however,Defoe takes his place in the rank ofwriters as a man of original and extraordinarypowers ; and is, whether as anovelist, a polemic, a commercial writer,or a historian, entitled to a high degreeof applause. His religious principlesmay be traced in his writings;and he was a strict dissenter in act aswell as word : he called theatres thenurseries of crime ; and carried his moralnotions, in many other respects, to adegree bordering upon intolerance andsuperstition. He was, however, of agenerous and benevolent disposition,and, in private life, was much belovedand respected. Though ridiculed byPope, Gay, and other of his contemporaries,he' is superior to most of themin boldness of style and originality ofthought, if not in wit and learning ; andhis dignified and independent addressto Queen Anne, prefixed to his Historyof the Union, is a noble exception tothe fulsome dedications which aboundedin that age of letters. He appears tohave been highly esteemed by LordsOxford and Godolphin, and was admittedto the table of the former, who,it is said, admired his conversationequally with his writings. Richardsonhas evidently taken Defoe as a modelfor his novels ; but he is, upon thewhole, inferior in power of descriptionto the author of Robinson Crusoe.RICHARD BENTLEY.RICHARD BENTLEY, said to betheson of a blacksmith, was born atfulton, near Wakefield, in Yorkshire,in 1662, and after having received therudiments of education at the grammarschool of the latter town, was placed atSt. John's College, Cambridge, wherelittle is known of his studies, except thathe thus early struck out some valuablediscoveries in the metre of the Latinpoets, and attended with advantagethe lectures of Sir Isaac Newton, thenLucasian professor of mathematics.Having proceeded to his degree of B.A.he commenced keeping a school atSpalding,.in Lincolnshire ; but in 1685,being appointed tutor to the son of thecelebrated Bishop Stillingfleet, thenDean of St. Paul's, he removed with hispupil, in 1689, to the University of Oxford;where, having previously takenthat degree at Cambridge, he was incorporatedM. A. Here he availedhimself of the treasures of the Bodleianlibrary in the pursuit of his studies ;and, in 1691, he published a Latinepistle to Dr. John Mill, in an editionof the Chronicle of John Mallet, whichat once procured him high reputationas a critic and scholar.On the appointment of Dr. Stilling-fleetto the see of Worcester, he madeBentley his chaplain ; and, in 1692,collated him to a prebend in his cathedral.Through the influence of hispatron, he was also elected the firstpreacher of the lecture instituted bythe celebrated Boyle, for the defenceof Christianity, in which capacity hedelivered a series of sermons, containinghis confutation of atheism. Thathe might be enabled to offer the clearestdemonstrations upon this subject, he,from time to time, personally consultedthe author of the Principia, which wasthen little understood ; and the mannerin which he explained the doctrinesboth of Newton and Locke, gave tohis own arguments in support of naturaltheology, a force which was no lessfelt than admired. In 1693, he wasappointed keeper of the royal libraryat St. James's ; and, in the followingyear, he published his Discoursesagainst Atheism, which have gonethrough several editions, and beentranslated into several foreign languages.About this time, the Hon. CharlesBoyle, afterwards Earl of Orrery,having published a new edition of theEpistles of Palais, it produced ananswer from Bentley, which led to thefamous controversy between himselfRICHARD BENTLEY.and that nobleman, respecting the authenticityof the Epistles. These weresatisfactorily proved by Bentley, in hisDissertation, to have been written bya sophist, who had assumed the nameof Palais ; but his arguments werenevertheless opposed by all the mosteminent wits and literati of the day.A confederacy was formed against him,of which Pope, Swift, Garth, and Atterburywere the leaders, each of whomassailed him with equal bitterness andilliberality. Garth applied to him thefollowing couplet in his Dispensary :So diamond* owe lustre to their foil,And to a Bentley 'tis we owe a Boyleand a caricature was produced on theoccasion representing him about to bethrust into the brazen bull of Palais,and exclaiming, " I had rather beroasted than Boiled" In 1696, hehad been created D. D. ; and in 1700,he was presented by the crown to themastership of Trinity College, Cambridge,when he resigned his prebend'sstall. In 1701, he was advanced tothe archdeaconry of Ely, and he appearsto have acted as chaplain bothto King William and Queen Anne.His arbitrary government of the collegeproduced him many enemies; and in1709, a charge was brought against himby the vice-master and some of thefellows, accusing him of scurrilous language,and embezzlement of the collegemoney. In 1710, he published apamphlet in his defence, but the contestat last gave rise to a law-suit,which, after being protracted for twentyyears, terminated in favour of Bentley.In 1716, he was appointed regiusprofessor of divinity ; and, in the followingyear, George the First havingpaid a visit to the university, and nominatedseveral persons for the degreeof D. D., Bentley, to whom belongedthe ceremony called creation, demandedfour guineas from each individual, inaddition to the usual fees, and refusedto create any doctor without payment.His conduct being brought before thevice-chancellor, he was first suspended,and subsequently degraded ; but, onthe matter being referred to the Courtof King's Bench, the proceedings againsthim were reversed, and he was restoredto. all his honours, in 1728. One of hismost inveterate opponents on this occasionwas Confers Middleton, who had,a short while before, by ridicule andanimadversion, frustrated Bentley's designof a new edition of the GreekTestament. In 1726, he printed hisedition of Terence and Phaedrus, withnotes, which was reprinted the followingyear at Amsterdam. He afterwardsbecame involved with BishopHare in a controversy on the metres ofTerence, which gave rise to the observationof Sir Isaac Newton, that " twodignified clergymen, instead of mindingtheir duty, had been righting abouta play book." The last work which exercisedthe critical powers of Bentley,was the Paradise Lost ; a new editionof which, with notes and emendations,he published in 1732. Though thisproduction exhibited strong proofs ofhis masterly genius, it was, on thewhole, laboured and feeble, and utterlyunworthy of his great powers as aclassical critic. He now grew sensibleof his decay, and passed his time incomparative inactivity until his death,which took place at Trinity College,Cambridge, on the 14th of July, 1742.The literary fame of Bentley, as ascholar and critic, is now too firmlyestablished to be injured by the attackswhich were made against him duringhis life-time. " He was," says Dr.Parr, "one of those rare and exaltedpersonages, who, whether right orwrong in detailed instances, alwaysexcite attention, and reward it alwaysinform, where they do not convincealways send away their hearers withenlarged knowledge, with animatedcuriosity, and with wholesome exerciseto those habits of thinking, whichenable them, upon mature reflection,to discern and avoid the errors of theirillustrious guide." Although, however,a host of literature himself, he oftenlost the credit of it, by sneering at theattainments of others. A person, oneday, naming to him the well-knownGreek professor, Joshua Barnes, Bentleyobserved, " that he knew no more ofGreek than an Athenian blacksmith !"and Walpole says, he, one day, reprovedhis grandson for reading a novel ; observing," Why waste your time on abook you cannot quote?"In his personal character, he hasbeen charged with being both mercenaryand extravagant ; but the onlyLITERATI) RE.foundation for the latter charge, is inthe expense which he bestowed on theimprovement of his college ; which, heused to say, he was sent by Providenceto save from famine, as Joseph wasinto Egypt. The celebrated dramatist,Cumberland, who was one of his grandsons,says, that in his ordinary style ofconversation, he was naturally lofty;and that his frequent use of " thee" andthou" with his familiars, carried with itakind of dictatorial tone, that savouredmore of the closet than the court. Inprivate life he was amiable and benevolent; and Cumberland asserts that suchwas his sensibility towards human suffering,that it became a duty with hisfamily to divert the conversation fromall topics of that sort. His haughty andoverbearing manner, however, detractedmuch from the esteem which he merited,and from the respect which histalents demanded. His pride seems tohave displayed itself at an early periodof his life, for Stillingfleet observed ofhim, when he was his chaplain, " hadhe but the gift of humility, he wouldbe the most extraordinary man inEurope." The following anecdotes aretold of him : Retiring, one day, fromthe combination-room of his college,he is said to have haughtily exclaimedto Walker, the vice-master, " Walker,our hat!" On another occasion, aftersome university matters had been longin discussion, Dr. Ashton having observed" that it was not quite clear tohim," Bentley replied, "Are we, then.to wait here till your mud has subsided?"Dr. Bentley was married tothe daughter of Sir John Bernard, andhad issue two sons and two daughters.MATTHEW PRIOR.MATTHEW PRIOR was born on the21st of July, 1664, according to some,at Inborn, in Middlesex, to others,at Wimborne, in Dorsetshire. Hedescribed himself as of Middlesex, andas the son of a gentleman ; but he issaid to have been of mean origin ; andsome assert that his father, who diedsoon after his birth, was a joiner.Young Prior was then taken under thecare of his uncle, keeper of the RummerTavern, at Charing Cross, by whom hewas sent to Westminster School, wherehe remained long enough to acquire aconsiderable degree of classical knowledge.Being destined for trade, hereturned to his uncle's house, whereasBarnet relates, being observed, bythe Earl of Dorset, reading Horace,that nobleman was so pleased with hisproficiency, that he undertook the careand expense of his education at theuniversity. He was accordingly enteredof St. John's College, Cambridge,in 1682 ; and, about four years afterwards,graduated B. A. and obtained afellowship. He early distinguishedhimself among his contemporaries, aswell by his talents in general as by theproduction, of some Latin verses onthe marriage of George, Prince of Denmark,with the Lady Anne. In 1688,he wrote his poem on the Deity, andalso, in conjunction with Charles Montague,afterwards Earl of Halifax, theCity Mouse and Country Mouse, inridicule of the Hind and Panther ofDryden, who is said to have she'd tearsat the pain he suffered from perusingthe former.This joint production obtained thefirst notice for Montague, which gaverise to the following lines by Prior,who seems to have been piqued at thepreference :My friend Charles Montague's preferred,Nor would I have it l.mg observed,That one IIIOUM: eats while t'other'* stared.He, however, did not complain long;for, in 1691, being invited to Londonby the Earl of Dorset, he was, in thatyear, sent to the congress at the Hague,as secretary to the English embassy.On his return, he was appointed oneof the gentlemen of the king's bedchamber; and, in 1695, he presentedan ode to his majesty on the death ofQueen Mary, couched in terms whichequally display the poet and thecourtier. In 1697, he was appointedsecretary to the embassy on the treatyMATTHEW PRIOR.of Ryswick ; and, in the followingyear, he held the same office at theFrench court. In 1699, he had anaudience with King William, at Loo,whence he was despatched with ordersto London ; and, upon his arrival, wasappointed under secretary of state inthe Earl of Jersey's office ; in whichcapacity he went to France to assassinthe formation of the partition treaty.In 1700, he produced his CarmenSecular, one of his most elaborate andsplendid compositions ; and, in 1701,he was made a commissioner of theboard of trade, and elected a memberof parliament for East Instead. Byhis voting for the impeachment of thepeers who had persuaded the king tothe partition treaty, he appears to havedeserted the Whigs soon after his entranceinto the house of commons.During the early part of the reign ofQueen Anne, he employed himselfchiefly in writing poetry ; and publishedsuccessively an Epistle to Boileauon the Duke of Marlborough's Victoryat Blenheim ; a volume of poems dedicatedto the Duke of Dorset, containingan eulogium on his predecessor,the poet's patron ; and an Ode on theBattle of Families. On the establishmentof The Examiner, he wrote awitty paper in ridicule of the Whigs ;and upon the return of the Tories topower, he was privately sent to Pariswith propositions of peace. He returnedin August, 1711, accompanied by theFrench plenipotentiary ; and, in thefollowing September, the preliminarieswere opened at his own residence,which led to the treaty of Utrecht. Hewas thence again sent to the Frenchcourt with the authority of an ambassador,but he did not publicly assumethat title until the departure ofthe Duke of Shrewsbury, who, it issaid, refused to be associated in theembassy with a man so meanly born.His conduct gained him the confidenceof the French monarch ; and great relianceseems to have been placed uponhis diplomatic powers at home, as,about this time, Lord Bolingbrokewrites to him," Dear Matt, hide thenakedness of thy country, and give thebest turn thy fertile brain will furnishthee to the blunders of thy countrymen,who are not much better politiciansthan the French are poets."In August, 1714, on the downfal ofthe Tories, he was recalled home ; and,on his arrival, in March, 1715, wastaken into custody on a warrant fromthe house of commons. After havingundergone an examination before acommittee of the privy council, relativeto his share in the treaty of Utrecht,he was impeached on the motion ofWalpole, and placed in confinement.During this time he wrote his Alma ;and upon his liberation, some timeafter the passing of the act of grace, in1717, from which he had been excepted,he found it necessary to recurto his studies as a means of future support.All that he at this time possessedwas the revenue accruing fromhis fellowship, which, when in hisexaltation he had been censured forretaining, he replied, " I can live uponit at last." Having completed hisSolomon, he was encouraged to add toithis other poems, and publish thewhole by subscription ; in which hewas assisted by Swift, in Ireland, andseveral powerful friends in England.The profits arising from the publicationamounted to 4,000 ; to whichLord Harley, son of the Earl of Oxford,added an equal sum for the purchaseof Downfall, in Essex, which,at the death of the poet, was to devolveto his patron. He did not live long toenjoy his good fortune, being seizedwith a fever, which, after a lingeringillness, put a period to his existenceon the 18th of September, 1721. Hewas buried in Westminster Abbey,where a monument is erected overhim ; for which " last piece of humanvanity," as he styles it in his will, heleft the sum of 500.Of the private character of Prior,there are but few memorials : as astatesman, he acted with duplicity andversatility at his entrance into politicallife, but after his first change he seemsto have remained faithfully attached tothe Tory party. Notwithstanding thedeclaration of Pope, that he was onlyfit to make verses, and less qualifiedfor business than Addison himself,Prior was decidedly fitted for the officehe filled, and was at least consideredby his employers as a very able diplomatist.He had great conversationalpowers, and many instances are recordedof his wit at repartee. BeingLITERATURE.at the opera at Paris, he sat next to aman who, in his rapture, accompaniedwith his own voice the principalsinger. Prior began to rail at the performer,when the Frenchman, ceasingfrom his song, expostulated with himfor his harsh censure of a man whowas the ornament of the stage. " Iknow all that," said the poet, " buthe sings so loudly, that I cannothear you." Whilst surveying, oneday, the royal apartments at Versailles,being shewn the victories ofLouis le Grand, painted by Lebrun,and asked whether the King of England'spalace had any such decorations,he replied, " The monuments of mymaster's greatness are to be seen everywherebut in his own house." Soonafter his return from the court ofFrance, he went to Cambridge, andpaid a visit to the master of St. John's,who, although he had a great opinionof Prior's abilities, was too muchimpressed with a sense of his own dignityto suffer a fellow of his collegeto sit down in his presence. Piquedat this, Prior wrote the following extemporeepigram on the reception hehad met with, and addressed it to themaster :1 stood, sir, patient at your feet,Before your elbow chair ;But make a bishop's throne your seat,Ml kneel before you there.One only thing can keep you dov/n,Fur your great soul too mean ;You'd not, to mount a bishop's throne,Pay homage to the queen.Although Prior was readily admittedinto the first class of society, he is representedas having been fond of lowcompany ; and we are informed bySpence, that he cohabited with a despicabledrab of the lowest species. " Ihave been assured," says the sameauthority, " that Prior, after havingspent the evening with Oxford, Boling-broke,Pope, and Swift, would go andsmoke a pipe, and drink a bottle ofale, with a common soldier and hiswife, in Long Acre, before he went tobed."With respect to his writings, saysJohnson, " he has tried all styles, fromthe grotesque to the solemn, and has notso failed in any as to incur derision ordisgrace." His style is easy, familiar,and sprightly ; but where he attemptsto imitate, he is inferior to his originals.This is chiefly apparent in his Alma, apoem written in imitation of Hudibras,in which he has the advantage of Butlerin smoothness and polish of numbers,but wants the latter's exuberance ofmatter, and variety of illustration.Alma, however, has many admirers ;and is the only piece among Prior'sworks of which Pope said he shouldwish to be the author. His amorouseffusions are cold and studied ; thelongest of them, Henry and Emma, isdescribed by Johnson as a dull andtedious dialogue, which excites neitheresteem for the man nor tenderness forthe woman. Gay, Mallet, and Lloydhave praised the genius of Prior veryhighly ; and, indeed, his works aredeserving of more eulogy than Johnsonseems disposed to allow. He possessedconsiderable felicity of expression,and in many passages hedisplays splendour and sublimity, greatknowledge, and deep thought. Uponthe whole, he may be said to be moreaccurate than graceful, more statelythan dignified, and to have morejudgment than fancy ; he is, therefore,often dull and tedious, but whilstsometimes deficient in sprightlinessand invention, he is always easy andcorrect.SIR SAMUEL GARTH.SAMUEL GARTH, the descendant ; the June of the following year, he waselected a fellow of the Royal College ofPhysicians, in London ; and, upon theof a good family in Yorkshire, was borabout the year 1665 ; and, after havingcompleted his school education, becamea member of Peter House, Cambridge,where he took the degree of doctor inmedicine on the 7th of July, 1691. Inresolution of that body, in 1696, toerect a dispensary in the college forthe purpose of giving to the poor gratuitousadvice, and medicines at a lowSIR SAMUEL GARTHrate, he was one of the most activeencouragers of the scheme. A resolutiontor the erection of such a buildinghad been passed by the Society in1688, but owing to the refusal of theApothecaries' Company to join in thesubscription, in consequence of theinterested motives of a great body ofits members, who, by their highcharges for medicines, had hithertocompletely nullified a previous order ofthe college to advise the poor gratis,several years elapsed before their intentionscould be carried into effect.It was this opposition to so benevolenta plan that led Mr. Garth to composehis admirable poem of The Dispensary,which appeared in 1699 ; and passingrapidly through several editions, acquiredour author a prodigious reputationfor wit and learning. At thistime, also, he ranked very high in hisprofession, having, by his skill andagreeable manners, gained the confidenceand esteem of most of the nobilityand gentry in the metropolis.In 1697, he delivered, before theCollege of Physicians, an Oratio laudatory,which is no less remarkable forits affinity to some of the most eloquentRoman orations, than for the curiousaccount it furnishes of the state ofphysic at that time. " This art," runsthe translation of one of the passages,of all others the most useful, knowsnot how to help itself; while, ratherfrom mock physicians than diseases,this country suffers. Here an operator,mounted on his pied horse, drawsteeth in the streets ; another is soobliging as to be at home at certainhours to receive fools ; another poresin urinals, and if he find no diseasethere, he makes it ; another still, drawstogether a crowd by the help of rope-dancing,he comes, he sees, thenrushes forth upon the multitude, andmurders without mercy."In May, 1701, a strange impedimenthaving delayed the funeral ofDryden, Dr. Garth sent for the body tothe College of Physicians, where heinstituted a subscription for its interment,and accompanied the deceasedto Westminster Abbey, having previouslypronounced over his corpse asuitable oration. As Johnson andothers doubt the truth of the circumstanceswhich are said to have led toalimentary verses, which were sewcriticised in a paper called The Einner, but much more ably deethe above proceeding, we do not relatethem ; but they may be found at lengthin the Biographia Britannica, and inJohnson's Life of Dryden. In 1702, thesubject of our memoir was elected one ofthe censors of the College of Physicians ;and, about the same time, being admittedinto a society called the Kit KatClub, he became one of its most eminentmembers. He was the friend of LordGodolphin and the Duke of Marlborough;and on the dissolution of theformer nobleman's administration, in1710, he addressed to him some com-h were severelyled The Exam-ablydefendedby Mr. Addison, in the first number ofThe Medley. In 1711, he wrote adedication for an intended edition ofLucretius, addressed to George theSecond, then Elector of Brunswick,which was considered one of the finestpieces of Latin writing of the time.On the accession of that prince to thethrone, in 1714, Dr. Garth received thehonour of knighthood, and was madephysician in ordinary to the king, andphysician-general to the army. Hisnext poetical production was entitledClaremont, addressed to the Duke ofNewcastle ; a lively and spirited poem,abounding with Vivian graces andbeauties. His last literary labour wasthe superintendence of a translation ofOvid's Metamorphoses ; to which hewrote a preface, wherein he displayedcorrect critical taste, and a thoroughacquaintance with classical literature.He died, after a short illness, onthe 18th of January, 1718-19, leavinga reputation for skill, learning, wit,and humour, which, as it had procuredhim many sincere friends and admirerswhen living, caused him to beproportionately lamented at his death.The best-natured of men, Sir SamuelGarth," says Pope, in a letter to afriend announcing the event, " hasleft me in the truest concern for hisloss. His death was very heroical, andyet unaffected enough to have made asaint or a philosopher famous. But illtongues and worse hearts have brandedeven his last moments, as wrongfully asthey did his life, with irreligion. Youmust have heard many tales on thissubject ; but if ever there was a goodChristian without knowing himself toVOL. HI.LITERATUREbe so, it was Dr. Garth." All that canbe said to elucidate this last observation,is, that the subject of it, to manyamiable qualities, added a love ofpleasure more easy to excuse thandefend, and which, in connexion withother parts of his conduct, have justifiedhis biographers in calling him alatitudinarian in religion. It should beobserved, however, that Pope expressedhis conviction that Garth died a catholic.The following anecdote is related ofhim, by Spence : Whilst in a bad stateof health, he sent for a physician, withwhom he was intimate, and entreatedthat he might be told whether thephysician thought he should recoverfrom his illness or not. His friend, thus,conjured, told him that he might struggleon with it, perhaps, for some years,but that he much feared he couldnever get the better of it entirely.Dr. Garth thanked him for dealingso fairly, turned the discourse toother things, and talked very cheerfullyall the rest of the time he staidwith him. As soon as he was gone,he called for his servant, said he was agood deal out of order, and would gotobed : he then sent for a surgeon tobleed him. Soon after, he sent for asecond surgeon, by a different servant,and was bled in the other arm. Hethen said he wanted rest, and, whenevery body had quitted the room, hetook off the bandages, and lay downwith the design of bleeding to death.His loss of blood made him faint away,and that stopped the bleeding : heafterwards sank into a sound sleep,slept all the night, waked in the morningwithout his usual pains, and said ifit would continue so he could be contentto live on.In his profession, he was humaneand liberal, and not more ready tovisit, than to relieve, the necessitous.His good-nature and affability wereproverbial ; and few men possessed agreater fund of conversational wit, or togaiety of thought joined so much goodsense and so solid an understanding.He was married, and left behind himan only daughter. An instance of hiswit, which occurred on the first nightof the performance of Addison's Cato,deserves recording : Observing LordBolingbrpke call Booth, who had actedthe principal character, into his box, andmake him a present of fifty guineas, heremarked that Cato would have somethingto live upon after he was dead.JONATHAN SWIFT.JONATHAN SWIFT, the son of anattorney, was, according to an accountwritten by himself, born at Holy'sCourt, Dublin, on the 30th of November,1667 ; although we are told, inSpence's Anecdotes, that his birth tookplace at Leicester, and that his fatherwas a clergyman. The question, saysJohnson, may be left in the obscurityin which he delighted to involve it : butit has since been pretty clearly ascertainedthat Swift was an Irishman.Having lost his father while yet aninfant, he was taken under the protectionof his uncle, Godwin Swift,from whom he was stolen by his ownnurse, and being carried to White-haven,remained there undiscovered forthree years. At the age of six, he wassent to a school at Kilkenny, and, in1682, to the University of Dublin, wherehe made such little progress in hisacademical studies, that, on examination,he was refused his degree of B. A.,and, at the end of seven years, was onlypermitted to graduate by special favour,a term used to denote want of merit.He felt this disgrace so deeply, that heresolved, from that time, to study eighthours a day, a determination to whichHe steadily adhered for the followingseven years ; three of which he passedat the University of Dublin. Sir WalterScott, however, in his life of our author,tells us that, during this period, he incurredno less then seventy penaltiesfor non-attendance at chapel and otherirregularities ; and that, in the last yearof his residence, his academical degreewas suspended, and he was sentencedto ask public pardon of the junior dean,for insolence.In 1688, having previously lost hisuncle, and being almost penniless, heJONATHAN SWIFT.applied, by the advice of his mother,to the celebrated Sir William Temple,who had married one of her relatives.Temple, highly pleased with his conversation,took him into his house, whereSwift became known to King William,who offered him a captaincy of horse,which the former, being bred to thechurch, declined. Whilst Residing withhis patron, at Moor Park, in Surrey, ourauthor was sent to the king to arguewith him in favour of triennial parliaments,but found the monarch* so impenetrableto his advice, that he usedto mention this disappointment as hisfirst antidote against vanity.In 1692, he graduated M. A. at Oxford; and, in 1694, dissatisfied at reapingno substantial benefit from thefriendship of Sir W. Temple, he leftthe house of his patron ; and shortlyafter his arrival in Ireland, entered intoholy orders, and obtained the prebendof Kilroot, in Condor. At the solicitation,however, of Temple, to return tohim, he resigned his prebendary infavour of a poor curate with eightchildren, and once more took up hisabode with Sir William, and remainedwith him until his death, in 1699.Swift was left a pecuniary legacy, andalso the papers of Temple, who, previouslyto his decease, had obtained fromKing William a promise, for our author,of the first prebend that should be vacantat Westminster or Canterbury. Inorder to remind the king of this, hededicated to him two volumes of lettersfrom the papers above-mentioned; butfinding all solicitation at court hopeless,he accepted an invitation from the Earlof Berkeley to accompany him intoIreland as his private secretary andchaplain. One Bush, however, havingpersuaded the earl that a clergymanwas not a proper person for secretary,not only supplanted Swift in the office,but prevented him from obtaining thedeanery of Derry ; and he was, in consequence,dismissed with the comparativelypoor livings of Labrador andRathbeggin, in the diocese of Meath.On the return of the Earl of Berkeleyto England, he took up his residence atLabrador, where he increased the parochialduty by reading prayers onWednesdays and Fridays, and performedall the duties of his professionwith great decency and exactness.Soon after his settlement, he invited toIreland Miss Johnson, better knownunder the appellation of Stella, whocame over, accompanied by a Mrs.Dingle, a distant relation of Sir WilliamTemple, to whom the father ofStella had been steward. With theseladies, who resided in the neighbourhoodwhen he was at home, and at theparsonage during his absence, he passedhis hours o relaxation, but they neverlived in the same house, and he sawneither without a witness.Swift, says Johnson, began early tothink, or to hope, that he was a poet;and wrote Pindaric odes to Temple,and to the king, besides other verses ;on a perusal of which, Dryden is saidto have exclaimed, " Cousin Swift, youwill never be a poet !" to which wasprobably owing his perpetual malevolenceto Dryden. These few poeticalessays were succeeded, in 1701, by hisDissensions between the Nobles andCommons of Athens and Rome, apamphlet of no great force in behalf ofKing William and his ministers. In1704, appeared The Tale of a Tub, which,though published anonymously, he isuniversally believed to have written,especially as he did not deny it whenArchbishop Sharpe and the Duchessof Somerset, by shewing it to QueenAnne, debarred him from a bishoprick.Looking over this production in thelatter years of his life, he is said to havemuttered, in an unconscious soliloquy,as he closed the book, " Good God !what a genius I had when I wrote thatbook !" To The Tale of a Tub, which,in raising the character of the wit, sinksthat of the divine, was appended TheBattle of the Books; so similar, inthe opinion of Johnson, to the Combatdes Livres, that he gives no credit tothe anonymous protestation prefixed,in which all knowledge of the Frenchbook is peremptorily disowned. In1708, he produced The Sentiments of aChurch-of-england Man; The Ridiculeof Astrology, under the signature ofBickerstaff 1 (which gave Steele thatname for The Tatler) ; The Argumentagainst Abolishing Christianity ; andThe Defence of the Sacramental Test.The second and third of these evincedhis great power of irony, and the othersdetermined his attachment to theTories, though he was at the same timeLITERATUREintimate with the wits of either party,and is said to have contributed to TheTatler at the commencement, in 1710.On the establishment of The Examiner,in the same year, he became the Torychampion in that paper; and havingbeen introduced to Harley, afterwardsthe Earl of Oxford, and secretary St.John (afterwards Lord Bolingbroke),he became one of the sixteen brotherswho dined weekly at each other'shouses, and were united by the nameof Brother.In 1711, he published A Proposal forCorrecting, Improving, and Ascertainingthe English Tongue, in a letter tothe Earl of Oxford, in which he proposesthe institution of an academy tosecure the purity of the language. Itwas followed by his famous tract, entitled,Conductor the Allies, of whicheleven thousand were sold in twomonths, and the author was raised byit to the zenith of his political importance.The popularity of this pamphletwas owing to the accordance ofthe author's views with those of thenation in favour of peace; and, asJohnson observes, it operates by themere weight of facts, with very littleassistance from the hand that producedthem. In 1712, appeared his Reflectionson the Barrier Treaty ; and,in the same year, he published Remarkson Burnet's Introduction to hisThird Volume of the History of theReformation.Being debarred of a bishoprick for thereason before-mentioned, he was, in1713, presented to the deanery of St.Patrick's, in Ireland ; but he had notbeen in Dublin a fortnight before hewas recalled to England, in consequenceof the dissensions between LordsOxford and Bolingbroke, whom he invain endeavoured to reconcile. In 1714,he published, anonymously, his PublicSpirit of the Whigs, which containedsuch reflections on the Scotch, that thepeers of that nation solicited reparationin an audience of the queen ; and aproclamation was issued, in which300 were offered for the discovery ofthe author. On his return to Ireland,he gave entertainments at his housetwice a week ; on which occasion MissJohnson regulated the table, but alwaysappeared at it as a guest ; and although,in 1716, he privately married her, nochange took place in the mode of life ofeither. " It would be difficult," saysLord Orrery, in alluding to this mysterious,connexion, " to prove that theywere ever afterwards together withouta third person." In 1720, he renderedhimself popular by a pamphlet, in whichhe recommended to the Irish the use oftheir own manufacture ; and, in 1724,appeared his celebrated letters, underthe name of Drapier ; in which he exposed,with great ability, the job ofWood's patent for a supply of coppercoinage. A proclamation, offering areward for the discovery of the authorof the fourth letter having been issued,Swift suspecting his butler had betrayedhim, dismissed him from his service,saying, " I know that my life is in yourpower, and I will not bear, out of fear,either your insolence or negligence."When the term of information had expired,he took him back, and summoningthe rest of his servants into hispresence, bade them take notice thattheir fellow-servant was no longerRobert the butler, but that his integrityhad made him Mr. Blarney, verger ofSt. Patrick's.From this time, Swift received theappellation of the dean ; and the degreeof control he possessed over the Irishmay be seen in his reply to ArchbishopBoulter, then one of the justices, fromwhose accusation of exasperating thepeople he exculpated himself by saying,"If I had lifted up my finger, theywould have torn you to pieces." " TheDrapier," says Johnson, "was a sign;the Drapier was a health ; and whichway soever the eye or ear was turned,some tokens were found of the nation'sgratitude to the Drapier." In 1726,appeared his Tulliver's Travels ; awork of which the design is too wellunderstood, and the merit too universallyacknowledged, to require any detailof either in this place. It was readby rich and poor, the learned and theilliterate, and was received with suchavidity, that the price of the firstedition was raised before the secondcould be issued. In the same year, hejoined Pope in three volumes of Miscellanies; and, in 1727, he came to London,and attended the court of Georgethe Second and his queen, from whomhe had flattered himself with the hopesof preferment. The illness of StellaJONATHAN SWIFT.soon called him back to Ireland ; and,on the 28th of January, 1728, he witnessedthe death of this unfortunateobject of his attachment A short whilepreviously to her decease, which was,doubtless, hastened by the equivocalcharacter in which he suffered her tobe regarded, he offered to publicly acknowledgeher as his wife ; but thewound had begun to mortify, and sheemphatically replied, " it is too late !"Swift's conduct towards her was at onceselfish, cruel, and cowardly ; and, withrespect to himself, he seems to haveacted equally in opposition to natureand reason. His encouragement of theaffections of Miss Van Homrig, bothbefore and after his marriage withStella, is another permanent blot uponhis memory ; as it not only contributedto hasten the death of the one, butactually broke the heart of the other,who died in 1723, after having revokeda will which she had previously madein his favour.After the death of his wife, his benevolencewas contracted ; and he becameso morose that most of his friends desertedhim. He still continued to writeon public topics, and, in a short poemon the Presbyterians, he so severelysatirized one Bettesworth, a lawyereminent for his insolence to the clergy,that he was, from very considerable reputation,brought into immediate anduniversal contempt. On his demandingof Swift whether he was the authorof the poem, he answered, " Mr.Bettesworth, I was, in my youth, acquaintedwith great lawyers, who,knowing my disposition to satire, advisedme that, if any scoundrel orblockhead whom I had lampoonedshould ask 'Are you the author of thispaper ?' I should tell him that I was notthe author ; and I therefore tell you thatI am not the author of these lines."Another story is told of Bettesworth'sgoing to his house, and, after askinghim if he was the dean, replying, " andI, sir, am Serjeant Bettesworth," uponwhich Swift is reported to have said,Of what regiment, pray ?" which soexasperated the Serjeant that he attemptedto take the dean's life.Swift, for a time, added to his popularityby lending out small sums tothe poor, for which he took no interest,but required punctuality of payment,and a small fee for the accompany.Many of his debtors failing at the appointedday, he ordered them to besued, which, at length, raised theclamour of the populace against him tosuch a degree that he was obliged todrop his plan. A fit of giddiness anddeafness, with which he had beenafflicted from his birth, grew more frequentin his later years, and his mentalpowers also declining, it was foundnecessary, in 1741, to commit his personand fortune to the care of legalguardians. In 1742, he was attackedwith an inflammation of his eye, whichhe was with difficulty restrained fromtearing out, by five attendants ; and onthe subsiding of the tumour, he sankinto a lethargy, in which he remainedspeechless for a year. At length, onthe 30th of November, 1743, when toldthat the usual bonfires were preparingto celebrate his birth-day, he answered,It is all folly ; they lead better let italone." He spoke but seldom afterwards,and died, without a struggle,about the end of October, 1744. Afterhis death appeared his Directions forServants; and the whole of his workshave been since printed in variousforms : the last edition appeared in1824, with a life by Sir Walter Scott.In youth, Swift appears to have beenreckoned handsome. Pope observedthat, though his face had an expressionof dulness, his eyes were very particular: they were as azure, he said, asthe heavens, and had an unusual expressionof acuteness?. In his personalhabits, he was scrupulously nice ; thoughthe gross passages in some of hiswritings would certainly lead to a contrarysupposition. In public, he spokewith great fluency and impressiveenergy, so that the government of Irelanddreaded his eloquence as much ashis pen. Notwithstanding the peculiaritiesin his manner, he was free,lively, and engaging in conversation ;and, in his better days, his companywas universally courted, particularly byfemales, over whose affections he seemsto have gained an ascendancy in morethan one unintentional instance.As an author, Swift is unequalledfor the originality and genius of hiswritings, which, as they abounded bothwith wit and truth, possessed a forcethat authority was unable to resist.LITERATU RE,He not only for some time dictated thepolitical opinions of the English nation,but was the first who taught theIrish to know their own strength andinterest ; in return for which they reverencedhim as a guardian, and obeyedhim as a dictator. His Tale of a Tub,Tulliver's Travels, and Drapier's Letters,are the most considerable of hisprose works ; and his Legion Club,Cadence and Vanessa, and his Rhapsodyon Poetry, are at the head of hispoetical performances. " His writings,in general," says Granger, " are regardedas standing models of our language,as well as perpetual monumentsof their author's fame." The chief meritof his style is its simplicity, and itsaccessibility to the commonest understanding:but while he thus easilyconveys his meaning, he takes littlehold either on the feelings or the imagination; his instruction is never assistedby persuasion. Nothing can exceedthe grave yet ludicrous irony underwhich he veils his humour ; it is, however,too often mixed up with languageunpardonably gross and disgusting. Ithas been said of him that he neverborrowed a thought; but without goingthe length of Lady Montagu, whoaccused him of stealing all his humourfrom Cervantes and Rabelais, we donot consider it improbable that he improvedon some of the ideas of thelatter, whose writings he enthusiasticallyadmired.Various conjectures have been formedin order to account for his conduct toVanessa and Stella, but the only certaintythat can be come to upon thesubject is, that he acted like a villain toboth. . Some have attempted, in assigninga physical infirmity of Swift as thecause of his infamous and mysteriousbehaviour, to refer the fatal consequencesof the attachment of his twovictims rather to their own passionsthan to his perfidy. However the truthof this may palliate his conduct in thecase of Vanessa, it sets his characterin a still more odious light with regardto Stella ; as, by throwing obstacles inthe way of her marriage with Dr.Tindal, he destroyed all her hopes ofhappiness with another, when he wasalready sure that she could never findit with himself. Among other reportsrespecting his marriage, it is said that,after the ceremony, his mind was in amost awful state ; and that Delany wastold, by Archbishop King, who shedtears as he spoke, that Swift was themost unhappy man on earth, but onthe subject of his wretchedness, Delanymust never ask a question. From thiscircumstance some have supposed, andattempted to prove, that Stella was anillegitimate sister of the dean ; but SirWalter Scott, with more reason, attributesthe state of his mind, at thatperiod, to his recollection of Vanessa,and the fear of his union reaching herear. His treatment of his sister hasbeen misrepresented by most of hisbiographers, who assert that he left herutterly destitute, merely for marrying atradesman ; whereas it appears that herhusband, Mr. Fenton, was in otherrespects objectionable, and that he allowedher a sufficiency after the ruin ofFenton.In his character of dean, his conductseems to have been unexceptionable ;and if his own notions of religion maybeinferred from the punctuality andsolemnity with which he performed itsrites, they must have been more deeplyimpressed upon his heart than has beengenerally supposed. He certainly, inthe former part of his life, furnishedgrounds for suspicions of, at least, hisorthodoxy, by his too great dread ofhypocrisy, which made him wish toseem worse, instead of better, than hewas. In illustration of this part of hischaracter, we are told that he went, inLondon, to early prayers, lest he shouldbe seen at church ; and that he readprayers to his servants every morningwith such secresy, that Dr. Delany wassix months in his house before he knewit. His character as a patriot is admirablydelineated in A Sketch of theState of Ireland, published in 1810.On this gloom," says the author,one luminary rose, and Irelandworshipped it with Persian idolatry ;her true patriot her first, almost herlast. Sagacious and intrepid, he saw,he dared ; above suspicion, he wastrusted ; above envy, he was beloved ;above rivalry, he was obeyed. Hiswisdom was practical and propheticremedial for the present, warning forthe future : he first taught Ireland thatshe might cease to be despot. But hewas a churchman : his gown impededJONATHAN SWIFT.his course, and entangled his efforts.Guiding a senate, or heading an army,he had been more than Cromwell, andIreland not less than England. As itwas, he saved her by his courage, improvedher by his authority, adornedher by his talents, and exalted her byhis fame."In domestic life, Swift was austereand rigorous ; and although upon thewhole a just master to his servants,none of them could regard him withaffection, and many must have shrunkfrom him with aversion. " That he wasdisposed to do his servants good," saysJohnson, " on important occasions, isno great mitigation ; benefaction canbe but rare, and tyrannic peevishnessis perpetual." According to the sameauthority, the love of a shilling wasdeeply fixed in his heart ; in confirmationof which, he tells us that Swift,when going from Sir W. Temple's tohis mother, at Leicester, travelled onfoot, unless some violence of weatherdrove him into a wagon, and at night,would go to a penny lodging, where hepurchased clean sheets for sixpence.He cannot, however, be justly calledavaricious, for he freely distributedwhat he accumulated ; and, it is probable,only saved that he might havemore to give. It may here be mentioned,that he left the greater part ofhis fortune to a hospital for lunatics andidiots, the intention of which he hadannounced in the verses upon his owndeath. In the intercourse of familiarlife, he, at last, grew haughty, petulant,and imperious ; and though no flattererhimself, began to delight in theflattery, whilst he despised the advice,of his friends and acquaintances. Popesaid of him that he did not hate praisewhen it was not extravagant or coarse ;when it was so, his manner of receivingit was more coarse and extravagantstill. On being told of a person whohad said he loved him more dearly thanall his relations and friends, he exclaimed," The man's a fool !" and ona lady's declaration, that she preferredhim to all other men, being repeated tohim, he replied, " Then I heartilydespise her."Innumerable anecdotes are recordedof his humour and eccentricity, of whichthe following are the most popular:Calling for his boots, one morning, hisservant excused himself from cleaningthem, saying, " they would soon bedirty again." " Very well," said thedean ; " get the horses ready, and wewill set out directly." The servanthesitated, and requested permission toget his breakfast first. " Oh !" said hismaster, " never mind ; you will soonbe hungry again." As they were ridingalong the road, a friend of Swift observinghim with a book in his hand,asked his man where they were going.Why," said he, " I believe we aregoing to heaven ; for my master ispraying and I am fasting." Upon oneoccasion, after he had permitted hiscook to set out on a journey to see hersister's wedding, he sent for her back,by express, to shut the door. Atanother time, hearing one of his servants,in the act of undressing, expressa luxurious wish that he could ride tobed, the dean summoned the man upstairs,commanded him to fetch a horsefrom the paddock, and prepare him forajourney ; and when the poor fellowreported that the horse was ready,Mount him then, sirrah," said Swift,and ride to bed." One evening, Gayand Pope went to see him. On theirgoing in, " Heyday, gentlemen !" saidthe doctor, " what's the meaning ofthis visit? How came you to leave allthe great lords, that you are so fond of,to come hither to see a poor dean ?"Because we would rather see youthan any of them." " Ay, any one,that did not know you so well as I do,might believe you : but, since you arecome, I must get some supper for you,I suppose?" "No, doctor, we havesupped already." " Supped already !that's impossible : why, 'tis not eighto'clock yet." " Indeed, we have."That's very strange : but, if you hadnot supped, I must have got somethingfor you. Let me see, what should Ihave had ? A couple of lobsters ? ay,that would have done very well, twoshillings: tarts, one shilling. But youwill drink a glass of wine with me,though you supped so much beforeyour usual time, only to spare mypocket?" " No, we had rather talkwith you than drink with you." " But.if you had supped with me , (as in allreason you ought to have done,) youmust have drank with me. A bottle ofwine, two shillings. Two and two areLITERATURE.four, and one is five : just a-piece. There, Pope, there'shalf-a-crown for you; and there'sanother for you, sir; for I won't saveany thing by you, I am determined."This was all said and done with hisusual seriousness on such occasions ;and, in spite of everything they couldsay to the contrary, he actually obligedthem to take the money. On LordBolingbroke's asking him to dinner,and promising to send him his bill offare, he replied, " Send me your bill ofyour company." His mode of introducinghimself was extraordinary :calling, one day, at the house of Mr.Hoy, he stole suddenly behind the chairof a lady he found in the room, and,giving her a sharp slap in the face, exclaimed," There ; now you will alwaysremember Dean Swift." At Button'scoffee house he went by the name ofthe Mad Parson, in consequence of hissingular conduct, before he made himselfknown to the wits who frequentedit : he used to walk in, lay down hishat and cane, promenade up and downthe coffee room for half an hour, takeup his hat and cane, and walk outagain without saying a word. This hedid several times, until, one evening,he suddenly touched a country gentlemanon the shoulder, and said, " Pray,sir, do you remember any good weatherin the world ?" " Yes, sir," repliedthe gentleman, somewhat startled ; " Iremember a great deal of good weatherin my time." " That is more," saidSwift, " than I can say ; I never rememberany weather that was not toohot or too cold ; too wet or too dry ;but, however, God Almighty contrivesit ; at the end of the year 'tis all verywell." On saying this, he took up hishat, and walked out of the coffee house.He was famous for making extemporeproverbs : going, one day, into a gardenfull of peaches, which the owner appearedto regard with a miserly affection,Swift coolly nttl'el one from atree, exclaiming, " It was an old sayingof my grandmother's, ' When inreach, pull a peach ;' " and happeningto pass when a gentleman was thrownfrom his horse, without much damage,into a heap of mud, he hollowed out,Never mind ; the more dirt, the lesshurt." He was fond of pranks whichbordered on childish sports ; and sometimes,by way of exercise, he wouldchase the Grattan, and other accommodatingfriends, through the largeapartments of the deanery, and up anddown stairs, driving them like horses,with his whip in his hand, till he hadaccomplished his usual quantity of exercise.He was by no means deficientin physical courage : seeing a draymanabusing his over-loaded horse, he attackedthe fellow with his whip, and gavehim several blows, exclaiming, at eachstroke, " Oh ! that I were a captain ofhorse !'' The common people receivedhim every where with profound respect ;and, upon one occasion, he made aludicrous experiment on the publicbelief in his authority : a number ofpeople having assembled round thedeanery to see an eclipse, Swift becametired of their noise, and commandedthe crier to make proclamation that theeclipse was put off by command of theDean of St. Patrick's, which had theeffect of dispersing the assembled stargazers.He was very fond of puns :Sir Walter Scott calls his application ofthe line of Virgil to the lady who threwdown, with her mantua, a Cremonafiddle, the best that ever was made :Mantua, vae misery! nimium vicina Remorse.In the following, there is, however, morelegitimate wit : A man of distinction,not remarkable for regularity in hisprivate concerns, having chosen for hismotto, Eques hand male notus, " Betterknown than trusted," was the dean'stranslation.JOHN TOLAND.JOHN TOLAND, or James JuniusToland, as he was properly called whena boy at school, was born near Londonderry,in Ireland, in November, 1669.He was reputed to be the illegitimateson of Roman catholic parents ; but heJOHN TOLAND.appears to have been born in wedlock ;and had not been long at school beforehe entertained some doubts of the religionof his ancestors ; and, at sixteen,became a zealous opposer of popery.In consequence of this change in hissentiments, he resolved to complete hiseducation in Scotland ; and he accordinglyentered, successively, the Universitiesof Glasgow and Edinburgh, wherehe graduated M. A. in 1690. He thenwent to England, where he passed twoyears among the first families of thedissenters, who, it is said, " conceivinggreat hopes from his uncommon parts,"furnished him with the means of pursuinghis studies at Leyden. On hisreturn from abroad, he obtained lettersof recommendation to Dr. Mill, andothers, at Oxford ; upon whose introduction,he was admitted to the use ofthe Bodleian library, where he collectedmaterials for several literary designs,and composed, besides othertreatises, A Dissertation, to prove theCommon Narrative of the Death ofRegulus a Fable. He had not beenlong at the university before he receivedan anonymous letter, commencing,Mr. Toland, the character you bearin Oxford, is this, that you are a manof fine parts, great learning, and littlereligion." This hint induced him,shortly afterwards, to draw up a formalconfession of his faith, which appearedin May, 1694.In 1696, he raised a clamour unparalleledin the annals of controversialwarfare, by the publication of hisChristianity not Mysterious, or a Treatiseshewing there is nothing in theGospel contrary to Reason or above it,and that no Christian Doctrine canproperly be called a Mystery. As thework was looked upon in the light ofone basins a tendency, if not a design,to overthrow revealed religion, it raisedup enemies to the author in Christiansof all denominations, and his book waseven presented by the grand jury ofMiddlesex. Not only was it also animadvertedupon by Stillingfleet, andother eminent writers of this country,but the celebrated Leibnitz publishedsome short remarks upon it in Latin.To escape, in some measure, the outcryagainst him, our author withdrewto Ireland ; but the obnoxious fame ofhis book having preceded him timber,he found himself already made thesubject of attack in the pulpits ofDublin. Here it seems that he tookmeasures calculated rather to increasethan allay the storm against him, bydiscussing the mysteries of Christianityin coffee-houses, and other public places,with an air of vanity and arrogancewhich disgusted many that would otherwisehave listened to him with therespect due to his learning. A replywas made to his book, by Mr. PeterBrown, in a pamphlet calling upon thecivil magistrate to interfere; in consequenceof which, his book was presentedby the grand jury of Dublin, and afterwardsburnt by the common hangman,according to a decree of the parliament,which also ordered, that the authorshould be taken into custody and prosecuted.In consequence of these proceedings,Toland thought it prudent to quit Ireland,where, according to Mr. Molyneux,in his correspondence with thecelebrated Locke, he had become soodious that it was dangerous for a manto have been known once to convergewith him. The same authority relatesthat, as no one would see him, or admithim to their table, he, at last, wanted ameal's meat ; and was reduced to suchpecuniary extremities, that he fell toborrowing half'-a-crown from any onethat would lend him. On his arrival inLondon, he published an apologeticaccount of the treatment he had metwith in Ireland ; in which he declaredhimself a latitudinarian, and renouncedall communion with the dissenters, whohad, it seems, been the chief promotersof his late persecution.In 1698, he published a pamphlet,entitled, Militia Reformed; in whichhe proposed to substitute that species ofarmament for a standing army ; and, inthe same year, appeared his Life ofMilton. In this work he attempted todisprove the Icon Bailie to have beenwritten by King Charles the First; andfrom this imposture, as he calls it, hedigressed to the spurious books whichhad been ascribed to Christ and hisapostles. Against the political and religiousadversaries which these partsof the work incited, he defended himselfin a treatise, entitled, Mentor ;in which he gave a catalogue of suchprimitive books as he considered toLITERATURE,be spurious ; and also a complete historyof the publication of the IconBailie. In 1699, after his return froma trip to Holland, he was employed,by the Duke of Newcastle, to publishMemoirs of Denzil, Lord Holies;and, in the following year, upon theencouragement of Mr. Robert Harley,he reprinted Harrington's Oceana. Hisnext most important publication wasAnglia Libera, in explanation andeulogy of the act of succession, occasionedby the death of the Duke ofGloucester, in 1701 ; and when theEarl of Macclesfield carried the act toHanover, Toland accompanied him,and presented his book to the PrincessSophia. From Hanover he proceededto Berlin, where he held a dispute, beforethe Queen of Prussia, with thelearned Beausobre, respecting the authorityof the books of the New Testament; of which the latter sent an accountto the Bibliotheca Germanique.He continued to employ his pen inthe civil and religious controversies ofthe time ; and, on the accession ofQueen Anne, paid a second visit to thecourts of Hanover and Berlin, where hewas very graciously received by thePrincess Sophia and the Queen ofPrussia; the latter, it is said, took apleasure in asking him questions andhearing his singular opinions. This inducedhim, on his return to England, in1704, to address to her, under the nameof Serena, letters on various philosophicalsubjects, in which he treats of TheOrigin and Force of Prejudices, TheHistory of the Soul's Immortality amongthe Heathens, and the Origin ofIdolatry ; and attempts a confutation ofSpinoza's system of philosophy. In1705, he published, at the suggestion ofMr. Harley, then secretary of state, theMemorial of the State of England, inVindication of the Queen, the Church,and the Administration ; and, in 1707,a Latin oration, urging the English toa war with France. In this, and thefollowing year, he visited Vienna,Prague, and the Hague, where he publishedtwo Latin dissertations, in whichhe declares superstition to be no lessdestructive of government than Atheism,and prefers the account given by Strabo,of the Jewish religion and its founder,to that of the Jews themselves. In thelatter end of 1710, he returned to England,where he found Mr. Harley, nowEarl of Oxford and lord treasurer, stillhis friend ; and it was owing to theliberality of that patron, says a writerin the Biographia Britannica, that, atthis time, Toland maintained a handsomepost, and took a country house atEpsom, in Surrey. However, in 1712,he lost the favour of Oxford, and commencedwriting pamphlets against theministry ; one of which, entitled TheArt of Restoring, went through teneditions in three months, and exposedhim to the danger of prosecution.On the accession of George the First,he resumed his theological pen; and,in 1718, appeared his Narazenus; orJewish, Gentile, and Mahometan Christianity,&c. &c. ; in which he stated hisown conceptions of the original plan ofthe Christian religion: which was,That the Jewish converts were still toobserve their own law throughout allgenerations, which was not, however, tobe observed by the converted Gentiles;but that both were to be united intoone body fellowship, in that part ofChristianity particularly, which, betterthan all the preparative purgations ofthe philosophers, requires the sanctificationof the spirit, and the renovationof the inward man." This was followed,in 1720, by his Pantheistic, writtenby way of dialogue; in the course ofwhich he endeavours to prove thatthere is no God but the universe. " It isthis work," says Aikin, " which has particularlysubjected Toland to the chargeof Atheism ; a charge not unmerited bythose philosophers who identify deitywith the nature of things, and representit rather as a principle than a person."In the same year, he published a workentitled, Tetradymus, in four parts ; atthe conclusion of which, he gives anaccount of his conduct and sentiments,and solemnly professes his preferenceof the Christian religion, pure and unmixed,to all others. Towards theclose of 1721, he went to his lodgings,at Putney, in a state of ill-health andpecuniary distress, under which he wassomewhat consoled by an assurancefrom Lord Wordsworth that, as long ashelived, he should never want necessaries.Toland continued to use hispen until a short time before his death,which took place on the llth of March,1722. He died with great resignation,COLLEY CIBBER.saying he had no hope but in God, andwanted nothing but death ; and DesMaizeaux, his biographer, and theeditor of his works, informs us that hemet his end without the least perturbationof mind, bidding farewell to thosethat were about him, and telling themThe character of Toland does notappear to advantage, either upon areview of his conduct or writings. Bothappear to be tainted with inconsistency,obstinacy, and conceit; and, accordingto the author of The Freeholder, arosefrom no other motive than the pleasureof appearing singular and paradoxical.The same authority justly says, that noone has written so much against religion,and no one done so little injuryto it, as Toland. Swift calls him amiserable sophist, and Des Maizeauxadmits that he might have employedmuch better the great talents and learningwhich he undoubtedly possessed.He wrote several works of minor considerationin addition to those alreadymentioned.COLLEY CIBBER.COLLEY, the son of Caius GabrielCibber, a Gernuu statuary, was born inSouthampton Street, Westminster, onthe 6th of November, 1671, and educatedat the free school of Grantham, inLincoln, where he seems to have beenequally conspicuous for his vanity, carelessness,and talent. On one occasion hewas flogged for having written avery badtheme, although the master declaredthat, in some parts of it, he had excelledall his competitors. On the deathof Charles the Second, the boys of hisclass were directed to compose a funeraloration for that monarch ; but all ofthem pleaded inability to execute sucha task but young Cibber, who was consequentlyplaced at their head. WhenJames the Second was crowned, hisschoolfellows petitioned for a holiday,which the master consented to grant oncondition that one of them should writean English ode on the occasion ; which,it is said, Cibber produced within halfan hour, but displayed so much vanityon account of his success, as to disgusthis companions, who would not permithim to join a party of them, in whoserecreations he felt particularly anxiousto share.In 1687, he left school, and attemptedto obtain a fellowship at New College,Oxford, on the plea of founder's kin bythe maternal side. His claim beingdisallowed, he entered the army for ashort while, but afterwards, coming toLondon, his partiality for the stage inducedhim to accept an engagement, atthe age of eighteen, at Drury LaneTheatre, at ten shillings per week.This was, shortly afterwards, increasedto twenty shillings, on the recommendationof Congreve, who expressedhimself much pleased with his performanceof Touchwood, in The DoubleDealer. His next character of importancewas that of Foridlewife, inThe Old Bachelor ; on hearing his resolutionto undertake which, Power observed," If the fool has a mind to blowhimself up at once, let us even give hima clear stage for it." He performedthe part in imitation of Dogget, andwith such verisimilitude, that Lie latter,who was present, joined in applaudinghim, and many of the spectators mistookhim for Dogget himself.In 1696, on the recommendation ofSouthern, his first production, entitled,Love's Last Shift, was brought on thestage, in which he represented the principalcharacter After its performance,Lord Dorset said to him, " That it wasthe best first play that any author inhis memory had produced; and thatfor a young fellow to shew himself suchan actor and such a writer in one daywas something extraordinary." Hisnext piece was Love in a Riddle, thefailure of which Cibber attributed tothe prejudice then existing in favour ofthe author of The Beggar's Opera ; asequel to which, written by Gay, aboutthis time, was forbidden to be acted.Cibber's piece, being exactly of an oppositenature, met with a proportionateLITERATURE.opposition, and, to use his own expression," was assassinated withoutmercy." In 1697, he produced Woman'sWit, and, in 1699, the tragedy ofXerxes ; the former of which met withlittle success, and the latter was damnedthe first night of representation. Thesewere succeeded by Love makes a Man,She Would and She Would Not, andThe Careless Husband, which appearedin 1706, and was received with theapplause it merited. He next produced,in succession, his Peroka and Izadora,a tragedy ; and his comedies of TheSchool Boy, The Comical Lovers, TheDouble Gallant, The Lady's Last Stake,and The Rival Fools. In 1711, he obtaineda share in the patent of DruryLane Theatre, with Wilkes and Dogget;and, upon the death of Queen Anne,the names of Booth and Sir RichardSteele were substituted in lieu ofDogget, in the new license. Steele,however, falling into pecuniary difficulties,and not attending to the concernsof the theatre, found such deductionsmade from his demands, thathe brought a suit in Chancery againsthis partners, which was successfullydefended by Cibber in person.In 1717, appeared The Nonjuror,now acted under the title of The Hypocrite.The piece, which is an adaptationof The Tartuffe of Moliere, had agreat run, and procured the author apension from the court. In 1730, hewas appointed poet laureat; a distinctionwhich, as he possessed nopoetical genius, procured him the ridiculeof both friends and enemies, whoselaugh he joined in with the good-natureof a fortunate coxcomb. He soonafterwards sold out his share of thepatent, and retired from the stage ; onwhich, however, he still occasionallyappeared ; and, at the age of seventy-four,he played Randolph, in PapalTyranny, a tragedy of his own composition.In 1740, in consequence ofthe continued attacks that were madeagainst him, he published An Apologyfor the Life of Colley Cibber, in whichhe vindicates his own character, andgives a curious and amusing account ofmany of his contemporaries. He wroteseveral other plays, in addition to thosementioned, previously to his death,which took place on the 12lh of December,1757, when he was found deadin his bed.Cibber appears, in his Apology, awork of talent and naivete, and highlyentertaining, to have drawn a very fairestimate of his own character. He confessesthat, even from his school-days,there was ever a degree of inconsistencyin his disposition ; that he was always infull spirits ; in small capacity to do right,but in a more frequent alacrity to dowrong ; and, consequently, often undera worse character than he really deserved.As an actor, Cibber excelledchiefly in foppish, and feeble old men ;but in every branch of acting he appearsto have been, at different times, successful.As an author, Cibber possessedmore genius than he was allowedby his contemporaries ; and he provedhimself by no means a despicable opponentto Pope, who carried his virulenceso far as to displace Theobaldfrom the Dunciad for the purpose ofsubstituting Cibber.In addition to the plays before-mentioned,Cibber wrote, in conjunctionwith Vanbrugh, The Provoked Husband,and several other original pieces, which,as well as his adaptations from Shakspeare,have been printed in five duodecimovolumes.SIR RICHARD STEELE.RICHARD STEELE, son of a barrister,who was secretary to the firstDuke of Ormond, was born at Dublin,according to one account, in 1671 ; butanother, by conjecture, places his birthabout 1676. By the influence of theabove nobleman he was placed at theCharter-House School, whence, in 1691,he was removed to Merton College, Oxford.Devoting himself to light literature,instead of the classics, he left theuniversity without taking a degree, andhad so strong a passion for a militarylife, that he entered as a private in theSIR RICHARD STEELE.horse-guards, by which he lost the successionto his Irish estate. By this stephe offended his relations ; but his frankand generous temper soon procured himfriends, some of whom obtained for himan ensign's commission in the guards.At this time his mode of life may beguessed from his own confession :When I was an ensign in the guards,"he says, " being thoroughly convincedof many things, of which I often repented,and as often repeated, I wrote,for my own private use, a little bookcalled The Christian Hero ; with a designprincipally to fix upon my mind astrong impression of virtue and religion,in opposition to a stronger propensity tounwarrantable pleasures." He printedthis work in 1701, with a dedication toLord Cutts,' who appointed him his privatesecretary, and obtained for him acompany in a regiment of fusiliers. Thecontrast, however, between his conductand his precepts exposing him to theridicule of his friends, he diverted theirattention from his former work, by producinga comedy called The Funeral,or Grief a-la-mode, which was broughtupon the stage in the same year. Itwas received with applause, and procuredhim the favourable notice of KingWilliam ; shortly after whose death hewas appointed gazetteer to the ministryof Lords Halifax and Sunderland, on therecommendation of Mr. Addison.In 1704, appeared The Tender Husband,in which Steele was materiallyassisted by the author of The Spectator ;and shortly afterwards was acted hisLying Lover, which, in a speech in thehouse of commons, he declared " wasdamned for its piety." In 1709, he commencedthe publication of The Tatler ;taking both the notion of his paper andthe name of Bickerstaff, under which hewrote them, from the previous letters ofSwift, who became one of his contributors,together with Addison and othereminent writers. Combining both moraland political views, Steele found hisend in siding with the existing ministry,who, in 1710, rewarded him with thepost of commissioner of the stamp duties.On a change of administration hestill continued his office ; but having,in The Guardian, which succeeded TheTatler, in 1713, attacked the new ministryunder borrowed names, he, toprevent dismissal, sent in his resignationto Lord Oxford, and at the same timeresigned a pension he had hitherto receivedfrom Queen Anne. He now continuedto write against ministers with aview of obtaining a seat in the newparliament, to which he was returned,as member for Stourbridge, in Dorset-shire,in the autumn of the year lastmentioned. His senatorial career wasnot of long duration ; for having written,in two papers, called The Crisis andThe Englishman, what was pronounceda libel by the commons, he was expelledthe house by a majority of two hundredand forty-five to one hundred and fifty-two.He now engaged in several literaryundertakings, and among others, wroteThe Spinster ; and, in opposition to TheExaminer, a paper called The Reader.On the accession of George the First,he was appointed surveyor to the royalstables at Hampton Court, and put intothe commission of the peace for Middlesex; and having procured a license tobe chief manager of the royal companyof comedians, he had interest to get itexchanged for a patent for life. In 1714,he re-entered parliament as memberfor Boroughbridge ; and in the followingyear he received, successively, thehonour of knighthood, and 500 fromSir Robert Walpole for special service.Continuing to write political pamphletsin favour of King William, he was, in1717, appointed one of the commissionersfor inquiring into the estatesforfeited by the late rebellion in Scotland; in which country, notwithstandingthe unwelcomeness of his errand,he was so well received, that he wasenabled to make some progress towardseffecting an union between the Scotchand English, in church as well as instate.This project, however, failing,on his attempting to introduce it atcourt, he started the more humble oneof conveying fish alive to any part ofthe kingdom, for which he obtained apatent in 1718.His scheme, however, after havinginvolved him in considerable expense,proved fruitless ; and he was still furtherembarrassed, in 1719, by beingdeprived of his theatrical patent, in consequenceof his having voted againstthe peerage bill. In the following year,he appealed to the public in a papercalled The Theatre, and employed hisLITERATURE.pen against the South Sea scheme ;shortly after which his patent was restoredto him. In 1722, he broughtupon the stage his excellent comedy ofThe Conscious Lovers, which producedhim a, considerable profit, besides apresent of 500 from the king, towhom it was dedicated. His heedlessextravagance, however, rendered hisgood fortune of such little avail, thathe was ultimately compelled to sell hisshare in the playhouse, with the managersof which he had the additionalmisfortune of maintaining an unsuccessfullaw-suit. In these circumstances,he received a paralytic shock,which greatly impaired his understand-standing;and, having retired to hisseat at Languor, in Wales, he died onthe 1st of September, 1729. *He wassurvived by one daughter, the issue ofhis second wife, on whose death hecame into possession of the estate abovementioned.By his first wife he had nochildren, and both marriages brought agreat increase to his fortune.The character of Sir Richard Steele,though not exemplary, appears to havemade almost every man his friend, andto have left him no enemy but himself.He possessed great benevolence andwarmth of disposition, with the correspondingfaults of indiscriminate liberalityand reckless improvidence ; butinevery sense of the words, he appearsto have been an amiable and agreeableman. " He was the best-natured creaturein the world," says Dr. Young,even in his worst state of health ; heseemed to desire nothing but to pleaseand be pleased." His veneration forAddison continued to the last; and,although the author of The Spectatorused now and then to play upon him,we are told by Pope that " he alwaystook it well." A more serious charhowever, than that of bantering slarge,ing hisfriend in society has been laid to Addison,who is said to have arrested Steelefor the loan of IQO during his pecuniaryembarrassments. Yet this wasreadily forgiven by Steele, who seemsto have been incapable of harbouringeither literary jealousy or personal malevolence.With respect to his writings, he isperhaps rather to be considered a manof parts than a man of genius; andwhile he must be allowed the praisedue to one who uses his pen in thecause of virtue, he is, at the same time,.open to censure for a style and trainof thinking equally lax and incorrect,and for precepts occasionally not lessexceptionable than his own example.Among other objects of his benevolenceand generosity was the ill-fatedSavage ; in the account of whoselife, Dr. Johnson relates the followinganecdote : Savage was desired by SirRichard, with an air of the utmost importance,to come very early to hishouse one morning. Savage came ashehad promised, found the chariot atthe door, and Sir Richard waiting forhim, and ready to go out. What wasintended, or whither they were to go,Savage could not conjecture, and wasnot willing to inquire ; but immediatelyseated himself with Sir Richard. Thecoachman was ordered to drive, andthey .hurried with the utmost expeditionto Hyde Park Corner, where theystopped at a petty ale-house, and retiredto a private room. Sir Richard theninformed him, that he intended to publisha pamphlet, and that he had desiredhim to come thither that he might writefor him. They soon sat down to thework. Sir Richard dictated, and Savage'wrote, till the dinner that was orderedhad been put upon the table. Savagewas surprised at the meanness of theentertainment, and, after some hesitation,ventured to ask wine, which SirRichard, not without reluctance, orderedto be brought. They then finished theirdinner, , and proceeded in their pamphlet,which they concluded in the afternoon.Savage then imagined his taskover, and expected .that Sir Richardwould call for the reckoning and returnhome ; when Sir Richard told him thathe was without money, and that thepamphlet must be sold before the dinnercould be paid for ; and Savage was,therefore, obliged to go and offer thenew production to sale for two guineas,which, with some difficulty, he obtained.Sir Richard then returned home, havingretired that day only to avoid his creditors,and composed the pamphlet to dischargehis reckoning. The following isalso told respecting Steele: Having oneday invited to his house a great numberof persons of the first quality, they weresurprised at the number of liveries whichsurrounded the table ; and after dinner,JOSEPH ADDISON.when wine and mirth had set them freefrom the observation of rigid ceremony,one of them inquired of Sir Richard howsuch an expensive train of domesticscould be consistent with his fortune.Sir Richard very frankly confessed thatthey were fellows of whom he wouldvery willingly be rid; and, being thenasked why he did not discharge them,declared, " That they were bailiffs, whohad introduced themselves with an execution; and whom, since he could notsend them away, he had thought it convenientto embellish with liveries, thatthey might do him credit while theystayed." His friends were diverted withthe expedient, and, by paying the debt,discharged their attendants ; having,however, previously obliged Sir Richardto promise that they should never againfind him graced with a retinue oi thesame kind.JOSEPH ADDISON.THIS eminent writer, son of DeanAddison, was born at Milton, nearAylesbury, in Wiltshire, on the 1st ofMay, 1672. In this town he receivedthe rudiments of education, under theRev. Mr. Nash, and was afterwardsremoved to the Rev. Mr. Taylor'sschool, at Salisbury, and from thence tothe Charter-House, where he becameacquainted with Steele. At the age offifteen, he was entered of Queen's College,Oxford; and, shortly afterwards,a copy of some of his Latin versesfalling into the hands of Dr. Lancaster,Dean of Magdalen College, that gentlemanwas so pleased with the talentthey displayed, that he procured theauthor's election into his own hall,where Addison took his degrees of B. A.and M. A. In the course of a fewyears, he gained the applause of bothuniversities, by his Latin compositions,which were no less esteemed abroad,and are said to have elicited fromBoileau the remark that he would nothave written against Perrault, had hebefore seen such excellent pieces by amodern hand. His first publication, acopy of verses addressed to Mr. Dryden,appeared about 1694, who bestowedgreat commendation both on this andthe one that followed it, which was atranslation of the fourth Georgic ofVirgil (omitting the story of Aristaeus).His next production was An Essay onthe Georgicss, prefixed to Mr. Dryden'stranslation, an admirable piece of criticism; and, about the same time, hewrote several small poems ; one ofwhich, dated April. 1694, was addressedto the famous Sacheverell, his intimacywith whom was subsequently brokenoff by their disagreement in politicalprinciples.Mr. Addison had, it seems, been urgedby his father to go into the church ;but either on account of his remarkableseriousness and modesty, as related byTickell, or, according to Steele, at thesuggestion of Lord Halifax, he declinedtaking orders ; and, in 1699, commenceda tour to Italy, on a travelling pensionof 300 per annum, obtained for himby Sir John Somers, whose patronagehe had previously secured by addressingto him some verses on one of the campaignsof King William. In 1701, hewrote, from Italy, an epistolary poemto Lord Halifax, which was much admiredboth at home and abroad, andwas translated into Italian verse bythe Abbot Antonio Maria Saloon, professor'sGreek, at Florence. In 1702,he was appointed to attend PrinceEugene, who then commanded for theemperor, in Italy ; but the death ofKing William happening soon afterwards,which put an end to this affairas well as his pension, he returnedhome, and published an account of histravels, dedicated to Lord Somers. Thework did not at first succeed, but, bydegrees, says the writer of his life in theBiographia Britannica, as the curiousentered deeper and deeper into thebook, their judgment of it changed, andthe demand for it became so great, thatthe price rose to five times its originalvalue before a second edition wasprinted. In 1704, an opportunity wasafforded to him of displaying his abilitieswith advantage from the following cir-LITERATUREconstance : Lord Godolphin, the treasurer,happening to complain to LordHalifax that the Duke of Marlborough'svictory at Blenheim had not been celebratedin verse as it deserved, the patronof our poet observed that he knew aperson capable of writing upon such asubject, but that he would not namehim ; adding that he had long seen, withindignation, men of no merit maintainedin pomp and luxury at the expenseof the public, while persons oftoo much modesty, with great abilities,languished in obscurity. Lord Godolphintook the hint, and, on Addisonbeing named, sent the chancellor of theExchequer to wait upon him personally,when he, in consequence, undertookhis celebrated poem of the campaign,which being shown to the lord treasurerwhen it was carried no fartherthan the famous simile of the angel, sopleased him, that he immediately appointedits author a commissioner ofappeals.In 1705, Mr. Addison accompaniedLord Halifax to Hanover ; and, in thefollowing year, he was chosen undersecretaryof state to Sir Charles Hedges,and was continued in the same office bythe Earl of Sunderland, who succeededSir Charles in December, 1706. Aboutthis time, a taste for operas beginningto prevail in England, the subject ofour memoir was requested, by severalpersons of distinction, to try his skill inthat species of composition ; and he accordinglyproduced his Rosamond,which, had the music been equal to thepoetry, would probably have met withsuccess. In 1709, he accompanied theMarquess of Wharton to Ireland as hissecretary, and was, at the same time,appointed keeper of the records in thatkingdom, with an increased salary of300 per annum. The publication ofThe Tatler having been commenced inthe same year by Steele, Addison continuedto be a principal supporter ofthat paper until its cessation, in January,1711, when the establishment of TheSpectator, in the following March, againcalled into play his unequalled powersas an essayist. Of this publication weshall, at present, only observe that itwas completed on the 6th of September,1712, and that our author was carefulto identify his papers throughout thewhole, by some letter in the name ofthe muse Clio. He also took a partin The New Spectator, which, however,failed ; and to its successor, TheGuardian, he contributed several excellentpapers, which are distinguishedby a hand.In 1713, appeared his celebratedtragedy of Cato, which, with a prologueby Pope, and an epilogue byDr. Garth, was received, on its representationat the theatre, with themost extravagant applause. Duringa run of five-and-thirty nights, it receivedthe unanimous applause ofWhigs and Tories: the former laudingto the skies every line in which libertywas mentioned, as a satire on theiropponents, and the latter echoing everyclap, to show that the satire was unfelt.It would seem, therefore, thatparty spirit, rather than the merit ofthe piece, was the source of its enthusiasticreception on the stage, whenceit may now be considered as banished.As a poetical production, however, Catoafterwards raised its author to a veryhigh rank in the literary world ; and,besides being translated into French,Italian, and German, and acted by theJesuit students at St. Omens, was attentivelycriticized by Voltaire, who,extravagant both in his praise andcensure, declared the love scenes contemptible,but the principal charactersuperior to any before brought uponthe stage. Notwithstanding, however,the weight of authority in its favour,Cato is a composition sufficiently bombasticand inflated, to merit the fate ofmany of the performances which it hasbeen fortunate enough to survive.Addison had already formed the designof composing an English Dictionaryupon the plan of the Italian DeliaCrusca; but, upon the death of QueenAnne, being appointed secretary to thelords justices, he had not leisure tocarry on the work. On the Earl ofSunderland's becoming viceroy of Ireland,our author accompanied him tothat country as secretary ; and, on theremoval of the earl, he was made oneof the lords of trade. In 1715, hebrought out The Freeholder, a kind ofpolitical Spectator, in which he so successfullymingled reason with humour,as to soften much of the party spiritwhich existed at the breaking out ofthe rebellion. About this time, he alsoJOSEPH ADDISON.published several poetical pieces ; one ofwhich was addressed to the Princess ofWales, with the tragedy of Cato ; andanother to Sir Godfrey Kneller, on theking's picture, in which he ingeniouslyadapted the heathen mythology to theEnglish sovereigns, from Charles theSecond to George the First, inclusive.In 1716, he married the Countess ofWarwick, to whose son he had beentutor; but although he had obtainedher hand by a long and anxious courtship,this union, of which one daughter.was the fruit, made no addition to hishappiness, owing to the proud and jealoustemper of the countess. In 1717, heattained his highest political elevation,being made one of the principal secretariesof state; but after holding thesituation for some time, he solicited hisown dismissal, and retired on a pensionof 1,500 a year. To the ill health,under which he was labouring at thistime, some have attributed his relinquishmentof this office ; but the truecause was his unfitness for the details ofbusiness, and his senatorial deficiencyas an orator, an objection to his prefermentwhich he had himself previouslystarted.After his retirement, he applied himselfto the completion of some religiousworks, in which he had been interruptedby his political duties, but beforehe could finish any of them, the asthmaticdisorder, under which he had forsome time suffered, increased with fatalsymptoms, and put an end to his life,at Holland House, Kensington, on the17th of June, 1719. He met his endwith great calmness and resignation,and rendered his death-bed memorableby the solemn injunction which he deliveredfrom it to his step-son, theyoung and profligate Lord Warwick.He had often before attempted to reclaimhim, and now made a last effortby saying to him, as he approached hisbed-side, " I have sent for you thatyou may see how a Christian can die."The character of Addison is moreentitled to respect than admiration ; histalents and his understanding havingbeen directed to the best of purposes,whilst his heart appears to have remaineda cold secret to all but himself.He was the patron and friend of allwhose abilities were inferior to his own,and as this was the case with most ofhis contemporaries, he had few temptationsto party spleen or inconstancy offriendship. What his general conductwould have been under more excitingcircumstances, may be conceived fromthe asperity with which he treated hisold friend Steele, in the anon vinous controversythat took place between themrespecting the peerage bill, in 1718,when the latter opposed that measurein The Plebeian, and the former defendedit in The Old Whig. His arrestof .Steele, also, and his envy and disparagementof Pope, show his characterin no very favourable light, if they donot altogether justify those tremendouslybitter lines, written by the latter, inreference to Addison concluding withthe well-known couplet,Who but must laugh, if such a man there be fWho would not weep, if Attics were he ?As far as can be discovered. Addisonseems to have been free from vanity andarrogance; and, with the exception ofthe few complimentary poems alreadyalluded to, was indebted solely to hisabilities for the station which he attained,both in his official and literarycharacter. Some writers have, nevertheless,accused him of senility; andthe manner in which, in his epistle fromItaly, he reconciles Lord Halifax to hisdismissal from office, in 1701, goes farto support the charge. Alluding to hisintimacy with the same nobleman, Mrs.Manley, in her sequel to The Atlantis,where she gives the character of Addison,under the name of Maro, exclaims," O, pity, that-politics andsordid interest should have carried himout of the road of Helicon, and snatchedhim from the embraces of the muses, tothrow him into an old withered statesman'sarms !"His moral character was uniformlyupright; and it is mentioned, to hishonour, that, whilst fervent and zealousin his own religious views, he was verytolerant towards dissent, and evenpatronised the learned but eccentricWhiston. Though mixing so muchwith the world, he was bashful andreserved in his manners, except whenamong his most intimate associates.These, previously to his marriage,generally consisted of Steele, Budgell,Philips, Carey, Covenant, and ColonelBrett ; with one or other of whom lieLITERATURE.always breakfasted, and, in the evening,he joined them at a tavern, where,it is said, he often drank wine to theinjury of his health. His society wascourted by persons of the first distinction; and the repute in which he washeld at home as well as abroad, willappear from the list of subscribers to hisworks, in which will be found the namesof the Queen of Sweden ; the Dukes ofOrleans, Tuscany, and Madeira; thePrinces of Tuscany and Parma; theDoge of Genoa; Cardinal Du Bois,and others. Queen Anne had expresseda wish to have his Cato dedicated toherself; but, says Tickell, as he haddesigned that compliment elsewhere,he felt himself bound, by his duty onthe one hand, and his honour on theother, to send it into the world withoutany dedication.To the prejudice of his fame as apoet and critic, Addison's chief literaryreputation is derived from his Spectator,a rare and immortal monument ofwit employed on the side of virtue andreligion, and of fiction and allegory onthat of justice and truth. Of the latterclass, nothing can exceed the pathosand imagination displayed in his Visionof Mirza, Pain and Pleasure, Theodosiusand Constantia, &c., whilst hishumour, in the former, is transcendentlyexemplified in his characters of the DeCoverley, the Thimbles, and theHoneycomb. Addison has also themerit of having taught a succession ofwriters to bring elegance and gaiety tothe aid of goodness, and of havingpurified intellectual pleasure, by separatingmirth from indecency and witfrom licentiousness. As a describer ofmen and manners, he is without a rival ;he copies life with so much fidelity,that he can hardly be said to invent,whilst, at the same time, his humour isso happily diffused as to give the graceof novelty to domestic scenes and dailyoccurrences. When he assumes thereligious monitor, he is equally freefrom enthusiasm and superstition ; andin his morality, has the negative excellenceof being neither dangerously laxnor impracticably rigid. In fine, tothe publication of The Spectator, maybeattributed much of that practicalgood sense and moral discriminationgenerally found in the middle ranks ofEnglish society.The incapacity of Addison in officehas already been alluded to, and inaddition to the fact of his inability toannounce the death of Queen Anne incommon terms, which was at last doneby some one else, the following anecdoteis related of one of his parliamentaryfailures : At the time of thedebate on the union act, he rose up,and addressing himself to the speaker,said, " Mr. Speaker I conceive " butcould go no farther: then, rising again,he said, " Mr. Speaker, I conceive "still unable to proceed, he sat downagain. A third time he arose, and wasstill unable to say any thing morethan, " Mr. Speaker, I conceive ;"when a young member at last arose,and said, " Mr. Speaker, I am sorry tofind that the honourable gentleman overthe way has conceived three times andbrought forth nothing." In furtherproof of his bashfulness in society, heused to say that, with respect to hisintellectual wealth, he could draw abill at 1,000, but that he had not aguinea in his pocket. His fondness forthe character of Sir Roger de Coverleyis exemplified in the following story :Having brought Sir Roger to town, he"left him, for a day, in the hands ofSteele, who, not quite so scrupulous asAddison, made the good-humouredknight perambulate Covent Garden witha nymph of the compliant kind. Thisso enraged Addison, that he told Steelehe would put it put of his power toinjure Sir Roger in future, by killinghim immediately, which he accordinglydid, by making the knight leave London,and, in the next paper, announcinghis death at Coverley Hall.In addition to the works alreadymentioned, Addison wrote a short humorouspiece, in censure of the Frenchcommerce bill, entitled, The late Trialand Conviction of Count Tariff, besidesseveral papers in The Whig Examiner.He also wrote the prologue to thecomedy of The Tender Husband, bySteele, on whose authority he is also allowedto have been the author of TheDrummer. An edition of his works appearedshortly after his death, edited byTickell, in which, besides the productionsalready noticed, appeared several translationsof Ovid's Metamorphoses, andthe admirable Dialogues on the Usefulnessof Ancient Medals.WILLIAM CONGREVE.WILLIAM CONGREVE.THIS celebrated dramatist was born,according to the inscription on hismonument, in 1672, but Mr. Malonefixes his birth at Barclay Orange, nearLeeds, in Yorkshire, about the year1670. He was educated first at Kilkenny,and afterwards at Dublin ; and,at the age of sixteen, was entered astudent of the Middle Temple, London,with a view to his study of the legalprofession. He paid, however, butlittle attention to statutes or reports,and, following the bent of his inclinationfor literary pursuits, produced anovel, called The Incognita, which, athis early age, was a most meritoriousperformance. This was succeeded byThe Old Bachelor, which was pronounced,by Dry den, the greatest firstplay he had ever beheld ; and, on itsrepresentation, in 1693, was receivedwith great applause. Lord Halifaxformed so high an opinion of theauthor, that he immediately made himone of the commissioners for licensinghackney coaches, and soon after gavehim a place in the pipe-office, and anotherin the customs of 600 per annum.Johnson gives a very just summaryof the merits of The Old Bachelor: heconsiders the characters as either easyand common, or fictitious and artificial,and the chief incident, the marrying awoman in a mask, improbable ; butthe dialogue," he says, " is quick andsparkling, the incidents such as seizethe attention, and the wit so exuberantthat it o'er-informs its tenement." Therepresentation of this play, togetherwith that of The Double Dealer, whichfollowed it, and failed, was attended byQueen Mary, on whose death, observesour previous authority, Congreve testifiedhis gratitude by a despicable effusionof elegiac poetry.In 1695, he excelled his former effortsin the production of Love for Love ;and, in 1697, his tragedy of TheMourning Bride shewed him to possesssufficient qualifications for either kindof dramatic poetry. He next engagedhis pen in a controversy with Collier,whose efforts to reform the stage beganabout this time to open the eyes ofthe public to the licentiousness ofthe writings of the living dramatists.His shafts were so well directed, thatDryden was prudent enough to shootnone in return, and Congreve enteredthe lists only to retreat, after havingexhibited the coarseness, without thestrength and learning, of his opponent.His last dramatic performance appearedsoon after, under the title ofThe Way of the World, which, thoughwritten with particular care, and considered,by many critics, as the mostperfect of his comedies, met with socold a reception, that, taking equaloffence and disgust, he resolved to trustno more to the caprice of an audience.He now devoted himself to the pleasuresof society, wrote some occasionalpoems, and, in 1710, he published anedition of his plays, dedicated to LordHalifax, to whose party he always remainedattached. During the administrationof Lord Oxford, he was permittedto hold the offices before-mentioned,and on the return of the Whigs topower, he was made secretary for theisland of Jamaica, which increased hisincome to about 1,200 per annum.He lived on, in literary indolence, thecompanion of the witty and the great,until his sixtieth year, when, alreadysuffering from gout, and blindness,brought on by cataracts in his eyes, hewas overturned in his chariot, and diedshortly afterwards, at his house inSurrey Street, Strand, on the 29th ofJanuary 1728-9. He was buried inWestminster Abbey, where a monumentwas erected to his memory byHenrietta, Duchess of Marlborough, towhom he left a legacy of about 10,000.Little is recorded of his character, andthat is not creditable either to his judgmentor his feelings. He appears tohave been parsimonious in the accumulation,and unjust in the distribution, ofhis wealth ; as he left relations in astate of distress, from which the abovelegacy would have relieved them.Though his only claim to respect consistedin his talents, he affected toLITERATURE.decline the character a man of letters,when Steele had already made him thepatron of his Miscellany, and Popeinscribed to him the translation of hisIliad. On receiving a visit from Voltaire,he gave a singular instance of thiscoxcombry, by expressing himself desirousof being considered not as anauthor, but a gentleman; when theFrenchman replied, that, "if he hadbeen only a gentleman, he should nothave come to visit him."In addition to the works before-mentioned,he wrote a masque, called TheJudgment of Paris; Semele, an opera;An Ode to King William on the takingof Namur; The Birth of the Muse,and other small poems; all of whichare beneath criticism. His reputationrests solely upon his plays, which havethe merit of originality both in plot anddialogue. His characters, however,have little nature in them ; and hisscenes, full of wit and combination,without much of imagery or passion,surprise rather than divert, and raiseadmiration oftener than merriment.Eulogy of Congreve must here end ;his plays having no other view thanamusement, and that often at the expenseof virtue and decency. " It isacknowledged," says Johnson, " withuniversal conviction, that the perusal ofhis works will make no man better ;and that their ultimate effect is to representpleasure in alliance with vice,and to relax those obligations by whichlife ought to be regulated."NICHOLAS ROWE.NICHOLAS ROWE, the son of abarrister, was born at Little Beckford,in Bedfordshire, in 1673. After havingreceived the rudiments of education ata school at Highgate, he, in 1688, wassent to Westminster School, where,under the famous Dr. Busby, he acquiredgreat perfection in classicallearning. At the age of sixteen, hewas entered a student of the MiddleTemple, where he, at first, diligentlypursued the study of the law. On thedeath of his father, however, in 1692,he suffered himself to be led away byhis fondness for poetry and polite literature; and, at the age of twenty-four, histragedy of The Ambitious Step-motherbeing acted with great applause, heabandoned the bar altogether. He nextproduced Tamerlane, by which characterhe intended to personate Williamthe Third, whilst Lewis the Fourteenthof France was represented under thatof Bajazet. It was the tragedy, saysDr. Johnson, upon which he valuedhimself most ; though its original successmay be attributed, in some degree, topolitical auxiliaries, as it was for a longtimeonly acted once a year, the anniversaryof the night on which KingWilliam landed. In 1703, appeared hisFair Penitent, founded on Massinger'sFatal Dowry, which lost something ofeffect and character in its new shape,but was otherwise rendered more interestingby poetry, situation, and sentiment.In 1706, appeared his Ulysses ;and, in the same year, he proved hisincapacity, as a writer of comedy, byproducing The Biter ; at which, althougha decided failure, he is said to havelaughed immoderately, on witnessingits representation. He next produced,in succession, his Royal Convert, JaneShore, and Lady Jane Grey, the lastand most faulty of his dramatic performances.In his Jane Shore, he affectsto imitate Shakspeare, though in whatrespect, Dr. Johnson expresses himselfat a loss to comprehend. The sameauthority, however, says that, in hisedition of Shakspeare's works, he hashappily restored many passages, and inhis life prefixed, greatly contributed tothe popularity of the immortal bard.Rowe was not without the patronageof the great: when the Duke ofQueensberry was made secretary ofstate to Queen Anne, he became hisunder-secretary, but, on the death ofhis patron, lost that post. Some timeafterwards, he was introduced to thelord treasurer, Oxford, who asked himif he could speak Spanish ; to whichRowe replied in the negative, but thathe did not doubt but he could, in aNICHOLAS ROWEshort time, both understand and speakit. The earl made no reply to thisobservation ; but Howe, probably expectingto be employed in some importantmission, retired from societylor some weeks, at the end of which heagain appeared before Lord Oxfordwith a knowledge of Spanish added tohis former attainments. Upon hiscommunicating his proficiency to thetreasurer, says Pope, who relates theanecdote, his lordship inquired, " Areyou sure you understand it perfectly ?"and being answered in the affirmative,he added, " How happy are you, Mr.Rowe, that you can have the pleasureof reading and understanding The Historyof Don Quixote in the original !"On the accession of George the First,however, he succeeded Nahum Tate aspoet laureat, and likewise became oneof the land surveyors of the customs inthe port of London, clerk of the closetto the Prince of Wales, and secretary ofpresentations under the lord chancellor,Parker. He held these situations untilhis death, which occurred on the 6th ofDecember, 1718. He was buried inthe Poet's Corner, in WestminsterAbbey, where a superb monument waserected to his memory by his widow.He had been twice married to women ofgood family, and left a son by his firstand a daughter by his second wife.In his person, he is described ashaving been a handsome, genteel man,with a mind as amiable as his person ;though Addison declares him to havebeen heartless and insincere. He washighly esteemed by Pope, who, speakingof Rowe, in "a letter to a friend,says, " there is a vivacity and gaiety ofdisposition almost peculiar to him,which makes it impossible to part fromhim without that uneasiness which generallysucceeds all our pleasure." Hisvanity is strongly illustrated in the followingincident: Dr. Garth, who usedfrequently to go to the wits' coffee house,the Cocoa Tree, in St. James's Street,was sitting there, one morning, conversingwith two persons of rank, whenRowe, the poet, who was seldom veryattentive to his dress and appearance,but still insufferably vain of being noticedby persons of consequence, entered.Placing himself in a box nearlyopposite to that in which the doctorsat, he looked constantly round with aview of catching his eye; but not succeeding,he desired the waiter to askhim for his snuff-box, which he knewto be a valuable one, set with diamonds,and the present of some foreign prince.After taking a pinch he returned thebox, but asked for it again so repeatedly,that Garth, who knew him well, perceivedthe drift, and taking from hispocket a pencil, marked on the lid thetwo Greek characters, phi, rho. (Fie,Rowe !) The poet was so mortified thathe quitted the room immediately.His powers of elocution would seemto have been considerable, for it wasaffirmed, by Mrs. Oldfield, that the bestschool she had ever known, was hearingRowe read her part in his tragedies.As a tragic poet, he seldom attempts toanalyze the passions, and draws hischaracters with little discrimination ;but his scenes, if not stirring, are alwayspleasing, and seldom often withtheir unreasonableness, if they do notstrike with their novelty. The onlycharacter in which he strongly movesor affects his audience is in Jane Shore,who, says Johnson, is always seen andheard with pity. As an original poet,Rowe does not take a very high rank,but his translation of Lucan's Pharsalia,published after his death, is considered,by the authority just mentioned, as oneof the greatest 'productions of Englishpoetry. He also gave translations ofthe first book of Quillet's Callipaedia,and of the golden verses of Pythagoras.An edition of his works appeared, inthree volumes, duodecimo, in 1719.ANTHONY COLLINS.THIS celebrated metaphysical writerwas born at Weston, near Hounslow, inMiddlesex, on the 21st of June, 1676,He received his education at EtonSchool, and King's College, Cambridge,whence he removed to the Temple,with a view of studying for the bar, butsoon renounced, in disgust, all thoughtsLITERATURE,of the legal profession. In 1698, hemarried the daughter of Sir FrancisChild, an alderman of London ; afterwhich event, he devoted his principalattention to the cultivation of literaryconnections and to freedom of inquiry.In 1700, he published a tract, entitled,Several of the London Cases considered; and three years after thedeath of Locke, who seems to haveconceived a warm friendship for him,appeared his Essay concerning the Useof Reason in Propositions, the Evidencewhereof depends upon Human Testimony.This work contains manyvaluable and just observations ; butthe reader will easily perceive in it theseeds of that prejudice against revelation,which is more fully developed inthe author's subsequent writings. Inthe same year, (1707,) he took part inthe controversy between Mr. Dwelland Mr. (afterwards Doctor) SamuelClarke, concerning the natural immortalityof the soul ; against which heargued in five pamphlets, publishedanonymously, as had also been his precedingworks. In 1709, he produced apamphlet, entitled, Priestcraft in Perfection,or a Detection of the Fraud ofInserting and Continuing that ClauseThe Church hath Power to DecreeRights and Ceremonies, and Authorityin Controversies of Faith, in theTwentieth Article of the Church ofEngland. Collins contended that thisclause formed no part of the Articles asestablished by the act in the thirteenthof Elizabeth ; upon which a controversyensued that gave further employmentto his pen, which he wielded with adexterity at least equal to that of hisadversaries, whom he did not finallyanswer until 1724.In 1710, he published A Vindicationof the Divine Attributes, in some Remarkson the Archbishop of Dublin'sSermon, which was entitled, Divine Predestinationand Foreknowledge consistentwith the Freedom of Man'sWill. In 1711, he went to Holland,where he became acquainted with LeClerc ; in 1713, he repeated his visit,and in that year published his Discourseon Free Thinking; the professedobject of which was to expose thetyranny exercised by the abettors ofpriestcraft, whether under paganism,popery, or any other corrupt form ofreligion. Had he confined himself tothis, the work would have been, perhaps,as ingenuous as it is able ; but acovert attack was discoverable in itupon revealed religion, in defence ofwhich several able writers entered thelists against him, among whom wereWhiston, Swift, Hoadley, and Bentley.In 1715, our author retired intoEssex, where he acted as a justice of thepeace, and deputy-lieutenant of thecounty, as he had before done in Middlesexand Westminster. In the sameyear, he published A PhilosophicalInquiry concerning Human Liberty,which was translated into French, andpublished at Amsterdam, in a collection,by Des Maizeaux. It contains one ofthe best illustrations that have appearedof the doctrine of philosophical necessity; but the author declined replyingto some remarks made upon itby Dr. Clarke, considering himself tobe precluded from fair discussion, onequal terms, by insinuations containedin the Remarks on the dangerous natureof his opinions, and on the improprietyof their being insisted upon. In 1718,Mr. Collins was chosen treasurer of thecounty of Essex ; and, in 1724, havingbeen some time a widower, he marriedElizabeth, daughter of Sir ThomasWrottesley. In the same year, appearedhis Discourse on the Groundsand Reasons of the Christian Religion,in two parts ; the design of which wasto show that the prophecies cited in theNew Testament from the Old, formedno proof of Christianity according tothe rules of reason. In this workgreat art and address are manifest;but the author, having proceeded oninadmissible assumptions, and displayedmore sophistry than argument,soon found in array against him ahost of learned and ingenious writers.Among the most distinguished of hisopponents were Drs. Clarke, Sherlock,and Sykes, Chandler, Bishop ofLichfield, and Mr. Whiston, who declaredCollins " guilty of gross immorality,impious fraud, and' lay-craft."In 1727, he was attacked bythe same opponents on the publicationof his Scheme of Literal Prophecy considered; a work having in view thesame object as the former. One of hisanswerers, on this occasion, was Dr.John Rogers, who roused his indigna-anthonyCOLLINS.tion by urging the propriety of his becominga confessor for his cause, andinduced Collins to advocate anew thefreedom of inquiry, in A Letter to Dr.Rogers, the last of our author's productions,all of which, it should be observed,were published anonymously.He died of a violent net of the stone, onthe 13th of December, 1729. and wasinterred in Oxford Chapel.The moral character of Mr. Collinshas been disputed by none, and evenhis most bitter adversaries give himcredit for temperance, humanity, andbenevolence. As a magistrate, he wasactive, upright, and impartial, andhighly estimable in all the relations ofsocial and domestic life. As an excusefor his opposition to revealed religion,it was said of him, by a writer in theBibliotheca Raisonnee, that the corruptionamong Christians, and thepersecuting spirit of the clergy, hadgiven him a prejudice against theChristian religion, and at last inducedhim to think that, upon its presentfooting, it was pernicious to mankind.There is, however, no ground for supposinghim to have been an Atheist ; hisdying declaration being, " that as hehad always endeavoured, to the best ofhis abilities, to serve God, his king, andhis country, so he was persuaded hewas going to that place which God hathprepared for them that love Him;" andpresently afterwards he added, thecatholic religion is to love God andman." Whatever may have been hisabilities as a writer, he was detected inso many instances of false quotations,and other unfair modes of controversy,that he must ever be recorded as oneof the most flagrant instances of literarydisingenuousness.It is told of Collins, that the first LordHarrington asking him why, with hisnotions of religion, he was so particularin sending his servants to church, hereplied, " I do it to prevent my beingrobbed and murdered by them."EDWARD YOUNG.EDWARD YOUNG, the son of a clergyman,was born at the rectory-houseof his father, Upham, near Winchester,in June, 1681, though some fix his birthin 1679. He received the first part ofhis education at the school at Winchester,where he remained until his nineteenthyear, and in 1703, he was enteredan independent member of NewCollege, Oxford. He subsequently removedto Corpus College ; and, in 1708,he was nominated by Archbishop tennysonto a fellowship of All-souls,where he graduated B. C. L. in 1714,and, in 1719, Dec. L. Both as a poetand a scholar he had already distinguishedhimself at the university ; butthe morality of his conduct during theearly part of his residence at college,more than one writer denies. Hiszeal, however, in the cause of religion,appears, upon the authority of Tindal,with whom he used to spend much ofhis time, to have been early roused.The other boys," says this Deist, orAtheist, " I can always answer, becauseI always know whence they have thearguments, which I have read an hundredtimes ; but that fellow, Young, iscontinually pestering me with somethingof his own."One of Young's earliest poetical effortswas a recommendatory copy of versesprefixed to Addison's Cato, if we exceptapart of his poem on The Last Day,which appeared in The Taller, and wasprobably finished as early as 1710. Itwas published in 1713, with a fulsomededication to Queen Anne, andwas shortly afterwards followed by hisForce of Religion, or Vanquished Love ;founded on the execution of Lady JaneGrey, and her husband, Lord Guildford.On the accession of King George theFirst, he flattered the monarch in anodeupon the queen's death ; and, in1717, he accompanied to Ireland theprofligate Duke of Wharton, whosefather had been a friend and patron toYoung. In 1719, his tragedy of Osiriswas acted at Drury Lane, and was followed,in 1721, by The Revenge, witha dedication to Wharton, which heafterwards, says Herbert Croft, his L 1 T E R A T U RE .rapier in Johnson's Lives of the Poets,took all the pains in his power to concealfrom the world. Wharton appears,however, to have been a substantialbenefactor of our author; for he notonly did his utmost to advance him inthe world by recommendation, butfurnished him with the means of pursuingeven a more ambitious course thanYoung aspired to. At the duke's requestand expense he stood a contestedelection for Cirencester ; but being unsuccessful,his patron granted him anannuity, and he henceforth determinedon studying for the church.He continued, however, his devotionto the muses; and, in 1728, publishedthe last of six satires, for which, underthe title of The Universal Passion,Wharton gave him 3,QQQ. About thesame time he entered into holy orders,and was appointed chaplain to Georgethe Second; and, in 1730, he was presentedby his college to the rectory ofWelwyn, in Hertfordshire. In 1732,he married Lady Elizabeth Lee, widowof Colonel Lee, and daughter of theEarl of Lichfield; she died in 1740,leaving him one son and a step-daughter,whose death, in conjunction with thatof her husband, Lord Temple, he lamentsin his Night Thoughts, under thenames of Philander and Narcissus. Itwas in consequence of the melancholyreflections occasioned by these familylosses, that Young composed his NightThoughts; respecting which we will only,in this place, remark, that the characterof Lorenzo does not appear to have hadallusion to his son. This is most satisfactorilyproved, by the authority justcited, notwithstanding the assertions ofmost of the biographers of our authorto the contrary. The Night Thoughtsoccupied him from 1741 to 1746, and inthe interval he produced other pieces,both in poetry and prose. In 1753, histragedy of The Brothers, written in1728, appeared upon the stage for thebenefit of the Society for the Propagationof the Gospel ; and not realizingthe profits anticipated, he made up thesum he intended, which was 1,000,from his own pocket In 1754, he com-nleted his Centaur not Fabulous, in sixLetters to a Friend on the Life in Vogue,a publication in prose ; as was also hisConjectures on Original Composition,which appeared in 1759. In 1761, hewas appointed clerk of the closet to theprincess dowager, the only prefermentlie ever received after his taking orders ;though, it seems, he was allowed byGeorge the Second a pension of 4J200a-year. A poem, entitled Resignation,was the last of his works, of the chiefof which he published an edition infour octavo volumes, a short time previousto his death, which took place onthe 12th of April, 1765. He left, withthe exception of 1,000 to his housekeeper,and a smaller legacy, the wholeof his fortune to his only son, Frederick ;and, in his will, ordered all his manuscriptsto be burnt.Young lived and died a disappointedman ; for, notwithstanding his elevatedsentiments and professed love of retirement,he had not given up hopes ofadvancement in the church until a veryshort period before his death. As aChristian and divine, however, hisconduct was exemplary, if we except hisharsh treatment of his son, whom, inconsequenceof his expulsion from collegefor misconduct, he refused everafterwards to see. Even on his deathbed,he is reported to have declinedseeing him, but sent him his forgiveness.This parental conduct has been attributedto the influence of his housekeeper,who, during the latter periodof his life, has been said to haveexercised a most tyrannical sway overhim. He was pleasant in conversationand extremely polite, and possessedsensibilities highly creditable to him, ifthe following anecdote may be reliedon : Whilst preaching in his turn, oneSunday, at St. James's, he found hisefforts "to gain the attention of the congregationso ineffectual, that he leanedback in the pulpit and burst into a floodof tears. The turn of his mind was naturallysolemn ; he spent many hours inaday walking among the tombs in hisown church-yard ; and whilst engagedin writing one of his tragedies, the Dukeof Wharton sent him a human skullwith a candle fixed in it, as the mostcongenial and appropriate present hecould make him. Notwithstanding, however,a certain gloominess of temper, hewas fond of innocent sports and amusements,and instituted an assembly anda bowling-green in his parish. Amongother instances of hs wit are the following; Voltaire happening to ridiculerEDWARD YOUNG.Milton's allegorical personages of Sinand Death, Young thus addressed him :Thou srt o witty, profligate and thin,Thou remit a Milton, with his Death and Sin.The following anecdote strongly illustrateshis courage and humour : Beingonce on a party of pleasure with a fewj ladies, going up by water to Vauxhall,he amused them with a tune on theGerman flute. Behind him several officerswere also in a boat rowing for thesame place, and soon came alongside theboat in which were the doctor and hisparty. The doctor, who was never conceitedof his playing, put up his flute ontheir approach. One of the officers instantlyasked why he put up his flute.For the same reason," said he, " thatI took it out to please myself." Theson of Mars very peremptorily rejoined,that if he did not instantly takeout his flute, and continue his music,he would throw him into the Thames.The doctor, in order to allay the fearsof the ladies, pocketed the insult, andcontinued to play all the way up theriver. During the evening, however,he observed the officer by himself inone of the walks; and making up tohim, said with great coolness, " It was,sir, to avoid interrupting the harmonyof my company or yours, that I compliedwith your arrogant demand; but thatyou may be satisfied that courage maybefound under a black coat as well asundera red one, I expect that you willmeet me tomorrow morning at a certainplace, without any second, the quarrelbeing entirely entre nous." The doctorfurther covenanted, that the affair shouldbe decided by swords. To all these conditionsthe officer assented. The duellistsmet; but the moment the officertook the ground, the doctor pulled out ahorse pistol. " What !" said the officer,do you intend to assassinate me?"No," replied the doctor; " but youshall instantly put up your sword anddance a minuet, otherwise you are adead man." The officer began to bluster,but the doctor was resolute, and he wasobliged to comply. " Now," said Young,you forced me to play against my will,and I have made you dance againstyours ; we are, therefore, again on alevel, and whatever other satisfactionyou may require, I am ready to give."The officer acknowledged his error, andthe affair terminated in a lasting friendship.As an author, Young's fame restschiefly upon his tragedy of The Revenge,and his Night Thoughts, which,Spence says, were composed by theauthor either at night or when he wason horseback. His Satires, however,must not be forgotten : their author,says Johnson, has the gaiety of Horacewithout his laxity of numbers, and themorality of Juvenal with greater variationof images. Swift observed of them,that had they been more merry or severe,they would have been more generallypleasing; because mankind are moreapt to be pleased with ill-nature andmirth, than with solid sense and instruction.In his Night Thoughts, Youngexhibits entire originality of style, elevationof sentiment, grandeur of diction,and beauty of imagery, accompaniedwith an extensive knowledge of menand things, and a profound acquaintancewith the feelings of the human heart.A gloominess and severity of thought,however, and a style occasionally tumidand bombastic, detract from the pleasurethey otherwise afford, and are aptto terrify rather than persuade the mindof the reader into a belief of those divinetruths which, in this sublime production,are so admirably argued.EUSTACE Budge.EUSTACE, son of the Rev. GilbertBudgell, of St. Thomas, near Exeter,was born about the year 1685, and,after having completed his elementaryeducation, became a gentleman commonerof Christchurch College, Oxford.On leaving the university, he was enteredof the Inner Temple, London,for the purpose of being called to thebar ; but relinquishing professional pursuitsfor those of pleasure and literature,he was taken under the patronageLiterature.of his mother's cousin, Mr. Addison,who, in 1710, took him with him toIreland, as one of his clerks, when appointedsecretary to the lord-lieutenant.He commenced his career, as anauthor, by contributing various papersto The Spectator; in the first sevenvolumes of which, all those marked X,to the number of twenty eight, are attributedto him. He is also said tohave been the only co-operator of Addisonin the eighth volume ; but, accordingto Boswell, Dr. Johnson affirmedthat Budgell's papers were either writtenby Addison, or so much improved byhim that they were made in a mannerhis own. One of them, a humorousepilogue to The Distrest Mother, wasreceived with such applause, that it wascalled for, by the audience, during thewhole run of that tragedy. This is alsoattributed, by Johnson, to Addison ; afact rendered probable by the lavishpraises bestowed upon it in Budgell'spapers in The Spectator, and by hispublicly calling for its repetition duringthe performance of the play ; though, itis to be observed, his vanity was fullyequal to conduct of this sort. He, however,acquired a reputation as one ofthe wits of the day ; and, in 1711$ succeeding,by the death of his father, to afortune, slightly encumbered, of 950per annum, he had the prudence not toalter his mode of living, nor to resignhis official situation, the duties of whichhe strictly performed.In 1714, he published a translationfrom the Greek of Theophrastus's Characters,dedicated to his patron, theEarl of Halifax; in praise of which,Addison, in the thirty-ninth paper ofThe Lover, has not said more than waswarranted by its real ingenuity andelegance. In the same year, our authorbecame under secretary of state to thelord-lieutenant of Ireland, and waslikewise made chief secretary to thelords justices, and deputy clerk of thecouncil in that kingdom ; and, shortlyafterwards, being elected a member ofthe Irish parliament, he distinguishedhimself as an able speaker.In 1717, he was appointed, throughthe influence of Addison, then secretaryof state, accompany and comptroller-generalof Ireland, and he now seemedto be wafted with the full tide of prosperity,when the appointment of theDuke of Bolton to the vice-royaltycaused a fatal change in his fortune.This was in consequence of the duke'sfavourite and secretary insisting onquartering one of his friends uponBudgell ; who, attacking, in a lampoon,both the secretary and the duke,was, in consequence, removed from hisaccompany's place. Budgell, almostin a state of delirium, declared his lifewas not safe in Ireland, and proceedingto London, published, against the adviceof Addison, an account of his case,which appeared in 1718, and being readwith great interest, only increased theresentment of his enemies. His solepatron now in government favour wasthe Earl of Sunderland, whom, in thefollowing year, he mortally offended byhis popular pamphlet against the famouspeerage bill ; and, not long afterwards,the death of Addison put a decisiveblow to his future hopes of success atcourt.His fortune was at this time sufficientto have enabled him to live in comfortableindependence ; but excited bythe restlessness of his mind, he was unfortunateenough to hazard his moneyin the South Sea scheme, by which helost 20,000, and was brought to theverge of ruin. He then vented his indignationby some clever pamphletsagainst the South Sea Company, whichattracting the attention of the Duke ot'Portland, who had been a great sufferer,that nobleman, on his appointment tothe governorship of Jamaica, offered totake Budgell with him as his secretary.He was making preparations for hisdeparture, when the Duke of Portlandwas informed by the secretary of statethat he might take any man in Englandfor his secretary, excepting Mr. Budgell,but that he must not take him. Irritatedbeyond measure at this oppressive conduct,he completed his ruin by spending5,000 in vain attempts to get intoparliament; wrote virulent pamphletsagainst Sir Robert Walpole and hisministry ; and at length completed thedestruction of his character, as well ashis fortune, by attempting to substantiatethe will of Dr. Matthew Tindal, onthe setting aside of which he was deprivedof a legacy of 2,100, understrong suspicions that forgery had beenthe only ground of his claim. Aboutthis time, he was engaged in editingAARON HILL,The Bee, after the extinction of which,becoming involved in lawsuits from hisexpensive habits, he, as a last resource,took to practising at the bar ; but failingin his object, his situation grew soinsupportable, that he came to the resolutionof destroying himself. Accordingly,after having in vain attempted topersuade a natural daughter of his toshare the same fate, he took a boat atSomerset Stairs, on the 4th of May,1737, and threw himself into theThames. As some excuse, probably,to the world, for this deed, lie left a slipof paper upon his bureau, upon whichwas written, " What Cato did, and Addisonapproved, cannot be wrong."As a writer, Budgell holds a conspicuousplace among the wits of histime, and was sufficiently lively, ingenious,and interesting, to be consideredthe best imitator of Addison. Hisessays are certainly much in the styleof his celebrated contemporary, butwith a looser contexture of thought,and a want of similar dignity. Accordingto Cibber, he assisted in The Talleras well as The Spectator; but this isascertained with less certainty than hiscontributions to The Craftsman, whichare distinguished by an asterisk. Hewas thought worthy the satire of Pope,who mentions him in several parts ofhis works, and, in allusion to the affairof Dr. Tindal, has the following lines :Let Budgell rhnrge low Grub Street on my quill,And write whatever lie please except my will.In his private character, Budgell appearsin no very estimable light. Pride,vanity, and disappointment, accompaniedwith ungovernable passions, appearto have destroyed, in him, a mindnaturally noble, and a generous andbenevolent heart. Acting, however,from impulse instead of principle, hebecame a sceptic in his opinions, and aprofligate in his manners, and died lamentedby few and respected by none.Of his epigrams, the following, on acompany of bad dancers to excellentmusic, is worth recording :But ill the motion with the music suits .So Orpheus fiddled, and so danced the brute*.AARON HILLAARON HILL was born in London,in 1685, and received the rudiments ofeducation at Westminster School, whichhe was compelled to quit, at the age offourteen, in consequence of the death ofhis father, a gentleman of estate inWiltshire, who left him almost unprovidedfor. His relation, Lord Paget,being ambassador at Constantinople, heventured, uninvited, to join him ; andbeing received with kindness, thoughsurprise, a tutor was provided for him,under whose care he travelled throughPalestine, Egypt, and various parts ofthe east. In 1703, he returned to England,and, on the death of Lord Paget,being disappointed in his expectationof a provision for life, he was left tobecome the architect of his own fortune.After travelling for three years withSir William Wentworth, of Yorkshire,he published, in 1709, A History of theOttoman Empire, partly from materialscollected in Turkey ; -a work whichattracted much notice, although theauthor himself regarded it, in his maturerjudgment, as a crude and puerileperformance. In the same year, hewrote a poem, called Camillus, in honourof the Earl of Peterborough, just returnedfrom Spain, which led to Insappointment of secretary to that nobleman,and introduced him to the noticeof the heads of the Tory party. Notlong afterwards, he married a' lady ofbeauty and fortune ; and, about thesame time, he became manager of DruryLane Theatre, where he produced hisfirst tragedy, entitled, Elfride, or theFair Inconstant ; a work begun andfinished in the space often days.In 1710, he became master of theOpera House, in the Haymarket ; atwhich time he wrote his opera ofRinaldo, which, with the music byHandel, met with great success. Uponsome misunderstanding with the lordchamberlain, he soon gave up his managementof Drury Lane Theatre,which he had conducted much to theL 1 T E K A T U K K .satisfaction of the public, and turnedprojector. His first scheme was to formacompany of subscribers for carryinginto effect a patent which he had obtainedfor extracting oil from beech-nutsas sweet as that from olives. This,after a trial of three years, failed, andwas succeeded by another for establishinga plantation in Georgia, which wasequally unproductive of benefit. Stillcontinuing to write for the stage, he, in1716, brought out, at the Lincoln's InnFields Theatre, The Fatal Vision, orthe Fall of Siam ; and, in 1718, hepublished a poem, called The NorthernStar, a panegyric upon the great CzarPeter ; for which he, some time afterwards,received a gold medal from theEmpress Catharine. He was also tohave written the life of the czar fromhis own papers, which were to havebeen sent him for the purpose ; but thedesign proved abortive by the czarina'sdeath.In 1723, his tragedy of King Henrythe Fifth was played at Drury LaneTheatre ; and, in 1724, he commenceda periodical paper, called The PlainDealer, in conjunction with Mr. Bond;and the two authors were called, by Mr.Savage, " the two contending powers oflight and darkness." They wrote byturns, each six essays ; and the characterof the work, says Dr. Johnson,was observed regularly to rise in Mr.Hill's weeks, and fall in Mr. Bond's.In 1728, he made a journey into thenorth of Scotland, for the purpose ofcutting timber on the estates of theYork Buildings Company, and floatingit down the river Spey, in which hemet with too many obstacles to carryon his project with sufficient profiteither to the Company or himself. In1731, he received a severe shock fromthe death of his wife, who had broughthim nine children, four of whom survivedhim ; and, in the same year, heproduced his tragedy of Athelwold,which was another version of his Elfride,and the difference between them provedthe progress of his judgment and poeticalpowers. He afterwards translated,in succession, and adapted for theEnglish stage, The Sara, Alzira, andMerope of Voltaire ; in which tasks,says Dr. Aikin, he displayed a com- iand of language and a knowledge of !the stage, which placed him much above !the common importers of foreign lite irare manufacture. In 1738, he re- |tired to Plaistow, in Essex, where" he icomposed several small poems, and Ioccupied himself with various schemes jof commercial improvement; in one of Iwhich, the art of making potash equalto the Russians, he is said to have succeeded.He had been for some time inadeclining state of health, and, duringthe rehearsal of his Merope, in whichthere are some lines prophetic of his |own approaching dissolution, he wasseized with an illness, which deprivedhim of life, in February, 1749. Hewas interred in the same grave with hiswife, in the great cloisters in WestminsterAbbey, near the tomb of LordGodolphin.The person of Mr. Hill is described,by Gibber, as extremely fair and handsome; his eyes were a dark blue, bothbright and penetrating ; brown hair,and oval visage, which was enlivenedby a smile the most agreeable in conversation,where his address was affablyengaging ; to which was joined adignity that rendered him at oncerespected and admired by those ofeither sex who were acquainted withhim. He was a finished gentleman,and few possessed a more benevolentdisposition, or have been more beloved ;he both assisted and patronise d meritwherever he found it, and Thomsonand Savage owed much of their earlysuccess to his zealous exertions in theirbehalf. The former says, in one of hisletters, that " next to the approbationof heaven he wishes for Hill's." Notwithstandinghe is termed, by Dr. wanton,"a fustian and affected writer,"his natural talents were considerable,though he would doubtless have attaineda higher rank in literature, hadhe confined himself to any single pursuit.Pope's attack upon him, in theDunciad, is rather a compliment theirotherwise ; but Hill thought proper toretaliate upon him in a piece called TheProgress of Wit ; in some lines which,for polished keenness, are worthy ofPope himself,ALEXANDER POPE,ALEXANDER POPE.ALEXANDER POPE was born inLombard Street, London, of Romancatholic parents, on the 22nd of May,1688. He was, according to Johnson,more willing to show what his fatherwas not, than what he was ; but hisprincipal biographers make him the sonof a linen-draper, who had grown richenough to retire from business to Bin-field,near Windsor. Alexander wasdeformed from his birth, and of sodelicate a constitution, and such weaknessof body, that he constantly worestays ; and when taking the air on thewater, had a sedan-chair in the boat, inwhich he sat with the glasses down.He received the early part of his educationat home, and, when about eight,was placed under the care of one Taverner,a Romish priest, who taught himthe rudiments or' Latin and Greek. Histaste for poetry was first excited by theperusal ot'Ogtlby's Homer and Sandy'sOvid ; and, on his removal to school atTwofold, near Winchester, he exercisedhis talents in verse, by lampooning themaster. He was next sent to a schoolin the vicinity of Hyde Park Corner,whence his occasional" visits to the playhouseinduced such a fondness fortheatrical exhibitions, that he composeda play from Ogilby's Iliad, with someverses of his own intermixed, whichwas acted by his schoolfellows.About twelve years of age, when hewrote his earliest production, The OdeonSolitude, he was called by his fatherto Binfield, where he improved himselfby translating into verse the Latinclassics, and in reading the Englishpoets. The versification of Drydenparticularly struck him, and he conceivedsuch a veneration for the geniusof that poet, teat he persuaded somefriends to take him to the coffeehousewhich he frequented, and pleasedhimself with having seen him. Asearly as 1702, he had put into more elegantverse Chaucer's January and May,and The Prologue to the Wife of Bath ;and, in the same year, he translatedthe epistle of Sappho to Phaon, fromOvid. At this time, the smoothness ofhis versification, which might be said tobe formed, surpassed his original ; " butthis," says Johnson, " is a small partof his praise ; he discovered such acquaintanceboth with human and publicaffairs, as is not easily conceived tohave been attainable by a boy of fourteen,in Windsor Forest."In 1703, he passed some time inLondon, in the study of the French andItalian languages ; and, on his returnto Binfield, wrote a comedy, a tragedy,an epic poem, with panegyrics on all theprinces of Europe, and, as he confesses,thought himself the greatest geniusthat ever was." Many of the productionsupon which he founded thisidea of himself, he subsequently destroyed; nor is it from an earlier periodthan 1705, that his life, as an author, isproperly to be computed. In that year,he wrote his Pastorals, which, togetherwith the very elegant and learned preface,received the praise of all the poetsand critics of the time ; to whose societyhe, in the following year, more particularlyintroduced himself, by attendingWill's Coffee-house, in London, wheremost of them used to assemble. HisPastorals did not appear until 1709, andin the same year he wrote, and in 1711published, his Essay on Criticism, whichhe seems to have considered either solearned or so obscure, as to declare thatnot one gentleman in sixty, even of aliberal education, could understand it."The piece was translated into Frenchand German, and however overratedmay have been the author's estimationof it, has not been inadequately praisedby Johnson, who observes that it displayedextent of comprehension, nicetyof distinction, acquaintance with mankind,and knowledge both of ancientand modern learning, not often attainedby the maturest age and longest experience.The essay, however, wasnot without opponents, and was attackedin a bitter and elaborate pamphlet, byDennis, in consequence of some linesapplied to him by Pope, whom hedesignated as " a little affected hypocrite,who had nothing in his mouthLITERATURE.at the same time but truth, candour,friendship, good-nature, humanity, andmagnanimity." In this year, he alsowrote his Messiah, first published inThe Spectator, and his verses on TheUnfortunate Lady, who, we are told byRuffled, having been removed by herguardian into a foreign country to avoidthe addresses of Pope, put an end toher life by stabbing herself with asword.His next production was The Rapeof the Lock, which is considered themost airy, the most ingenious, and themost delightful of all his compositions.The origin of it is too well known toneed repetition here ; but it is doubtful,as generally asserted, whether it hadthe effect of reconciling the partieswhose conduct gave rise to the subject.On its first appearance, Addison calledit a delicious little thing, and urgedPope not to alter it : he was, however,too confident of improving it to followthis advice, and considerably altered,and added to, the poem. " His attempt,"says Johnson, " was justifiedby its success: The Rape of the Lockstands forward in the classes of literatureas the most exquisite example ofludicrous poetry." In 1712, he publishedThe Temple of Fame, and, aboutthe same period, his Eloise to Abelard ;to the composition of which he was led,according to Savage, by the perusal ofPrior's Nut-brown Maid. In 1713, appearedhis Windsor Forest, the conclusionof which is said to have givenpain to Addison, both as a poet and politician; but this is doubted by Johnson,who, in proof of the apparent friendshipthat continued to exist between the twopoets, refers to the prologue of Cato,written by Pope, and also to a defenceof that tragedy against the attacks ofDennis. About this time, the subject ofour memoir is said to have studiedpainting, under Jervis, and to havemade progress enough to take the portraitsof several of his friends.He now turned his attention to thecompletion of his Iliad, which heoffered to subscribers in six quartovolumes, for six guineas. The subscriptionsoon rose to an amount that,while it gratified, at the same timealarmed him, when he thought of theextent of his undertaking ; which, hesays, disturbed him in his dreams atnight, and made him wish that somebodywould hang him. It was alsogiven out, by some of his enemies, thathe was deficient in Greek ; and Addison,who does certainly, in this instance,seem to have been jealous of thefame of Pope, hinted to the Whigs, witha view to impede the subscription, thathe was too much of a Tory ; whilst thissuspected him to be of the other party,in consequence of his contributions toSteele's Guardian. His genius, however,carried him above all difficulties ;and, at the rate of about fifty lines perday, he soon completed the whole ofthe volumes, though his repeated alterationsdelayed the appearance of thesixth until 1720. The clear profit whichhe gained by this work amounted to5,324 4*. ; a sum that relieved himfrom his present pecuniary difficulties,and enabled him to secure himselfagainst future ones, by the purchase ofconsiderable annuities.The Iliad, which is described by theauthor's biographer already mentioned,as not only one of the noblest versionsof English poetry ever seen by theworld, but, as one of the greatest eventsin the annals of learning, was a sourceof much annoyance to Pope, both duringits progress and after its completion.Whilst it failed to gain him a patron, italso lost him a friend ; the coldness ofAddison he returned with indignation,and the overtures of Lord Halifaxwith indifference and contempt. Hehad taken umbrage at the conduct ofthe former, in endeavouring to createa rivalry between his translation ofHomer and Tickell's ; the appearanceof which, at the same time with hisown, he had good reasons for attributingto the instrumentality of Addison. Areconciliation between them was afterwardsattempted to be brought about,by Steele ; but the interview only increasedtheir mutual dislike, which continuedto the end of their lives. Anotherreason assigned for Pope's quarrel withAddison, is, that he had given oneMilton ten guineas to abuse the formerin a letter, which was published respectingWycherley. "On hearing ofwhich," says Pope, " I wrote a letterto Mr. Addison, to let him know that Iwas not unacquainted with this behaviourof his ; that if I were to speakseverely of him in return for it, it shouldALEXANDER POPE.not be in such a dirty way ; that Ishould rather' tell him himself fairly ofhis faults, and allow his good qualities ;and that it should be something in thefollowing manner. I then adjoined thefirst sketch of what has since beencalled my satire on Addison, the characterof Attics." Our author's contemptfor Lord Halifax arose from thatnobleman's delay in the bestowal of hispatronage, until he had secured somecompliment, in the way of dedicationor otherwise, which the poet was notover anxious to render. " They, probably," says Johnson, " were suspiciousof each other : Pope would notdedicate till he saw at what rate hispraise was valued ; Halifax thoughthimself entitled to confidence, andwould give nothing unless he knewwhat he should receive."Pope had removed to his celebratedvilla, at Twickenham, in the year 1715,when the first volume of his Iliad waspublished, from which time he generallycontinued to reside there. In1717, he collected his former worksinto one quarto volume ; and, in 1720,partaking of the national infatuation,he lost a slight sum of money in theSouth Sea stock. In 1721, he was induced,by a reward of 217 12*., togive his name and labours to an editionof Shakspeare, in which his variouserrors were detected and exposed,with all the insolence of victory, byTheobald, in a book called, ShakspeareRestored. From this time, saysJohnson, Pope became an enemy toeditors, collators, and verbal critics ;and hoped to persuade the world thathe miscarried in this undertaking onlyby having a mind too great for suchminute employments. The same authoritytells us that, in 1723, he appearedas a witness on the trial otBishop Atterbury, and that, in the fewwords he had to utter, he made severalblunders. In 1725, appeared his translationof the Odyssey, in which he wasassisted by Broome and Fenton ; theformer of whom he is said to havetreated with great illiberality. Aboutthe year 1726, he had the misfortuneto be overturned in the water whilstpassing a bridge in a friend's coach, bywhich he narrowly escaped drowning,and lost the use of two of his fingersfrom the breaking of the windows.Uponof consolation from Voltaire, whom hehad previously entertained at his table,where he is said to have talked with somuch grossness, that Pope was drivenfrom the room.In 1727, he joined with Swift inthe publication of three volumes ofMiscellanies, wherein was inserted hisArt oi Sinking in Poetry ; and in thefollowing year appeared his Dunciad, ageneral attack against all the inferiorauthors of his time, whom he distinguishedby the appellation of TheDunces. " On the day the book wasfirst vended," says Pope, " a crowd ofauthors besieged the shop; entreaties,advices, threats of law and battery, nay,cries of treason, were all employed tohinder the coming out of The Dunciad."The poem excited a great sensation inall quarters, and was presented to theking and queen by Sir Robert Walpole.It is said to have blasted the literaryreputation of all those whom it touched,and to have driven many of them tosuch an extent of hatred against theauthor, that they held weekly clubs toconsider how they might injure him,and brought his image in clay for thepurpose of executing him in effigy. In1731, he published a poem on Taste,by which he incurred the odium of allparties, in consequence of ridiculing,under the name of Timon, his formerfriend and patron, the Duke of Chances;to whom he wrote an explanatory letter,as full of hypocrisy as his verseswere of ingratitude. In 1733, he published,anonymously, the first, and in1735, under his own name, the fourthpart of his Essay on Man ; the idea ofwhich he acknowledges to have receivedfrom Hoh'ngbroke, who is said tohave ridiculed Pope as having advancedin it principles of which he did not perceivethe consequence, and as blindlypropagating opinions contrary to hisown. Pope certainly appears to moreadvantage as a poet than a theologistin this production ; which was, on thataccount, on its translation into French,attacked with great skill by ProfessorCreusa, of Switzerland, who discoveredthat many of the positions containedinferences against the doctrines of revelation.Warburton, however, defendedthe essay, in a manner thatever afterwards secured him the gratistide and friendship of Pope, who tookthe opportunity of acknowledging thathe had not explained his own meaningproperly, and of disclaiming any intentionto propagate the principles ofBolingbroke.His next poems, in succession, were,An Epistle to Lord Bathurst, The Charactersof Men and of Women, severalimitations of Horace, Dr. Donne'sSatires, and An Epistle to Dr. Arbuthnot.In 1737, he published, bysubscription, a quarto volume of hisCorrespondence ; for the previous publicationof which, by Curls, whom hehad prosecuted in the house of lords,he accounts, in his preface, by sayingthat his letters had been stolen from afriend's library, and thence sent privatelyto the press. There is, however,good reason to believe that theywere printed with his own connivance,in order to give him an opportunity ofsubsequently publishing them himself,without incurring the imputation ofvanity. In 1738, at which time he wasvisited by the Prince of Wales, and wasof the opposition party, he publishedtwo Satirical Dialogues, in which heattacked several statesmen, but with aview rather of displaying his powers asasatirist than his sentiments as a patriot.His share in The Memoirs ofScriblerus has been mentioned in ouraccount of Arbuthnot : they were followed,in 1742, by a fourth book of TheDunciad, which brought on a paperwar between himself and Gibber ; hisattacks against whom he repeated, inanew edition of that work, in a strainof virulence that contributed more tothe amusement of his readers than tohis own reputation. From this timehis vital powers gradually declined ; hegave over original composition, andpassed his time in the correction andrevisal of his former works, and insocial intercourse with his intimatefriends, the chief of whom appear tohave been Warburton and Lord Boling-broke.An asthma, with which he hadbeen for some years affected, now terminatingin a dropsy, his end visiblyapproached ; he met it with resignationand calmness ; and, after having takenthe sacrament, and exclaimed, a shorttime previously to death, " there isnothing meritorious but friendship andvirtue !" he expired, on the 30th ofMay, 1744, so placidly, that the attendantsdid not ascertain the exacttime of his dissolution. He was interredat Twickenham, where a monumentwas erected to him by Warburton,to whom he left half his library, andthe copyright of such of his worksalready printed as were not otherwisedisposed of.The character of Pope has been differentlyestimated by his biographers,Warburton, Bowles, Wanton, and Johnson.The last seems to have treatedit in the most impartial manner ; buthis view of it is too diffuse and incongruousto be altogether satisfactory.Upon the whole, Pope seems tohave been more deserving of praisethan he is represented : he has beenconsidered too exclusively in his literarycharacter to have had justice doneto him as a man. His reputation evenas a poet, in the complete sense of theword, has been a subject of dispute withmany ; but it is idle to deny him a titleto which none have so zealously, if sosuccessfully, aspired. It is not to bedenied that, upon the ground-work ofothers, he has raised some of his mostbeautiful superstructures ; but fromwhatever sources he may have drawnhis ideas, he has transferred them immortallyto his own verse, by the mannerin which he has there enshrinedthem. His Iliad will probably continueto supersede all other translations :whilst the exquisite machinery of thesylphs in The Rape of the Lock, andthe vigorous animation and pathetictenderness pervading his Verses on theUnfortunate Lady, evince an originalgenius which may successfully challengecompetition. His avowed model wasDryden ; between whom and himself,Johnson, in drawing an elaborate comparison,says, that where the one delightsthe other astonishes; that Drydenis sometimes vehement and rapid, Popealways smooth, uniform, and gentle.His conclusion seems to be that theformer wrote the brighter paragraphs,the latter the better poems. " Pope,"he observes, " had perhaps the judgmentof Dryden ; but Dryden certainlywanted the diligence of Pope."His Ode to St. Cecilia's Day, the sameauthority thinks inferior to Dryden.,but his Epistle of Eloise to Abelard h<;ranks as one of the most happy proALEXANDER POPE.auctions of human wit. For seductiveeloquence and splendour of imagery,his Essay on Man is unequalled ; but,stripped of their ornaments, the sentimentswill be found common-place andthe diction bombastic. His epistolarywritings, composed, doubtless, with aview to publication, attest the care andelegance of his pen, but are too full ofthat affectation and ambition, withwhich he himself confesses his earlyletters to have been vitiated.Vanity and affectation were principalfeatures in the character of Pope ; likeByron, he pretended a hatred of theworld, whilst his highest pleasure consistedin pleasing those who lived in it ;and his egotism is sufficiently manifestin the contempt with which he treatedall excellence in others that had notsome affinity with his own. One of hisboasts was, that he never obtained thenotice of one titled acquaintance byadulation or servility ; and Johnson, inconfirming this, says, that lie neverflattered those whom he did notlove, or praised those whom he didnot esteem. An exception to this,however, appears in his conduct towardsLord Hervey and Lady WorsleyMontagu, in our memoir ot whom hewill be found apologizing in a strain ofmeanness and hypocrisy commensuratewith the grossness and vindictive ss ofhis previous abuse. But though sometimesviolent in his attacks and meanin his retreat, he was warm and constantin his friendships ; and his socialqualities, says Johnson, exhibit a perpetualand unclouded effulgence of generalbenevolence. Though his fortunewas far from splendid, he assistedDodsley with 100 to open a shop, andof the subscription of 40 a-year thathe raised for Savage, 20 were paid byhimself.In his domestic concerns, he was frugalalmost to perfidiousness ; in proof ofwhich, it is said, that he used to writehis compositions ion the backs of letters;and after a scanty entertainment to twoof his guests, would place a single pintof wine, with two small glasses, uponthe table, and say, " Gentlemen, I leaveyou to your wine." He, however,would sometimes give a splendid dinnerto a party of his friends, and is saidhimself to have been so great an epicure,that his heart was often won by apresent of some luxury fir his table.He used constantly to call for coffee inthe night, when it is not probable hetook much sleep, if the story of LordOxford's domestic be true, that she wascalled from her bed, by him. four timesin one night, to supply him with paper,lest he should lose a thought. He didnot excel in conversation ; and it was saidno merriment of others, or of his own,excited him to laughter. There appearsto have been a certain littlenessand artifice in his intercourse withmankind, particularly with regard totrifles, which made Lady Bolingbrokesay that " he played the politician aboutcabbages and turnips." In his person,he was so much beneath the middlestature, that, to bring him to a levelwith common tables, it was necessaryto raise his seat : his countenance was,upon the whole, prepossessing, and hiseyes were animated and expressive.His physical debility continued throughouthis life ; to conceal the tenuity ofhis legs, he wore three pairs of stockings;and being unable to dress orundress himself, could neither retire torest, nor rise, without assistance.An important feature in his privatehistory, is his intimacy with MarthaBlunt, the daughter of a catholicgentleman, near Reading, who is saidto have been his intimate confident andcompanion through life. She possessedgreat influence over him, and thoughshe treated him with great neglect forsome time previous to his death, he lefther the greater part of his property.With this temporary exception, thoseto whom Pope was attached, remainedhis warm friends to the last ; andBolingbroke, who wept over him inhis last illness, said, " I never knew inmy life a man that had so tender aheart for his particular friends, ormore general friendship for mankind."Having discovered, however, after thedeath of Pope, whom he had commissionedto procure a few impressionsof his Patriot King, that he had orderedone thousand five hundred copies to beprivately printed, Bolingbroke was soenraged at the transaction, that he exertedhis utmost efforts to blast thememory of the man over whom he hadso lately shed tears of affection andregret. For this artifice, of which themotive is not apparent, WarburtonLITERATURE,attempted to apologize; but in so unsatisfactorya manner, that it producedan answer, by Mallet, in A Letter tothe most Impudent Man living.We conclude our memoir of this paradoxicalcharacter, with the followinganecdotes respecting him : Lord Halifaxhaving expressed himself dissatisfiedwith several passages in Pope's translationof the Iliad, the latter observed toGarth, that, as he could not see whereany alteration could be made for thebetter, his lordship's observation hadlaid him under some difficulty. " Allthat you need do," said Garth, laughing,is to leave them just as they are ; callon Lord Halifax two or three monthshence, thank him for his kind observationson those passages, and then readthem to him as altered." Pope followedhis advice, waited on Lord Halifaxsome time after, said he hoped hislordship would find his objections tothose passages removed,' read them tohim exactly as they were at first, andhis lordship was extremely pleased withthem, and cried out, " Ay, now they areperfectly right ; nothing can be better."On Pope's receiving, at his house,the Prince of Wales, with the mostdutiful expressions of attachment, theformer remarked, " How shall we reconcileyour love to a prince, with yourprofessed indisposition to kings, sinceprinces will be kings in time ?" " Sir,"replied the poet, " I consider royaltyunder that noble and authorized typeof the lion ; while he is young, andbefore his nails are grown, he may beapproached and caressed with safetyand pleasure." During his last illness,a squabble happening between histwo physicians, Dr. Burton and Dr.Thompson, who mutually charged eachother with hastening the death of theirpatient by improper prescriptions, Popesilenced them by saying, " Gentlemen,I only learn by your discourse that Iam in a dangerous way ; therefore allI now ask is, that the following epigrammay be added, after my death, to thenext edition of The Dunciad, by wayof postscript,Dunces rejoice, forgive all censures past,The greatest Vluiire has kill'd your Toe at last.Pope, though some have attributedthem to Young, is also said to havecomposed, on being asked for an extemporecouplet, by Lord Chesterfield,the following lines, with the pencil ofthat nobleman :Accept a miracle, instead of witSee tnw dull lines with $lahop's pencil writ.JOHN GAY.JOHN GAY, descended from an ancientbut reduced family, was born at ornear Barnstaple, in Devonshire, in 1688.After having received his education atthe free-school of that city, he was apprenticedto a silk-mercer in London ;but his aversion to trade soon led to thecancelling of his indentures, when hedevoted himself wholly to literary pursuits.His first performance was a poemcalled Rural Sports, which appeared in1711, dedicated to Pope, who, admiringhis talents, and pleased with his manners,about this time formed a friendshipwith him, which remained uninterruptedthroughout their lives. Theindolence and improvidence of Gaybeing likely to involve him in pecuniaryembarrassments, he, in 1712, acceptedthe situation of secretary to the Duchessof Monmouth, under whose roof he foundfull leisure to pay his court to the muses.In the same year he published a mock-heroicpoem, called Trivia, or the Artof Walking the Streets of London ; andin 1714, his comedy of The Wife of Bathmet with failure at the theatre in Lincoln'sInn Fields; as it did also upon asubsequent representation in 1729. Inthe former year he ably burlesquedAmbrose Phillips' System of Pastoral, inapoem called The Shepherd's Week,which he dedicated to Lord Bolingbroke ;by whose influence with the Tory partyhe was shortly afterwards appointedsecretary to the Earl of Clarendon, in hisembassy to the court of Hanover.The death of Queen Anne, however,soon brought him back to England withclouded hopes, which were revived byJOHN GAY.the singular effect of exciting teaone portion of the audience, and lauramost affectionate epistle from Pope.Whether returned a triumphant Whigor desponding Tory," he writes to Gay,equally all hail ! equally beloved andwelcome to me." He concludes withadvising him to get into court favour byaddressing something to the king, theprince, or the Princess of Wales ; thelast of whom, the subject of our memoiraccordingly took care to compliment insome verses on the occasion of herarrival in England. In 1715, he broughtupon the stage his tragi-comical farce ofWhat d'ye Call It, which was receivedwith great applause ; though at first,from the ambiguity of the satire, it hadtears inghterin another. He next had a share, withPope and Arbuthnot, in the productionof a farce, called The Three Hoursafter Marriage, which completely failed.This, added to his disappointment atreceiving no substantial favours from anyof the persons of distinction who at thistime paid him much attention, preyedupon his spirits in such a manner, that,to divert his melancholy, Mr. Pulteneytook him with him to France, in 1717;and in the following year he passedsome months at Lord Harcourt's seat inOxfordshire.In 1720, he published his poems bysubscription, which produced himl,000and a portion of South Sea stock, thewhole of which he lost in that speculation,by refusing to sell in time, accordingto the advice of all his friends.This disappointment so seriously affectedhis health, that he was removed toHampstead in a dangerous state, fromwhich he did not recover until the closeof 1722. In 1724, on the completion ofhis tragedy of The Captives, he had thehonour of reading it in manuscript tothe Princess of Wales. " When thehour came," says Johnson, " he sawthe princess and her ladies all in expectation; and advancing with reverencetoo great for any other attention,stumbled at a stool, and, falling forwards,threw down a weighty Japan screen.The princess started, the ladies screamed,and poor Gay, after all the disturbance,was still to read his play." The tragedywas approved by the princess ; and beingencouraged by her to write a set of Fablesin verse, for the use of the young Duke ofCumberland, he commenced upon thosemost celebrated of his performances, andn* lished them in 1726, with a suitablecation to the young prince. Theonly reward offered to him for this wasthe place of gentleman-usher to thePrincess Louisa, which he rejected indisgust and disdain. His feelings uponthis occasion are vividly expressed in aletter to Pope some time afterwards,wherein he says, " Why did I not takeyour advice, before my writing Fablesfor the duke, not to write them ; or ratherto write them for some young nobleman? It is my very hard fate, I mustget nothing, write for them or againstthem."In this spirit of mortification he composedThe Beggars' Opera, which, afterhaving been refused at Drury Lane,was brought out at Lincoln's Inn FieldsTheatre, in November, 1727 ; and Richbeing the name of the manager, it wassaid that its success had the effect ofmaking Gay rich, and Rich gay. Itwas soon played all over England; and,during a run of sixty-three nights inLondon, threw the whole metropolisinto a state of excitement House screensand ladies' fans were filled with its favouritesongs ; and, besides raising MissFenton, the actress who played Polly,previously obscure and unnoticed, to therank of a duchess, it caused the ItalianOpera to be utterly deserted during theseason of its performance. This unparalleledsuccess induced the author to followup the plan of The Beggars' Opera, in asecond part, called Polly ; but the formerpiece had so offended the party in power,that this the lord chamberlain refusedto license. Gay's disappointment wasechoed by the greater part of the town,and with the assistance of the Duke andDuchess of Queensberry, who retiredfrom court to take him under their protection,he published his Polly by subscription,which produced 1,200, beingthrice the sum he had gained by its predecessor.But neither this success, northe kindness of his friends, had the effectof relieving his melancholy, which beingincreased by an attack of the colic, atlength reduced him to a state fromwhich he, as well as his physician, Dr.Arbuthnot, seems to have consideredhimself irrecoverable. " I begin," hesays, in a letter written about a monthbefore his decease, " to look upon myselfas one already dead, and desire myLiterature.dear Mr. Pope, whom I love as my ownsoul, if you survive me, as you certainlywill, if a stone should mark the place ofmy grave, see these words put upon it:Life is a jest, and all thing, shew it :I thought co once, but now 1 know it.If anybody," he adds, " should askhow 1 could communicate this afterdeath, let it be known, it is not meantso, but my present sentiments in life."He continued to reside with the Dukeand Duchess of Queensberry till his lastmoments, and expired at their house inBurlington Gardens, London, on the4th of December, 1732. He was buriednear Chaucer's tomb, in WestminsterAbbey, where a monument was erectedto his memory, with the well knownepitaph by Pope, commencingOr manner, gentle, of affection, mild ;n wit, a man ; simplicity, child.The character of Gay is not stronglymarked ; he appears to have been anindolent and amiable man, with moreabilities than ambition ; the disappointmentof which, however, he had neitherthe foresight to avoid nor the fortitudeto sustain. At the instigation of Popeand other she sought the smiles of powerwith an assiduity and patience destructiveequally of his happiness and hisindependence. " Oh that I had neverknown what a court was !" he exclaims,in one of his letters to Pope. " What abarren soil have I been striving to producesomething out of!" His indolenceis well described by Swift, who alwayswrote to him with sincerity, and forwhom Gay is said to have had an awfulregard, as if he had been his father andpreceptor. " You pretend," says thedean, in one of his epistles to the subjectof our memoir, " to preach up riding andwalking; yet, from my knowledge ofyou after twenty years, you alwaysjoined a violent desire of perpetuallyshifting places and company, with arooted laziness, and an utter impatienceof fatigue. A coach and six horses isthe utmost exercise you can bear, andthis only when you can fill it with suchcompany as is best suited to your taste."In addition to the works before-mentioned,he had finished, a short timebefore his decease, his sonata of Acisand Galatea, and his opera of Achilles ;and, about twenty years afterwards, cameout a comedy, called The Distressed Wife,and a humorous piece, entitled TheRehearsal at Grantham, of which hewas said to be the author. His balladsof Black-eyed Susan, and 'Twas whenthe Seas were Roaring, are among themost pleasing instances of his poetry;but his fame principally rests on hisFables and Beggars' Opera, which willnever cease to be admired. The moralityof the latter has been a subject ofmuch controversy; and, in 1773, SirJohn Fielding is said to have written toGarrick, remonstrating with him on theimpropriety of acting The Beggars'Opera ; as it was never represented onthe stage without creating an additionalnumber of thieves. Herring, Archbishopof Canterbury, preached a sermonagainst it ; whilst in the opinion ofDean Swift, " it hath, by a turn ofhumour entirely new, placed vices of allkinds in the strongest and most odiouslight, and thereby done eminent serviceboth to religion and morality." It is,however, probable, that whilst it exposesand satirizes many follies, it has neitherpromoted virtue nor increased vice, butmaintains its reputation on account ofits being the first and best ballad operaproduced on the English stage, andbecause the most beautiful of our oldmelodies are enshrined in it.SAMUEL RICHARDSON.THIS eminent novelist, the son of ai'i Her, who had carried on business inLondon, was born in Derbyshire, inthe year 1689; but the exact place ofhis birth, says Mrs. Barbauld, he, forsome reason or other, always avoidedmentioning. He was at first intendedfor the church, in consequence of hissedate and serious disposition, buthis father not possessing sufficientmeans to send him to the university,he was ultimately destined to trade, andSAMUEL RICHARDSON.never obtained any education beyondthat of a common school. It appears,from his own statement, that he waseaiiy a general favourite with females,and that, at the age of thirteen, beingmade the confidant of three youngwomen in their love secrets, he wasemployed by them to write draughts ofletters to their lovers ; and such was hisfidelity and discretion, that not one ofthem suspected him to be the secretaryof the others.In 1706, he was put apprentice to Mr.Wilde, a printer, in Stationers' Hall ; abusiness of his own choosing, in orderto gratify his thirst for reading. He,however, found this not so easy ; for hismaster, lie says, being one who grudgedevery hour to him that tended not tohis profit, he was obliged to steal fromthe hours allotted to rest and recreation,his times for mental improvement.So conscientious was he on these occasions,that he always purchased hisown candle, and he was, at the sametime, so diligent in his proper business,that his matter used to call him thepillar of his house. After the expirationof his apprenticeship, he worked asajourneyman and corrector in a printingoffice, until 1719, when he took uphis freedom, and set up for himself inacourt in Fleet Street, whence he subsequentlyremoved to Salisbury Court.His exertions were not confined to hisbusiness ; he not only printed but wrotefor 'the booksellers, in composing forthem indexes, prefaces, and, as he stylesthem, honest dedications. His reputationfor honourable and generous dealingssoon made his trade profitable,and, about 1723, he was employed toprint the Duke of Wharton's TrueBriton, and afterwards, The DailyJournal, The Daily Gazetteer, and TheJournals of the House of Commons, ofwhich he completed twenty six volumes.Mr. Speaker Onslow, through whoseinfluence he obtained this last employment,offered, it is said, to promote himto some station at court, but Richardsondeclined quitting his business. At thistime he appears to have been married,but subsequently lost his wife, who wasthe daughter of his first master, in 1731.In 1739, he received an applicationfrom two booksellers to write for them avolume of letters upon various supposedoccasions, which might serve as modelsfor those who had not the talent of inditingfor themselves. " He began,"says Mrs. Barbauld ; " but letter producingletter, it grew into a story, andwas given to the public under the titleof The History ot Pamela." Such wasthe fluency of his pen and his easinessof invention, thai the two volumes, ofwhich the work at first consisted, andbeyond which it should not have beenprolonged, were completed, amidst otherengagements, within two months. Thereception it met with from the publicwas unparalleled ; it was recommendedfrom the pulpit by more than oneeminent divine ; Pope declared it woulddo more good than many volumes ofsermons : and, indeed, all parties concurredin finding it a work of moralentertainment, calculated to serve alikethe cause of virtue, religion, and morality.The two additional volumeswere written in consequence of the appearanceof a spurious continuation ofthe story, called Pamela in High Life;and are, as Mrs. Barbauld justly observes,superfluous and dull, and filledwith heavy sentiment instead of incidentand passion.In 1748, he published the two firstvolumes of Clarissa, which at onceplaced him in the first rank of novelists.This, as was the case with Pamela, wastranslated into Dutch, German, andFrench, and procured for him a reputation,both at home and abroad, whichno novelist perhaps has ever before orsince enjoyed. The female characterhad hitherto been the object of his pento exalt, and he now determined to givethe world an example of a perfect man.Accordingly, in 1753, he produced TheHistory ot Sir Charles Grandison : howfar his attempts succeeded will be noticedafter the remaining occurrences ofhis life have been related. It should,however, here be stated, that, while thework was printing, the author underwentgreat vexation from the piracy ofthe Dublin booksellers, who bribed hisservants to steal the sheets while theywere under the press. They even brokeopen locks to get at the manuscripts;sent over what was prepared for publication; and the booksellers, almostall of whom concurred in this act ofrobbery, came out with a cheap editionof several of the volumes before theauthor's English one.LITERATURE.In 1754, Richardson, who was amassinga handsome fortune, from his worksand his business, was made master ofthe Stationers' Company ; on whichoccasion one of his friends told him thatthough he did not doubt his going verywell through every other part of theduty, he feared his habitual abstemiousnesswould allow him to make but avery poor figure at the city feasts. In1760, he purchased a moiety of thepatent of law printer to the king, and,about the same time, he removed fromhis country residence at North End,Hammersmith, to a house which he hadbuilt for himself at Parson's Green.Here he passed the latter part of hislife, surrounded by his family, and anamiable and accomplished circle ofvisitors, principally females, to whomhe used to read his works in the progressof composition. " In this mentalseraglio, as it may be called," says Mrs.Barbauld, "he had great facilities forthat knowledge of the female heartwhich he has so eminently shown in hisworks ; but it cannot be denied that ithad a tendency to feed that self-importancewhich was perhaps his reigningfoible." A paralytic disorder atlength terminating in apoplexy, derivedhim of lite, on the 4th of July,761 ; previously to which he hadadded to his reputation by the publicationof Familiar Letters, being thescheme he had laid aside for Pamela ;an edition of aesop's Fables ; and NumberNinety-seven in the Rambler ; besidessome fugitive pieces in differentperiodical publications. By his firstwife, Richardson had one daughter andfive sons ; and by his second, a MissLeake, one son and five daughters : theformer children all died young ; and ofthe latter, he was survived by fourdaughters.The character of Richardson did notdisappoint the expectation of those wholooked to the author of Clarissa andGrandison for example as well as precept.He was virtuous, friendly, benevolent,humane, and hospitable ; and itis an amiable picture, observes Dr.Aikin, that one of his correspondentsdraws of him, when he says, " I thinkI see you sitting at your door, like anold patriarch, and inviting all who passby to come in." Flattery, praise, andadulation, than which no man receivedmore, threw no taint upon his independence,and the acquaintance of hissuperiors he never deemed of sufficientvalue to court. In company, he wassilent and reserved, and never altogethergot over that bashfulness incidentto a man of sensibility who hasrisen to notice beyond what his originalrank in society could claim.As an author, his fame rests onClarissa and Grandison ; had he writtenPamela only, he would have been rememberedas a novelist, but nothingmore. Exquisitely as is the characterof the heroine portrayed, up to thetime she resists the licentious overturesof her master and admirer, the momentshe becomes his wife, a death-blow isgiven to the consistency of her characterand the moral tendency of thework. But the author has made amendsfor this fatal error in Clarissa; Lovelaceis not superior in villany to thehusband of Pamela, and yet the handof Lovelace is disdained ; the one offersmarriage to his victim in the characterof an insatiate violator, the other inthat of a foiled seducer ; both despicableenough it must be owned ; and by sucha woman as Richardson professed torepresent, both should have been rejected.Richardson is more highlyestimated by the French than by his owncountrymen ; and Rousseau has Clarissa, " that no book wasever written equal toitinany language."It is, indeed, a masterly and originalproduction of genius; and Mrs. Barbauldjustly remarks, that it will transmit hisname to posterity as one of the firstGeniuses of the age in which he lived,n this novel, observes his female biographer," it was reserved for Richardsonto overcome all circumstances ofdishonour and disgrace, and to throw asplendour round the violated virginmore radiant than she possessed in herfirst bloom." Dr. Johnson, in comparingthe Lothario of Rowe with theLovelace of Richardson, says, that theone was probably taken from the other ;but gives the preference, for moraleffect, to our author, observing thatLothario retains too much of the spectator'skindness. " It was in the powerof Richardson alone," he continues,to teach us at once esteem and detestation; to make virtuous resentmentoverpower all the benevolence whichRICHARD SAVAGE.wit and elegance and courage naturallyexcite ; and to lose, at last, the hero inthe villain." In Sir Charles Grandison,the character of Clementina is the bestdrawn ; but it has been observed that,after the refusal of Sir Charles, thereader should hear no more of her.It is the fault of Richardson," saysMrs. Barbauld, " that he never knewwhen to have done with a character."Grandison created less interest thaneither of his preceding novels, althoughsurpassing them both in compass, invention,and entertainment. Indeed thehero was not a character calculated toplease or to impress, notwithstanding thesuperior qualities with which his authorinvests him. Sir Charles is an excellentexample of self-control, but the passionlessuniformity of his actions findsno sympathy with the generality ofmankind in whatever degree it mayattract their admiration. Nor is theconsistency of his conduct always preserved; in the dr.el scene it is unquestionablydestroyed ; and his goingso far into a matrimonial treaty with abigoted catholic is at variance with allpropriety, and particularly with theprinciples of the stiff and scrupulousSir Charles. The faults of Richardson'sstyle are his prolixity and ineleganceof diction; few readers, therefore, ofthe present day, possess the patienceto read him. In Pamela, many ofthe scenes are extremely indelicate ;and Dr. Watts, instead of complimentinghim upon this novel, told him heunderstood that the ladies could notread it without blushing. It was inridicule of Pamela, that Fielding wroteJoseph Andrews, an injury which wasnever forgiven by Richardson, whoaffected to despise Tom Jones, and predictedthat the author would soon beno more heard of.RICHARD SAVAGE.RICHARD SAVAGE, an illegitimatechild of the Countess of Macclesfield,by Earl Rivers, was born on the 10th ofJanuary, 1698. No sooner had hisbirth taken place, than his mother (who,in consequence of the public declarationof her adulterous intercourse withRivers, caused herself to be divorced,)discovered a resolution of disowningher child. She accordingly removedhim from her sight, by placing himin the hands of a poor woman, whomshe directed to educate him as herown offspring, and never to divulgeto him the names of his true parents.His abode, however, being ascertainedby the countess's mother, Lady Mason,she, in conjunction with his godmother,Mrs. Lloyd, benevolently undertookthe care of his education. The latterdied when he was in his tenth year,when he was sent, at the expense ofthe former, to the grammar school of St.Albans, where he was called by thename of his nurse. Before he had leftschool, where he displayed great ability,he lost his father, who, having been frequentlydeceived in his inquiries respectinghis son, now, upon his deathbed,demanded a true account of him,in order to leave him a competent provision.For this purpose he had setapart 6,000 ; but left it to another person,on being informed, by the inhumanmother, that th boy, for whom he intendedit, was dead. The next act ofthe countess was to endeavour to transportthe object of her hatred to the Americanplantations ; but, being thwartedin this, she ordered him to be apprenticedto a shoemaker in Holborn, inthe hope of burying him in poverty andobscurity, in his own country. Savage,however, after he had worked at theawl some time, began to grow disgustedwith his occupation ; and losing hisnurse about this time, he went to takepossession of her effects in the name ofher son, as he supposed himself, whenhe found some letters which informedhim of his birth, and of the reasons forwhich it was concealed.He now quitted the employmentwhich had been allotted to him, andmade every exertion to obtain an interviewwith nis mother, who avoided himwith the most vigilant precaution, andgave orders that he should be excludedfrom her house, by whomsoever hemight, be introduced. Savage, on theother hand, was so affected by the discoveryof his surviving parent, that heused to walk in the evenings for severalhours before her door, in hopes of seeingher as she might come, by accident, tothe window, or cross her apartment witha candle in her hand. Receiving, however,neither attention nor assistancefrom her, he had recourse to his pen forthe purpose of obtaining subsistence.His first production was a pamphlet onthe Bangorian Controversy, of whichhe was, in a short time, so ashamed,that he destroyed all the copies whichhe could collect. He next wrote twocomedies, borrowed from the Spanish,called Woman's a Riddle, and Love inaVeil, " which .procured him," saysJohnson, " no other advantage than theacquaintance of Sir Richard Steele andMr. Wiles; by whom he was pitied,caressed, and relieved." He unfortunatelylost the friendship of the former,by too openly ridiculing some of Steele'sfollies , but he still found a benefactorin Mr. Wiles, who obtained from hismother 50, with a promise of 150more ; which, however, was never performed.. His association with this gentlemanbrought him frequently to thetheatre, where he became acquaintedwith Mrs. Oldfield, who was so muchpleased with his conversation, andtouched with his misfortunes, that sheallowed him a settled pension of 50a-year, which he received until herdeath.In 1723, he, with the assistance ofAaron Hill, brought upon the stage histragedy on the subject of Sir ThomasOverture, he himself taking the principalcharacter; but his performancewas not so successful as his play, whichyielded him a profit of 100. " Duringa considerable part of the time," saysJohnson, " in which he was employedupon this performance, he was withoutlodging, and often without meat ; norhad he any other conveniences for studythan the fields or the street allowedhim ; there he used to walk and formhis speeches, and afterwards step into ashop, beg, for a few moments, the useof the pen and ink, and write downwhat he had composed, upon paperwhich he had picked up by accident."Savage's next production was a volumeof Miscellanies, towards the publicationof which Mr. Hill procured hima subscription of seventy guineas, bypublishing his story in a periodical paper,called The Plain Dealer, with somelines, written by our author, relative tothe treatment he had received from hismother. An ode on the death of KingGeorge the First added to his reputation,which was fast increasing, when, inNovember, 1727, entering a house ofill fame with two companions, a broilensued, in which lie killed a Mr. Sinclair.On his trial for murder, a verdict ofguilty was pronounced against himselfand Mr. Gregory, whilst his other friend,Mr. Marchant, was found guilty of manslaughteronly. The circumstances ofthe case were such as to warrant an applicationfor the king's pardon in behalfof the prisoners, which, but for the exertionsof Lady Hertford, Lord Tyroneand others, would, in all probability,have been withheld, in consequenceof the obstacles thrown in itsway by the inhuman mother of Savage,who exerted her utmost efforts for hisdestruction. In order to prejudice thequeen against him, she declared that hehad some time ago entered her house inthe night, and attempted to murder her.The incident on which this atrociouscalumny was founded, is thus relatedby Johnson : " One evening, walkingas it was his custom, in the streetthat his mother inhabited, Savage sawthe door of her house by accident open;he entered it, and, finding no person inthe passage to hinder him, went upstairsto salute her. She discovered himbefore he could enter her chamberalarmed the family with the most distressfuloutcries, and when she had, byher screams, gathered them about her,ordered them to drive out of the housethat villain, who had forced himself inupon her, and endeavoured to murderher. Savage, who had attempted, withthe most submissive tenderness, to softenher rage, hearing her utter so detestablean accusation, thought it prudent toretire; and, I believe, never attemptedafterwards to speak to her."Savage received the king's pardon onthe 9th of March, 1728, and, on deliberationfrom prison, found the number ofhis friends increased ; and a short me .mohr of his life being published, excitedthe compassion of those who read it sopowerfully in his favour, that he wasenabled, by frequent presents, to sup-richardSAVAGEport himself decently for a short time.He was, however, soon reduced to astate of indigence, which induced himto look to his mother for relief, but withfar different feelings from those he hadformerly entertained towards her. Regardingher now only in the light of anenemy implacably malicious, whom nothingbut his blood could satisfy, hethreatened to harass her with lances,and to publish a full account ofconduct, unless she consented toallow him a pension. The expedient sofarsucceeded, that Lord Tyrconnel, oneof her relations, on condition of hisabandoning his design, consented to receivehim into his house, and to allowhim a pension of 200 per annum.This," says Johnson, " was the goldenpart of Savage's life ; his appearancewas splendid, his expenses large, andhis acquaintance extensive. He wascourted by all who endeavoured to bethoughtmen of genius, and caressedby all who valued themselves upon arefined taste. Not only was an acquaintancewith him a title to poetical reputation,but any place of public entertainmentderived popularity from hispresence ; and his approbation and exampleconstituted the fashion."In this bright period of his existencehe published The Wanderer, a moralpoem, which was always considered byhimself as his master-piece ; and Popesaid of it, on a third perusal, that herecurred to its contents with increaseddelight. For this poem, which waspublished in 1729, he only received tenguineas, which he accepted to defraythe expense of some trifling gratificationin which he happened at the timeto be engaged. His irregular habitsand dissipated conduct, both at publicplaces and in the house of his patronatlength led to a separation from LordTyrconnel, to whose remonstrances hispride would not suffer him to listen.Mutual recrimination took place, andwas for some time carried on in a spiritthat heightened the animosity of both,and improved the character of neither.Lord Tyrconnel was exasperated to sucha degree by the wit and virulence ofSavage, that he went, with a number ofattendants, to beat him at a coffeehouse; the latter, however, had just leftthe place, and, next day, repaid the visitat his lordship's residence, but retired,at the request of the domestics, withoutinsisting upon an interview.The subject of our memoir nowthought himself at liberty to put histhreat into execution respecting his mother,and he accordingly published hispoem of The Bastard, in which he exposedher conduct with such success,that she was obliged to leave Bath, toavoid the public odium. His work hada rapid sale, but as the principal shareof the profits went to the bookseller,Savage was soon again in want of thenecessaries of life. He, therefore, exertedhis utmost to obtain the place ofpoet laureat, upon the death of Eusden,but had the mortification of seeing itbestowed upon Colley Gibber, after theking had already promised it to himself.In consequence of this disappointmenthe styled himself VolunteerLaureat, and wrote a birth-day ode tothe queen, which procured him a presentof 50, with permission to writeannually on the same subject, and aPromise of the same reward. " His conduct,"says Johnson " with regard tothis pension, was very particular. Nosooner had he changed the bill, than hevanished from the sight of all his acquaintances,and lay for some time outof the reach of all the inquiries thatfriendship or curiosity could make afterhim: at length he appeared again,penniless, as before, but never informedeven those whom he seemed to regardmost, where he had been, nor was hisretreat ever discovered."His next publication was a satireagainst the clergy, called The Progressof a Divine, for which an informationwas laid against him, before Sir philipYorke, who dismissed it on the groundof the moral tendency of the work.Being disappointed in a recent promiseof patronage from Sir Robert Walpole,he made an attempt to gain the noticeof the Prince of Wales, by addressingto him a poem on Public Spirit withregard to Public Works. No attention,however, was paid to it by the prince,and very little by the public ; a failurewhich roused the'indignation of Savage,but did not drive him to despair. Hepublished proposals for printing hisworks by subscription, but this nevertook place, in consequence of his dissipatingthe small sums he received intransient luxuries, instead of allowingLITERATU RE.them to accumulate. In 1738, on thedeath of the queen, he lost his pension,and was reduced to such a state of distress,that his friends entered into asubscription for him, and agreed to allowhim 50 a- year, upon which he was toretire into Wales. Before the moneywas collected, he took a lodging in FleetStreet, where he received, every Monday,a guinea, which he commonly spentbefore the next morning, and trusted,after his usual manner, the remainingpart of the week, to the bounty of fortune.He now began to feel the miseriesof dependence, but nothing offendedhim so much as the proposition of hiscontributors to send him a tailor to takehis measure, and then to consult howthey should equip him. Upon hearingof this, he went to the lodging ofa friend, in a paroxysm of rage ; andbeing asked what it could be that gavehim such disturbance, he replied, withthe utmost vehemence of indignation,That they had sent for a tailor tomeasure him."In July, 173&, he left London forSwansea, determined to commence arigid economist, and having much morethan sufficient to convey him to theplace of his destination ; but, before hehad reached Bristol, he sent word tohis friends to say he was without money,and could not proceed without aremittance. He at length arrived atSwansea, whence his haughty letters tohis subscribers caused many of themto withdraw their contributions, untilbis allowance was reduced to 20 perannum.Having completed a second tragedyon the subject of Sir Thomas Overture,he resolved on coming to London forthe purpose of bringing it out, and hadreturned to Bristol on his way thither,when he was arrested, and thrown intoprison, for a debt of 8. During hisabode in the town, his engaging qualitieshad procured him a host of acquaintances,from many of whom hereceived various sums, with which hemight have continued his journey toLondon, instead of expending them inthe revels of a tavern. After remainingin confinement for some time, he wasseized with a fever, which put an end tohis existence in the summer of 1743.The last time that the keeper of thegaol gawirim," says Johnson, " was onthe 31st of July, when Savage, seeinghim at his bed-side, said, with an uncommonearnestness, ' I have something tosay to you, sir ;' but, after a pause, movedhis hand in a melancholy manner ; and,finding himself unable to recollect whathe was going to communicate, said,'Tis gone I' The keeper soon after lefthim, and the next morning he died."In person, Savage is described byhis biographer, as a man of middlestature, of a thin habit of body, a longvisage, coarse features, and melancholyaspect; of a grave and manlydeportment, a solemn dignity of mien,but which, upon a nearer acquaintance,softened into an engaging easiness ofmanner. In delineating his character,we must not be led away by compassionfor his misfortunes, many of which hehad it in his power to prevent, and maybesaid to have been of his own creating.Having once discovered that he was theoutcast of an unnatural mother, andthat he had been defrauded by her ofa competence, he seems, throughout life,to have considered himself entitled tothe continuous bounty and compassionof all such as were in possession of heartsand purses. With this feeling, it is notstrange that he should have frequentlysubjected himself to the charge of insolenceand ingratitude, which is, in someinstances, but too well founded. It isto be, however, recollected, that the peculiarframe of his mind led him tovalue benefits only in proportion to hisregard for the benefactor, whom he consideredno longer as such, if the leastobjection were taken to his conduct, ordictation offered in his affairs. Hispride, also, led him to refuse, as oftenas his haughtiness forbade him to acknowledge,the favours of others ; andno circumstances of misery, howeverextreme, could tempt him to adopt atone of submission in soliciting assistance.His independence, therefore,made him rather a demandant than asuppliant ; yet he was enraged at beinganswered as the former, whilst hespurned to be considered as thelatter. " Once," says Johnson, " whenhe was without lodging, meat, or clothes,one of his friends, a man not, indeed,remarkable for moderation in his prosperity,left a message, that he desiredto see him about nine in the morning.Savage knew that his intentionRICHARD SAVAGE,was to assist him, but was very muchdisgusted that he should presume toprescribe the hour of his attendance,and, I believe, refused to visit him, andrejected his interference." At anothertime, when his clothes were worn out,he received notice, that at a coffeehousesome clothes and linen were leftfor him ; but the offer was made withsome neglect of ceremonies, which Savageso much resented, that he refusedthe present, and declined to enter thehouse till the clothes that had been designedfor him were taken away.With all his pride and hauteur, hewas one of the most entertaining andfascinating companions of his day, andfew thought the pleasure they receivedfrom him dearly purchased, by payingfor his wine, which he would often callfor at a tavern, without scruple, andtrust for the reckoning to the liberalityof his company. It was his peculiarhappiness, says his biographer, that hescarcely ever found a stranger whomhe did not leave a friend ; but it mustlikewise be added, that he had not oftena friend long without obliging him tobecome a stranger. His temper wasuncertain and capricious, and he retainedhis hatred more tenaciously thanhis benevolence; yet he was compassionate,both by nature and principle,and always ready to perform offices ofhumanity. One instance is recorded ofhis generosity, which, says Johnson,in some ages would have made a saint,and, perhaps, in others a hero. Sometimeafter he had obtained his pardonfor his share in the death of Mr. Sinclair,he met in the street a woman whohad sworn with much malignity againsthim. She informed him that she wasin distress, and, with great earnestness,desired him to relieve her ; when, insteadof taking pleasure in the calamitiesof one who had brought his life intodanger, he gently reproved her for herperjury, and, changing the only guineathat he had, divided it equally betweenher and himself.Of his mode of life after he left LordTyrconnel's house, Johnson draws anaffecting picture. " He lodged," saysthe doctor, " as much by accident as hedined, and passed the night sometimes inmean houses, which are set open at nightto any casual wanderers ; sometimes incellars, among the riot and filth of themeanest and most profligate of the rabble; and sometimes, when he had notmoney to support even the expenses ofthese receptacles, walked about thestreets till he was weary, and laid down,in the summer, upon a bulk ; or, in thewinter, with his associates in poverty,among the ashes of a glass-house." Topass a night in this manner did Savageoften retire from a convivial circle, ofwhich he had been at once the life andthe ornament. Yet, under such circumstances,his fortitude never desertedhim ; indeed, perhaps at no period ofhis career did despair even enter histhoughts. Exhilarated by the presentmoment, he forgot the past and becamereckless of the future, and dissipated histime and his money with equal prodigalityand vivacity. But these momentswere not unimproved ; he mingled incursory conversation with the samesteadiness of attention as others applyto a lecture ; and amidst the appearanceof thoughtless gaiety, lost no newidea that was started, nor any hint thatcould be improved.As an author, Savage appears to advantagein every respect ; and whatevermay have been his actions, his writingsuniformly tended to the exaltation ofthe mind, and the propagation of moralityand piety. His great powers andexperience of observation more thancompensated for his want of learning ;and with a genius at once poetical andoriginal, he gave to his versification andsentiments a cast peculiar to themselves,and not to be imitated with success.Of his style, Johnson says, the generalexcellence is dignity, and its generalfault harshness ; of his sentiments theprevailing beauty is sublimity, and uniformitythe prevailing defect. No authortook more pains in the correction of hissheets ; he often altered, revised, recurredto his first reading or punctuation,and again adopted the alteration ; theintrusion or omission of a comma wassufficient to discompose him, and hewould lament an error of a single letteras a heavy calamity.Upon the whole, it is not too muchto say of the capacities of Savage, thathe possessed wisdom enough for astatesman, eloquence to have influencedsenates, delicacy that might have polishedcourts, and ideas of virtue thatmight have enlightened the moralist;LITERATURE.but, to those who possess similar attainments,he is a memorable example, saysthe authority from whom we have sooften quoted, " that nothing will supplythe want of prudence; and that negligenceand irregularity, long continued,will make knowledge useless, wit ridiculous,and genius contemptible."JAMES THOMSON.JAMES THOMSON, the son of aclergyman, was born at Ednam, in Rox-berkshire, Scotland, on the 17th of September,1700. His father having a largefamily, the education of James, who displayeduncommon promises of futureexcellence, was undertaken by Mr. Ricea neighbouring minister. He wasfirst sent to school at Jedburgh, wherehe showed no superiority to other boys,except in the composition of occasionalpieces of poetry, most of which he threwinto the fire. From Jedburgh he removed,with the intention of studying forthe church, to Edinburgh, where he remainedwithout distinction, till the timecame for him to perform a probationaryexercise, by explaining a psalm. On thisoccasion his diction was so poetical andsplendid, that he received a reproof fromMr. Hamilton the divinity professor,who declared many of his expressionsunintelligible and profane. This rebuke,whilst it repressed his thoughtsof entering into orders, gave additionalfervour to his poetical genius ; and receivingencouragement from his friendsto proceed to London, he arrived in themetropolis with no other incumbrancesthan some letters of recommendation,and his poem of Winter. The formerhe had the misfortune to lose, and thelatter he with some difficulty sold, for avery low price, to Mr. Millar. The dedicationof it, however, to Sir SpencerCompton, procured him a present oftwenty guineas ; and the poem beingrecommended by Aaron Hill and others,as well as by its own intrinsic merit,passed, in a short time, through severaleditions, and gained the author a proportionatereputation.In 1727, he published his Summer ;poem on the Death of Sir Isaac Newton,and Britannia; the first of which wasdedicated to Bubo Dodington, at thesuggestion of Lord Binning, to whomThomson had been tutor. In the followingyear appeared his Spring, witha dedication to the Countess of Hertford,whom he used to visit every summerfor the purpose of assisting her studies,and listening to her verses. In 1730,he completed his Seasons by the publicationof Autumn, having previouslybrought upon the stage his tragedy ofSophonisba, which produced but littleeffect beyond that of a moral lecture ;and, in consequence of the unfortunateline,O Sophonisba, Sophonisba, O !caused the author for some time to beechoed through the town asO, Jemmy Thomson, Jemmy Thomson, O!Having been recommended by Dr.Rundle, as tutor to Mr. Charles Talbot,the eldest son of the chancellor, thesubject of our memoir passed some timeabroad with his pupil, and on his returnwas made secretary of the briefs, andcommenced his poem on Liberty : afterhaving employed two years in the compositionof it, he published it in fiveparts, and considered it as his noblestwork; but none, from his pen, producedso little impression upon the public.Their judgment," says Johnson, " wasnot erroneous : the recurrence of thesame images must tire in time ; anenumeration of examples to prove a positionwhich nobody denied, as it wasfrom the beginning superfluous, mustquickly grow disgusting."Thomson lived in ease and plentyuntil the death of Lord Talbot, in 1737,when omitting, either through pride,bash fulness, or indolence, to solicit acontinuation of his place from the succeedingchancellor, Hardwickle, it was,after being kept vacant some time, bestowedupon another. Indigence nowprompted him to labour ; but the formerwas soon relieved by the bounty of thePrince of Wales, who, on the intro-jamesTHOMSON,diction of our author, interrogated himabout the state of his affairs. Thomsonreplied, that they were " in a morepoetical posture than formerly," andhad a pension allowed him of 100 perannum. In 1738, he produced his tragedyof Agamemnon, with the receptionof which he was not more satisfied thanthat given to Sophonisba; and it issaid, that coming late to some friends,with whom he was to sup on the firstnight of its representation, he excusedhis delay by telling them, the sweat ofhis distress had so disordered his wig,that he could not come till he had beenrefitted by a barber. An anecdote isalso told of the interest he evinced inhis own drama by attending the representationof it in the upper gallery, wherehe accompanied the players by audiblerecitations, till a friendly hint frightenedhim into silence. He next produced hisEdward and Eleanoraa, which was thesecond play refused under the licensingact, then lately passed ; and when thepublic murmured, says Johnson, at theunkind treatment of Thomson, one ofthe ministerial writers remarked, thathe had taken a Liberty which was notagreeable to Britannia in any Season"Shortly afterwards, our author wrote, inconjunction with his friend Mallet, theMasque of Alfred ; but it is doubtfulwhich of the two "was the author ofthe still popular and national song ofRule Britannia. In 1745, appeared hismost successful tragedy, entitled Tancredand Sigismund ; and about the sametime he received the appointment ofsurveyor-general to the Leeward Islands,through the influence of Mr.Littleton. His next piece was The Castleof Indolence, the publication of whichhe did not long survive ; for paying littleattention to a cold which he had caughton the Thames, between London andKew, he was attacked by fever, anddied at his residence at the latter place,on the 27th of August, 1748. He wasburied at Richmond; and, in 1762, amonument was erected to his memoryin Westminster Abbey. After his death,his tragedy of Coriolanus was acted forthe benefit of his family ; on whichoccasion a prologue was written byLittleton, and spoken by Quin, in amanner, says Johnson, that shewed himto be, in that instance, no actor.In person, Thomson was above themiddle size, of a dull countenance, anda gross, unanimated, uninviting appearance.In company, he was shy andsilent, except among select friends, withwhom, as he was warmly beloved by all ofthem, he was cheerful and entertaining.He died a bachelor; and, indeed, heappears to have preferred the transientpleasures of a voluptuary, to the uninterruptedquiet of domestic life. " Heknows not any love," said Savage, " butthat of the sex; he was, perhaps, neverin cold water in his life; and he indulgesin all the luxury that comes within hisreach." He possessed, however, greatkindness of heart, was entirely freefrom literary jealousy, and would giveon all occasions what his purse wouldsupply ; though his natural indolenceprevented him from performing the activeoffices of intervention or solicitation.He had often, says Johnson, felt the inconveniencesof idleness, but never curedit; and was so conscious of his owncharacter, that he talked of writing aneastern tale of The Man who loved tobe in Distress. Such was his exceedinglaziness, that he is recorded to havebeen seen standing at a peach-tree,with both his hands in his pockets, eatingthe fruit as it hung. At anothertime, being discovered in bed at a verylate hour in the day, when he was askedwhy he did not rise, his answer was,Troth, mon, I see nae motive forrising."One of his peculiarities was a veryunimpressive and inarticulate manner ofdelivering any lofty or solemn composition; and he was once reading toDodington, who was so provoked byhis manner of pronunciation, that hesnatched the paper from his hand, andtold him that he did not understand hisown verses.As a poet, Thomson takes his placein the first rank of English writers ; hisSeasons and Castle of Indolence beingperformances of equal beauty and originality,and such as will always continueto command the applause of critics andreaders. He is eminently the poet ofNature, which he describes with a fidelitythat, in the words of his biographer,makes the reader "wonder that he neversaw before what Thomson shews him,and that he never yet has felt whatThomson impresses." His diction,though occasionally cumbrous and la-literature.poured, seldom becomes harsh or unmusical; but the exuberance of splendour,in which he involves some of histhoughts and images, frequently rendershim obscure, and fills the ear morethan the mind. As a dramatic writer,he cannot be said to have succeeded ;his tragedies possess little interest orpathos, and his language is rather thatof declamation than dialogue.HENRY FIELDINGHENRY FIELDING, a grandson ofthe Earl of Denbigh, and the son ofLieutenant-general Fielding, by his firstwife, who was a daughter of JudgeGould, was born at Sharpham Park, nearGlastonbury, Somersetshire, on the 22ndof April, 1707. The first rudiments ofhis education were acquired under Mr.Oliver, who is said to have been theoriginal of Parson Tulliver, in JosephAndrews. He was afterwards sent toEton, where he applied closely to study,and had the reputation of being an excellentGreek and Latin scholar. Onleaving school, he proceeded to Leyden,where he studied civil law for two years,at the expiration of which time, his fatherbeing unable to continue the necessarypecuniary supplies, he returned toLondon, at the age of little more thannineteen. Although his course of legaleducation was thus interrupted, he hadaccumulated a large store of solid learning; and, amidst his wildest subsequentdissipation, the love of reading and ofliterary intercourse never forsook him.On his arrival in London, his brilliantwit, humour, and high relish ofsocial enjoyment, soon brought him intogreat request with men of taste andliterature, as well as with the voluptuousof less refinement. The dissipated habitswhich he thus acquired, speedily involvedhim in pecuniary difficulties ;for, although his father professed toallow him j200 a-year, this allowance,as Fielding used to say, " any onemight pay who would."Under these circumstances he turnedhis attention to dramatic composition,and, in 1727, produced a comedy, in fiveacts, called Love in several Masques. Thepiece, which was favourably receivedcontained much smart, and even wittydialogue ; but none of that finisheddevelopment of plot and characterwhich he subsequently displayed in hisclassic performances. The same observationswill apply to his next effort, TheTemple Beau, also a comedy, in fiveacts, which appeared in 1729 : the herois of the Ranger class, (though it shouldbe noted that the piece preceded theSuspicious Husband,) and is endowedwith a good stock of wit and vivacity,but the grouping of the characters isstraggling and inefficient We cannotafford space for a separate mention ofall Fielding's dramatic productions ;they were mostly written between 1727and the end of 1736; so that he producedabout eighteen dramas, of variouslengths, before he was thirty.Those that have longest kept the stageare, the Wedding Day ; an alterationof his Tom Thumb; the IntriguingChambermaid ; the Virgin Unmasked ;and two excellent adaptations fromMoliere, the Miser, and the Mock Doctor.His theatrical performances altogetheramount to twenty-six, thirteenof which are comedies in three or fiveacts ; all containing some sterling matter,though they cannot be commendedas models either of delicacy or composition.It was his own observation thathe left off writing for the stage when heought to have begun ; and, consideringthe extreme haste in which his pieceswere put together, it is easy to accountfor his not holding a more distinguishedrank among dramatists. It appears,also, that he had no overweening respectfor the judgment of a theatricalaudience. When The Wedding Day,the last of his dramas, was forthcoming,in 1743, Garrick, who played in it, toldthe author, he was apprehensive thatthe audience would take offence at acertain passage, and therefore beggedit might be expunged. " No," saidFielding, " if the scene is not a goodone, let" them find that out." The disapprobationof the house was arousedHENRY FIELDING.at the place the actor had anticipated,and he retired, chafing, to the greenroom,where the author was solacinghimself with a bottle. " What's thematter, Garrick ?" said he ; " What arethey hissing now ?" " Why, the scenethat I begged you to retrench : I knewit would not do ; and they have frightenedme so that 1 shall not be able toI collect myself again the whole evening."Oh, curse them !" said Fielding, " theyhave found it out, have they ?"In his twenty seventh year, Fieldingmarried Miss Craddock, of Salisbury, alady of great beauty, and whose domesticvirtues appear to have afforded thematerials from which he drew the exquisitecharacter of Amelia. Her marriageportion was 1,500 ; and has motherdying about the same time, a smallestate at Slower, in Dorsetshire, of^200 per year, devolved to him. Uponhis retirement to this place, he commencedkeeping an establishment farbeyond his means, and in less thanthree years found himself in greater indigencethan before, with the additionof a young family to support. He now,for the first time, determined steadilyto pursue his legal studies, and for thatpurpose took chambers in the Temple,and soon made himself master of no inconsiderablesnare of professional knowledge.After his call to the bar, he attendedthe courts at Westminster, and travelledthe western circuit ; but his constitutionbeing unequal to the activelabours of his profession, he found himselfobliged to renounce it, but not withouthaving given some proof of his legalattainments, in the composition of twomanuscript volumes on Crown Law. Agreat number of fugitive political tractsj also came from his pen at this time, andthe periodical paper, called The Champion,was mainly indebted to his abilitiesfor support.His Essays on Conversation, and onthe Knowledge of the Characters ofMen, the Journey from this World tothe Next, and the History of JonathanWild, were among the earliest fruits ofhis literary industry, and formed theprincipal means of his support whilstlie was preparing himself for the bar.In 1742, appeared his first completenovel of Joseph Andrews, which propduce him both fame and emolument,though the latter was not sufficient toremove the embarrassments of one whocould learn anything but economy.The loss of his wife, which he felt withan anguish that threatened the loss ofhis reason, added to his difficulties ; andit was some time before he was sufficientlycomposed to continue his literarylabours. These he resumed by engagingin two periodical papers, called TheTrue Patriot and The Jacobite Journal,which he conducted in a mannerfavourable to the views of the existinggovernment, who rewarded him withthe office of a Middlesex justice. Thiswas a situation at that time not altogethercongenial to the feelings of agentleman, but Fielding did much toincrease its respectability by the mannerin which he fulfilled his duties. Norwas his pen idle : he published manypamphlets respecting the prevention ofcrime, and the regulation of the police ;and his Inquiry into the Cause of thelate Increase of Robbers, &c. made agreat impression at the period.In the midst of these labours, hefound time to complete his master-piece,Tom Jones, which, in the dedication ofit to Littleton, he calls the labour ofsome years of his life. The plot of thisnovel is confessedly unrivalled, both forvariety and consistency, and every pageteems with observation and character ;the author is animated throughout witha genuine love of goodness and hatredof hypocrisy. It has been said that thecharacter of Jones is an encouragementto imprudence ; but Allworthy, who isa man of prudence as well as benevolence,is evidently the model whom theauthor holds out for imitation ; Jonesnever commits an imprudence withoutfinding it involve him in distress ; andis finally made happy, not by his vicesor follies, which always keep him offhis haven, but by the discovery of thetreachery of his enemies. " I have endeavouredto inculcate," says Fielding,that virtue and innocence can scarceever be injured but by indiscretion ; andthat it is this alone which often betraysthem into the snares that deceit andvillany spread for them."The novel of Amelia, which succeededTom Jones, (December, 1751,) althoughit may not display the intense glow ofcolouring and consummate skill in compositionwhich characterize the formerLITERATURE.work, exhibits a delicious mellownessand pathetic power which are equallyenchanting. Notwithstanding his illstate of health, and the time consumedby his magisterial duties, Fielding,shortly after the publication of Amelia,started a new periodical paper, calledthe Covent Garden Journal, which waspublished every Tuesday and Friday,and conduced much to public amusementfor a twelvemonth, when thewriter's increased infirmities obligedhim to abandon the undertaking.He was now recommended to take ajourney to Lisbon, which he reached inAugust, 1754, having written an interestingaccount of his voyage to thatcity, where he died about two monthsafter his arrival, in the forty-eighth yearof his age. He was attended in his lastillness by his second wife, by whom hehad four children.The person of Fielding was tall, handsomeand robust, and his constitutionproportionably vigorous ; but early dissipation,aggravated, probably, in hismaturer years, by mental vexation andwant of sufficient bodily exercise,brought him to a painful and untimelyend. He was not one of those malignantdeceivers who decry those virtues theyhave not had the fortitude to practice ;but, like Steele, (to whom, both incharacter and genius, he bears a strongresemblance), he everywhere inculcates,directly or by inference, the dutyand advantages of enlightened prudence;and is the indignant satirist onlyin branding selfishness, injustice, andhypocrisy. Although, perhaps, possessedof as strong animal spirits asever glowed in a human frame, he wasremarkable for conjugal tenderness andconstancy, and equally exemplary inthe discharge of his paternal duties. Inreligious principle he was a sincereChristian ; and he had even contemplatedan answer to the theologicalwritings of Bolingbroke, and made considerablepreparations for the purpose.As a writer, his faculties were not onlyvast, but admirably balanced : tasteand learning, invention and observation,wit, sense, feeling and humour, glow inhis pages with united lustre; and, inspite of some superficial blemishes, bothas a writer and a moralist, it may besafely pronounced that Henry Fieldingranks in the first class of the literary ornamentsof his country. His chief defectsare an occasional coarseness of language,and a proneness to excuse palpable deviationsfrom rectitude of conduct, on thescore of "goodness of heart," which hehimself possessed in an eminent degree ;but nothing seems to have been fartherfrom his intentions than indecency ofexpression or immorality of sentiment.JOHN CAMPBELL.JOHN CAMPBELL was born atEdinburgh, on the 8th of March, 1708,and was articled to an attorney, butnever practised in that capacity, althoughhe appears to have served thefull period of his clerkship. His firstliterary labour appeared in 1736, in twovolumes folio, under the title of TheMilitary History of Prince Eugene andthe Duke of Marlborough ; which wasthe cause of his being solicited to undertakea share in the Ancient UniversalHistory, wherein, according to Dr.Kippis, he wrote the Cosmogony ;whilst Johnson assigns him the Historyof the Persians and the ConstantinopleEmpire. During the time he wasthus engaged he also produced, in1739, The Travels and Adventures ofEdward Browne, Esq., followed byMemoirs of the Bashaw Duke de ripped,which was reprinted in 1740,with improvements. In 1741 he publishedhis concise History of SpanishAmerica ; and in the following yearthe first and second volumes of hisLives of the English Admirals andother eminent British Seamen, the twolast volumes of which appeared in 1744.This work, the first to which he affixedhis name, gained him great reputation,and was translated into German soonafter its completion. In 1 743, he printedHermippus Redivivus, or The Sage'sTriumph over Age and the Grave ; atract, which had its origin in one printedJOHN CAMPBELL.at Coblentz, wherein it is recorded, thatone Hermippus preserved his life to theage of one hundred and fifteen, by inhalingthe breath of young females. In1744 appeared his Voyages and Travels,in two volumes, folio, containing allthe circumnavigators from Columbus toAnson : a complete History of the EastIndies ; Historical Details of Attemptsmade to discover the North-east andNorth-west Passages ; the CommercialHistory of Core and Japan ; the RussianDiscoveries by Land and Sea ; adistinct Account of the Spanish, Portuguese,British, French, Dutch, andbanish Settlements in America ; withother pieces, not to be found in any formercollection. During the time he waspreparing this laborious undertaking,he contributed to the pages of the BiographiaBritannica, which began to bepublished in numbers in 1745 ; and hiswritings, extending through four volumesof the work, are much superiorto those of his coadjutors.In 1748, he contributed a tract onChronology, and another on Trade andCommerce, to Dudley's Preceptor ; andin 1750 he published the Present Stateof Europe, which went through six editions,and was highly commended bythe critics. His next employment wasin The Modern Universal History, inthe progress of which he displayed greatlearning and ability, having contributedthe ably-written histories of the Portuguese,Dutch, Spanish, French, Swedish,Danish, and Ostend Settlementsin the East Indies ; and the histories ofthe kingdoms of Spain, Portugal, Al-gave,Navarre, and that of France,from Clovis to 1656. In June, 1754,the University of Glasgow presentedCampbell with the degree of L.L.D. ;and a pamphlet which he wrote in defenceof the peace of Paris, in 1763,procured him the patronage of LordBute, through whose influence he wasafterwards appointed agent for the provinceof Georgia, in North America. Hehad in the mean time written, amongother works, An Exact Account of theGreatest White Herring Fishery inScotland ; The History of the War inthe West Indies ; and A Treatise uponthe Trade of Great Britain to America.In 1772, he brought out, in two quartovolumes, his last great work, entitledA Political Survey of Great Britain :being a series of reflections on the situation,lands, revenues, colonies, and commerceof this island ; intended to shewthat they had not approached near thesummit of improvement, but that it willafford employment to many generationsbefore they push to their utmost extentthe national advantages of Great Britain.This was his favourite production,and the one from which he expectedto derive his greatest degree offame and profit ; but, notwithstandingthe merit of the work, which has, however,since received its adequate shareof praise, he did not live to see his expectationsrealized. The accuracy ofmany of his facts may, perhaps, be disputed; and much of his reasoning mayappear ill-founded ; yet, from the prodigiousvariety of information it contains,there is no book more worthy ofthe constant study of the politician, themerchant, the manufacturer, and of allothers interested in the prosperity ofthis country. Burke acknowledged thathe was chiefly indebted to it in thecomposition of his Account of theEuropean Settlements in America ; andin the spring of 1774, our author receivedfrom Catherine, the late Empressof Russia, a present of her portrait,drawn in the robes worn in that countryin the days of John Vassillievitch.Campbell died of a decline, broughton by severe study, on the 28th of December,1775, in the sixty-eighth yearof his age, at his house, in Queen Square,Great Ormond Street. He is describedas having been of a humane dispositionand kind manners, exemplary in all thesocial relations of life, and of strictpiety and morality. In addition tohis knowledge of Greek and Latin, theprincipal European, the Hebrew, andmany of the Oriental languages, hepossessed a vast share of biblical learning,and was so skilled in medicine,that he might have followed it as a professionwith success. His industry andversatility as a writer, will have beenseen from the foregoing memoir, butsome imputations have been, with jus .time, cast upon his taste and judgment, 'in consequence of the almost unvaryingstrain of panegyric indulged byhim in the Biographia Britannica.Besides the works already named, heprinted A Discourse on Providence,which reached a third edition; alsoLITERATURE.various tracts on political, moral, andreligious subjects, all of which were,in their time, extremely popular.The writer of Anecdotes, Historicaland Illustrative, tells the following anecdotesof Campbell : A gentleman, whohappened to dine with the doctor, atthe house of a common acquaintance,observed, that he should be glad topurchase a complete set of his works.The hint was not lost; for the nextmorning the gentleman was surprisedat the appearance of a cart before thedoor, loaded with books, and the bill,amounting to 70. Campbell was anon-juror, and most zealously attachedto the House of Stuart. It happenedthat a messenger who was employed bythe Jacobites in England to carry on acorrespondence with the Pretender, hadprevailed upon the doctor to write aletter to the Pretender's secretary, andas the messenger was in Sir RobertWalpole's pay, he carried it, with therest, to that minister, who sent for thedoctor the following morning (as heoften did at other times, having frequentlyemployed his pen in writingin defence of his administration), onpretence of talking to him aboutsomething he was to write. Sir Roberttook him to a window which lookedinto the street, and while they werestanding there together, he had contrivedthat the messenger should passby, and, looking up, moved his hat atthem ; upon which Sir Robert askedthe doctor if he knew that man, andwho he was? The doctor, in somealarm, immediately answered, that hewas very well acquainted with him,and that he could assure him he was aworthy, honest man. " He may be so,"said Sir Robert, " but he is certainlya very careless one; for he gave me aletter yesterday, which, I believe, wasnot intended to come into my hands,and I think its direction is in yourhand writing!" Then, pulling out theletter, he gave it to him unopened.The doctor fell upon his knees, andvowed, that as he had given him hislife, it should be devoted to his service,and he never ceased to be his advocatethroughout the remainder of his life.And Sir Robert was so well convincedof his sincerity, that he would havegiven him a valuable place ; but thedoctor would not sacrifice his principlesto his interest, and therefore declinedthe offer, continuing a non-juror aslong as the Pretender lived.JOHN ARMSTRONG.JOHN ARMSTRONG, the son of aclergyman, at Carleton, in Roxburgh-shire,Scotland, was born at that place,about the year 1709. He was educatedforth medical profession, and distinguishedhimself at the University ofEdinburgh, both in .the study of physicand literature. Before his twentiethyear he gained a prize medal for aprose composition, presented by aliterary society ; and, in 1752, he tookhis doctor's degree with great reputation,his inaugural thesis, De TakePurulent, being far superior to thecommon bulk of productions of thatnature. He soon afterwards removedto London, where he appeared in thedouble capacity of author and physician,but in the latter he attainedneither eminence nor emolument. In1735, he published an anonymous pamphlet,entitled An Essay for Abridgingthe Study of Physic, to which is addeda dialogue between Hygeia, Mercury,and Pluto, relating to the practice ofphysic, as it is managed by a certainillustrious society ; and an epistle fromBeck, the Persian, to Joshua Ward,Esq , with a dedication to Ward, Moore,and the numerous sect of inspired physicians.It was a humorous attackupon the empiric, of which Ward wasthen at the head, and had wit enoughto be compared, by some of the critics,to Lucian. In 1737, he published aHistory and Synopsis of the Cure of theVenereal Disease; and, shortly afterwards,his elegant and vigorous, butobscene poem, of The Economy ofLove ; " which has, probably," sayshis biographer, in the Edinburgh Encyclopaedia," contributed to extend thatJOHN ARMSTRONG.pestilence as much as his Synopsis hascontributed to cure it." At a subsequentperiod the author pruned someof its luxuriance, but left it still soredolent of immorality, that it has beenexcluded from collections, in whichits merits would have entitled it to aplace.in 1744, he published his principalwork, the didactic poem of The Art ofPreserving Health, which raised hispoetical reputation to a height that Irisafter performances scarcely sustained. In1746, he was appointed one of the physiciansto the hospital for lame and sicksoldiers ; and, in the course of a few years,he published, successively, his poem onBenevolence, Epistle on Taste, andSketches on Various Subjects, under thename of Launcelot Temple, Esq. Thelast publication, in which he is supposedto have derived some assistance fromthe celebrated Mr. Wilkes, had a veryrapid sale, and was justly admired forits humour, and the knowledge of mankindwhich it displayed. In 1760, hewas appointed physician to the armyin Germany, where he wrote a poem,called Day; and an Epistle to JohnWilkes, Esq., in which latter piece heridiculed Churchill, as a " bouncingmimic." This infuriated the latter toan extraordinary degree, and in hispoem of The Journey', he satirized ourauthor with unjustifiable severity; andsoon afterwards Armstrong lost thefriendship of Wilkes, through disagreementin politics. In 1763, he returnedto London, and passed his time principallyin study, and the society ofmen of genius ; his medical practicebeing so confined, as to require littleor no portion of his time. In 1770, hepublished a collection of miscellanies,containing his former pieces, (exceptthe Economy of Love, and Day,) withimitations of Shakspeare and Spenser ;the Universal Almanac, and othereffusions, which are scarcely worthparticularizing. In 1771, he made ajourney to France and Italy, accompaniedby Fuseli, the celebrated painter ;and afterwards published an account ofhis tour, under the name of LauncelotTemple. This was followed, in 1773,ley a pamphlet, in his own name, calledMedical Essays, in which he attributedhis want of popularity in his profession,to his '' not being able to employ theusual means of flattery and cajoling,from an inherent pride and an excessof sensibility." This was his last publication; he died in September, 1779,leaving, to the surprise of his friends,upwards of 3,000, saved by greatparsimony, out of a very moderateincome, arising principally out of hishalf pay.Dr. Armstrong, though a man ofmorbid sensibility of mind, possessedan elevated understanding, and greatgoodness of heart, and was muchbeloved and respected by his intimatefriends, among whom were Dr. Grainger,Sir John Pringle, and the poetThomson. This last he assisted in hiscomposition of the Castle of Indolence ;the fine stanzas, descriptive of thediseases to which the votaries of indolencefinally become martyrs, havingbeen written by Armstrong. Thetenth stanza in that poem is said tohave contained a description of hischaracter, which is so graphicallydrawn that it should not be omitted :With him was sometimes joined in silent walk,(Profoundly silent lor they never spoke)One shyer still, who quite detested talk ;Oft stung by spleen, at once away he broke,To grove of pine and broad overshadowing oak,There inly thrilled, he wandered all alone,And ou himself his pensive fury woke ;He never uttered word, save when first shoneThe glittering star of eve "Thank Ileav'u! thday is doue !"Notwithstanding the morbid and unsociallight in which he is here represented,his conversation is said to havebeen rich and entertaining ; and Fuseliand others warmly attest the benevolenceof his character. In writing toa friend respecting him, Thomson says,the doctor does not decrease in spleen ;but there is a certain kind of spleenthat is both humane and agreeable, likeJacques's in the play." As a poet, thereputation of Armstrong rests upon hisArt of Preserving Health, which willbe a lasting monument of his poeticaltalents, as well as his skill in the medicalart. It is full of charming descriptions,and beautiful images ; the authorthinks boldly, feels strongly, and althoughhis language nearly approachesto common phraseology, it never becomesprosaic. " To describe so difficulta thing gracefully and poetic-ally," saysDr. Wanton, in his Reflections onLITERATURE.Didactic Poetry, " as the effects of adistemper on a human body was reservedfor Dr. Armstrong, who accordinglyhath executed it at the end of histhird book of his Art of PreservingHealth, where he hath given us thatpathetic account of the sweating sickness.There is a classical correctnessand closeness of style in this poem thatare truly admirable, and the subject israised and adorned by numberlesspoetical images."SAMUEL JOHNSON.THIS " great cham of literature,"as Dr. Smollett termed him, was theson of a bookseller and stationer, atLichfield, in Derbyshire, where he wasborn, on the 18th of September, 1709.He was afflicted from his birth withscrofula, which disfigured his countenance,and, for a time, deprived him ofthe sight of one of his eyes. In allusionto this he says, " I was taken to Londonto be touched for the evil byQueen Anne. I always retained somememory of the journey, though I wasthen but thirty months old." He receivedthe rudiments of education,first at a day school, and afterwardsat the grammar-school of Lichfield,where he surpassed all his schoolfellowsin quickness of learning ; andacquired, in particular, a most accuratek no pledge of Latin, which he account tedfor by saying, " my master whippedme very well ; without that I shouldhave done nothing." At this time hewas remarkable for his memory, inquisitiveness,and indolence ; being tooidle to join his schoolfellows in theirdiversions, except in winter, when hetook a pleasure in being drawn uponthe ice by a boy bare-footed, who pulledhim along by a garter fixed roundhim.In 1725, he was removed, by theadvice of his cousin, the Rev. Mr. Ford,to a school at Stourbridge, in Worcestershire,where he remained littlemore than a year, and did not receiveas much benefit as was expected. Of hisrespective progress at Stourbridge andLichfield, he is said to have remarkedto Dr. Percy, Bishop of Dromore, " AtoneI learned much in the school, butlittle from the master; in the otherI learnt much from the master, butlittle in the school." On his returnhome, he is related, by his principalbiographer, to have passed two yearsin a state very unworthy his uncommonabilities, although he read so much,and so well, that when he came toOxford, Dr. Adams, he says, told him,he was the best qualified for the universitythat he had ever-known comethere. It is not certain at whose expensehe resided at Oxford ; he wasentered a commoner of Pembroke College,in October, 1728, and, accordingto Sir John Hawkins, was supportedthere by the father of one of his schoolfellows,to whom he acted as tutor;but Mr. Croker has stated circumstances,in his edition of Boswell, thatrender this part of Johnson's historydoubtful. He appears neither to havelearnt much, nor thought much of Mr.Jordan, the college tutor ; and on beingfined by him for absence from one ofhis lectures, he said to him, " Sir, youhave sconced me twopence for non-attendanceat a lecture not worth apenny." His reputation at the universityarose principally from his Latinpoetical compositions ; one of thesewas a translation of the Messiah ofPope, who, on being shewn a copy,said, " the writer of this poem willleave it a question for posterity, whetherhis or mine be the original." In otherrespects he paid but little attention tohis studies at college, where he had thereputation of a gay, frolicksome fellow,and was noted for the pleasure he tookin entertaining the students, and vexingthe tutors and fellows. On hearingthat this character had been given ofhim, he observed to Boswell, " Ah ! sir,I was mad and violent. It was bitternesswhich they mistook for frolick. Iwas miserably poor, and I thought tofight my way by my literature and mvwit ; so" I disregarded all power and allauthority." .SAMUEL JOHNSON.It was his poverty, thus alluded to,that, about 1730, threw him into thatstate of hypochondriacal, to which hewas constitutionally subject, and fromthe influence of which he was at notime perfectly free. It affected him somuch that he drew up an account ofhis case in Latin ; and put it into thehands of his godfather, and physician,Dr. Swine, who irreconcilable offendedhim by communicating it toothers. He was equally averse to anexposure of his indigence, but was, atthe same time, too proud to accept ofmoney; and somebody having set a pairof new shoes at the door of his apartmentat Oxford, he threw them awaywith indignation. Despairing of themeans of continuing at the university,he took his name off the books of thecollege, in the autumn of 1731, up towhich time, Boswell tells us, he residedthere ; but Mr. Croker states, on verygood authority, that Johnson neverreturned to the university after hisabsence, in December, 1729.Shortly after the death of his father,which took place at the close of theformer year, he accepted the situationof usher, at the free grammar-schoolof Market Bosworth, but he found itso irksome that, in 1733, he acceptedan invitation from Mr. Hector, to residewith him at Birmingham. Thehouse in which his friend lodged,belonging to one Warren, a bookseller,Johnson was employed by him totranslate, from the Portuguese, Lobo'sVoyage to Abyssinia, which was publishedin 1735. For this, his first prosework, he received only five guineas ;the preface is admirably written, andthe style is such as cannot be mistakenfor that of any other author. In thesame year, Mr. Wellesley attemptedto obtain him the mastership of thegrammar-school at Solihull, in Warwickshire; but, although his qualificationsin every other respect were acknowledged,he was objected to on theground of his " being a very haughty,ill-natured gentleman, and having away of distorting his face, which mightaffect some young lads."Not long afterwards he fell in lovewith one Mrs. Porter, the widow of aBirmingham mercer, to whom, al thoughshe exceeded his age by twenty-oneyears, he was united, at Derby, in "1735.She was," says Garrick, " very fat,with a bosom of more 1 than ordinaryprotuberance. Her swelled cheekswere of a florid red, produced by thickpainting, and increased by the liberaluse of cordials. She was glaring andfantastic in her dress, and affected bothin her speech and general behaviour,"Johnson's appearance at the same periodis described as being exceedinglyforbidding : he was then, as Miss Porterdescribed him to Boswell, lean andlank, so that his immense structure ofbones was hideously striking to theeye, and the scars of the scrofula weredeeply visible. He also wore his hair,which was straight and stiff, and separatedbehind ; and he had seeminglyconvulsive starts and odd gesticulations,which tended at once to excite surpriseand ridicule. It was, however, asJohnson says, " a love match on bothsides," and he not only treated his wifewith great tenderness during her life,but thought her eminently beautiful,as appears from the epitaph which hecaused to be inscribed upon her tombstone.With the property he acquired byhis marriage, which was about 800,he attempted to establish a boardingschool at Dial, near Lichfield, but heonly obtained three pupils, one ofwhom was the celebrated David Garrick.His scholastic speculation provingunsuccessful, he determined on tryinghis fortune in London ; and accordingly,on the 2nd of March, 1737, being thenin the twenty-eighth year of his age, heset out for the metropolis, in companywith Garrick, whose intention it was tocomplete his education in town. Johnsonremained in London a few months,principally occupied in writing histragedy of Irene, and in endeavouringto procure employment from the booksellers; one of whom, Wilcox, lookingat his robust frame, told him, insteadof attempting to get his livelihood asan author, " he had better buy a porter'sknot." According to Mr. Cumberland,such washes indigence duringhis first stay in London, that he subsistedfor a considerable space of timeupon twopence-halfpenny per day. Atthe close of the year he went to 'Lichfield,and returned to London with hiswife, and soon after his arrival he becamea contributor to the Gentleman'sLITERATURE.Magazine : his first performance inthat publication being a Latin ode,Ad Urban, which appeared in themonth of March, 1738. In the Mayfollowing, he published his London, apoem, written in imitation of the thirdsatire of Juvenal, with which Pope wasso struck, that on being told that it waswritten by some obscure man, he exclaimed," he will soon be deterred"The poem, which procured him tenguineas, created a great sensation inthe literary circles ; it got to a secondedition in the course of a week, andlaid the foundation of the author's fame.This was succeeded by his MarmotNorfolciense, a poem, in which themeasures of government were so intemperatelyattacked, that, according toSir John Hawkins, who, is, however,contradicted by Boswell, a warrant wasissued against the author. Writing forhis bread, however, he found so great ahardship, that being offered the mastershipof a school, at Appleby, in Leicestershire,if he could obtain the degreeof master of arts, he used his utmostexertions, but without effect, to procurea diploma. The want of a degree incivil law also nullified a subsequenteffort he made to practise as an advocatein Doctors' Commons. As his onlymeans of subsistence, therefore, he resumedhis labours for the Gentleman'sMagazine, to which he contributed avariety of excellent articles, chieflybiographical, fn November, 1740, hebegan, and continued for two years,to compose the parliamentary speeches,which, being then deemed a breach ofprivilege, were published under thefiction of Debates in the Senate ofMagna Lilliputian. It was not generally.known at the time that he was theauthor of the-m, but the secret transpiredseveral years afterwards, andwas avowed by Johnson himself onthe following occasion. At a party, ofwhich lie was one, besides Mr. Wed-dearborn,Dr. Francis, and others, thelatter, alluding to one of Mr. Pitt**speeches, towards the close of SirRobert Walpole's administration, declaredit to be superior to any of theorations of Demosthenes. Many of thecompany remembered the debate ; andsome passages were cited, with theapprobation and applause of all presentexcept Johnson, who, as soon as thewarmth of praise had subsided, calmlyexclaimed, " That speech I wrotein a garret in Exeter Street." Thecompany, says Boswell, was struckwith astonishment ; after staring ateach other in silent amaze, Dr. Francisasked " how that speech could bewritten by him?" (i Sir," said Johnson," I wrote it in Exeter Street ; Inever had been in the gallery of theHouse of Commons but once. Cavehad interest with the door-keepers ; he,and the keepers employed under him,gained admittance : they brought awaythe subject of discussion, the names ofthe speakers, the sides they took, andthe order in which they rose, togetherwith notes of the arguments advancedin the .course of the debate. The wholewas afterwards communicated to me,and I composed the speeches in theform which they now have in the parliamentarydebates." All bestowedlavish encomiums upon Johnson ; andone, in particular, praising his impartiality,he replied, " that is not quitetrue ; I saved appearances tolerablywell, but I took care that the Whigdogs should have the best of it." He,however, seems to have subsequentlyregretted the composition of thesespeeches, as propagating a deceptionequivalent to falsehood.Among other of his writings in theGentleman's Magazine for 1742, wereProposals for Printing Bibliotheca ,or a Catalogue of the Library ofthe Earl of Oxford ; which is here particularlymentioned for the purpose ofnoticing a quarrel that it producedbetween our author and Osborne, thebookseller, who purchased the library,and employed Johnson to write theLatin accounts of books in the catalogue.It was reported that he hadknocked down Osborne in his shop,with a folio; but he afterwards explainedthe truth to Boswell, by saying" Sir, he was impertinent to me,and I beat him. But it was not in hisshop : it was in my own chamber."In 1744, he published his Life ofSavage, his association with whom,says Boswell, " imperceptibly led himinto some indulgences, which occasionedmuch distress to his virtuousmind." A more excellent piece ofbiography than this, of which Johnsonwrote forty-eight octavo pages at aSAMUEL JOHNSON.31.1sitting, was, perhaps, never composed;objections have been taken to the truthof some of the facts, but the authorundoubtedly believed the statements towhich he gave publicity, and was, insome instances, a sharer in the eventswhich he has recorded. Savage andhimself used frequently, for want ofmoney to pay for a lodging, to pass thenight in the streets, our author at thattime being separated from his wife, inconsequence,as Hawkins asserts, ofthe influence of Savage ; but attributed,by Mr. Croker, with more probabilityof ti;utb, to the desire of Johnson thathis wife should find, in her own family,a temporary relief from the want withwhich he was struggling.In 1745, he published a pamphlet,entitled Miscellaneous Observations onthe Tragedy of Macbeth, which obtainedthe approbation of Warburton,who, in the preface to his own editionof Shakspeare, declared all the essays,remarks, &c., which had appearedupon the plays of the bard, with theexception of the above, beneath notice.In 1747, at the opening of Drury LaneTheatre, by Garrick, Johnson wrote aprologue, which has never been surpassed; it was not only received withenthusiastic applause on the first night,but was called for by the audienceseveral times in the course of the season.In the same year he publishedhis plan for a Dictionary of the EnglishLanguage, in a pamphlet addressed tothe Earl of Chesterfield ; he undertookto complete it in three years, and theprice stipulated for with the booksellers,was 1,575. Dr. Adams findinghim at work, one day, upon thisstupendous work, asked him how itwas possible he could do it in threeyears, when the French Academy,which consisted of forty members, tookforty years to complete their Dictionary.Sir," said Johnson, "thus it is: thisis the proportion ; let me see fortytimes forty are six teen hundred; as threeto sixteen hundred, so is the proportionof an Englishman toa Frenchman."Whilst his Dictionary was in progress,he formed a literary club, whichmet once a week, at the King's Head,in Ivy Lane, Paternoster Row, his ownresidence being in Gough Square, FleetStreet. In 1748, he wrote for Dodsley'sPreceptor, the preface, and, what heconsidered his best production, TheVision of Theodore the Hermit. InJanuary, 1749, he published his Vanityof Human Wishes, for which he onlyreceived five guineas ; and, in the followingmonth, his tragedy of Irene wasbrought out, by Garrick, at Drury Lane.Previously to its representation, a violentaltercation took place between theauthor and the manager, to whoseamputations, for the sake of stage effect,Johnson refused to submit. He atlength, however, through the interferenceof a friend to both parties,allowed in part, the proposed alterations,and the tragedy was produced.The play went off' tolerably well till itcame to the conclusion, when Mrs.Pritchard, the heroine of the piece,was to be strangled upon the stage,and to speak two lines with the bowstringround her neck. The audiencecried out " Murder ! murder !" Sheseveral times attempted to speak, but invain : and at last was obliged to go offthe stage alive. This passage wasafterwards struck out, and she was carriedoff to be put to death behind thescenes ; but the play did not please,although Garrick's zeal for the authorcarried it through for nine nights.Johnson, however, it is said, acquiescedwithout a murmur, to the unfavourabledecision of the public, and was probablyconvinced that dramatic writingwas not his forte, as he never afterwardsattempted that species of composition.Irene, after all, could nothave been a matter of much disappointmentto him, as it produced him altogether300 ; 200 for the first threenights' profit, and 100 for the copyright.In March, 1750, he published thefirst number of The Rambler, whichthe Italians have ludicrously translated11 Vagabonds. He completed this workin 1752 ; the whole of .the papershaving been written by himself, withthe exception of Numbers Ten, Thirty,Forty-four, and Ninety-seven. Thegrave tone of the work greatly impededits periodical popularity, but soon afterits publication, in six duodecimo volumes,it rapidly increased in fame, andits author lived to see it reach a tenthedition. Richardson, Dr. Young, andothers preferred it to The Spectator, butJohnson received most delight fromLITERATURE.the opinion of his wife, who said tohim, after a few numbers had comeout, " I thought very well of youbefore ; but I did not imagine youcould have written any thing equal tothis." Many of the characters in TheRambler are said to have been drawnfrom life, particularly that of Prospero,from Garrick ; a satire which, howeverapplicable, was, in Johnson, an ingratitude,which it was no wonder the formernever entirely forgave. In 1751,having previously written a preface toLander's Essay on Milton's Use andImitation of the Moderns, in his ParadiseLost, he, on the detection of theauthor's imposture, by Dr. Douglas,dictated a letter for Lauder to write,acknowledging his fraud and contrition.Johnson himself, also, as someatonement for his unconscious promotionof the fraud, wrote a prologueto Comus, on its representation, for thebenefit of Milton's grand-daughter.In the year last-mentioned, he wasplunged into great distress by the deathof bis wife: she does not appear toLave possessed any very attractivequalities; but there is no doubt thatJohnson loved her passionately duringher life, and deeply lamented her afterher death. Dissensions, as it has beensaid, probably took place between them ;but a record of all the gossip on thissubject would only increase the length,without adding to the importance, ofthe present memoir. He had not longbeen a widower, before he receivedinto his house Mrs. Anna Williams,then afflicted with blindness, and onthe failure of an operation to restoreher sight, he kept her under his rooffor the remainder of his life. In 1753,he began to write for The Adventurer,which was at first rather more popularthan The Rambler. He marked hispapers with the signature T, but gaveboth the fame and the profit to hisfriend, Dr. Bathurst, who wrote themwhilst Johnson dictated. In 1755,the long-expected and much-talked-ofDictionary of the English Language,with an History of the Language,and an English Grammar, was published,in two folio volumes, as thework of Samuel Johnson, M. A., theauthor having previously obtained thatdegree from the University of Oxford,through the intervention of Mr.Wanton. The patience of the proprietorswas often tried before the completionof the work ; when the messengerwho carried the last sheet to Millar jreturned, Johnson asked " Well, what jdid he say ?" " Sir," answered the jmessenger, " he said, ' Thank God, Ihave done with him.' " " I am glad,"replied Johnson, " that he thanks Godfor any thing." His reasons for notdedicating his Dictionary, as well ashis proposals, to Lord Chesterfield, arestated in the following words to Boswell: " Sir, after making great professions,he (Chesterfield) had, for manyyears, taken no notice of me ; but whenmy Dictionary was coming out, he fellascribbling in The World about it.Upon which I wrote him a letter, expressedin civil terms, but such asmight show him that I did not mindwhat he said or wrote, and that I haddone with him." This celebrated letteris a master-piece of composition, andfor keen satire and polite reproof, has,perhaps, never been equalled ; but thepride of Johnson led him to view theneglects of his discarded patron in astronger light than it deserved. He acknowledgedthat he once received 10from Lord Chesterfield, but thoughtthe sum too inconsiderable to mentionin his letter, which, it is said, Chesterfieldread with an air of indifference,smiling at the several passages, andobserving how well they were expressed.He excused his neglect ofjohnson by saying, that he had heardhe had changed his lodgings, and didnot know where he lived ; and declaredhe would have turned off the best servanthe ever had, if he knew that hehad denied him to a man who wouldhave been always more than welcome.The work was received with universalapplause, though it contained,as he himself confessed, " a few wildblunders and wild absurdities," andwas deficient in the technical part. Onbeing asked, by a lady, how he came todefine pastern the knee of a horse, hereplied " Ignorance, madam ; pure ignorance."Nor was he more disconcertedor less candid when other errors werepointed out to him. The followingpassage in his Grammar, " H seldom,perhaps never, begins any but the firstsyllable," was thus ridiculed by Wilkes,in the Public Advertiser: "The authorSAMUEL JOHNSON,of this observation must be a man of aquick apprehension, and of a mostcomprehensive genius."Our author having spent, during theprogress of his laborious work, themoney for which he had contracted toexecute it, was still under the necessityof exerting his talents, as he himselfexpresses it, in making provision forthe day that was passing over him.The subscriptions taken in for his editionof Shakspeare, and the profits ofhis Miscellaneous Essays, were now hisPrincipal resource for subsistence ; andappears, from the following letter toMr. Richardson, dated Gough Square,March the 16th, 1756, that they werenot sufficient to ward off the distress ofan arrest on a particular emergency. " Iam obliged to entreat your assistance :I am now under an arrest for fivepounds fifteen shillings: Mr. Strahan,from whom I should have received thenecessary help in this case, is not athome, and I am afraid of not findingMr. Millar. If you could be so goodas to send me this sum, I will verygratefully repay you, and add it to allformer obligations."In this year he engaged to superintendand contribute to a monthly publication,entitled The Literary Magazine,or Universal Review; for whichhe wrote several original essays, andcritical reviews, which he accomplishedin his usual masterly style. About thisperiod he was offered, but declinedtaking orders, a church living of considerablevalue ; and, in April, 1758, hebegan The Idler, which appeared statedlyin a weekly newspaper, called TheUniversal Chronicle ; and was continuedtill April, 1760. The Idler evidentlyI appeared to be the production of thej same genius as The Rambler ; but ithas more of real life, as well as ease oflanguage: out of one hundred andthirteen numbers twelve only werecontributed by friends.The death of his mother, in the beginningof 1759, led to the productionof his Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia,which he wrote for the express purposeof defraying the expense of her funeral.He told Sir Joshua Reynolds that hecomposed it in the evenings of oneweek, sent it to the press in portions asit was written, and had never since readit over. He received for the copy100, and 25 when it came to asecond edition. Eulogy on a workwhich is so well known in our owncountry, and has been translated intomost, if not all, of the modern languages,would be superfluous. Thoughwritten with a very different motive, itis similar in plan and conduct to Voltaire'sCandide, " insomuch," observesBoswell, " that I have heard Johnsonsay, that if they had not been publishedso closely one after the other,that there was not time for imitation,it would have been in vain to deny thatthe scheme of that which came latestwas taken from the other."In 1762, he accepted, but not withoutsome reluctance, arising from his predilectionfor the house of Stuart, the grantof a pension of 300 per annum, whichhad been obtained for him through theinfluence of the Earl of Bute, at thesolicitation of Mr. Wedderburn andothers. In consequence of this, he wasmuch abused, and his own definition ofthe word pensioner, in his Dictionary,was quoted against him. Churchillsatirised him with the most poignantseverity, under the name of Compose,and among other lines, were the following:How, to all principles untrue,Not fixed to old friends, nor to new,He damns the pension which he takes,And loves the Stuart he forsakes.Johnson, however, lost nothing in theestimation of his friends by acceptingthe pension, which could not have beenbestowed upon one whose abilities moremerited, or whose necessities more requiredit. He was now in comparativeaffluence, and in order to a full enjoymentof the society of his acquaintance,he became member of a weekly club, inGerard Street, Soho, to which most ofthe literati of the day belonged.In 1764 and 1765 he was principallyengaged in preparing his long-expectededition of Shakspeare, which appearedin the latter year, with a preface whichis considered among the most valuableof his literary disquisitions. The edition,however, disappointed the highexpectations which some had formed ofit ; for, although the author had displayedsound sense in comparing thedifferent readings suggested by differentcritics, he was not only wanting in orielLITERATURE.final conjecture, but in that knowledgeof the literature of the Hesperian age,which has been since found the onlygenuine source of illustration. It wasabout this time, that Johnson appears tohave been first introduced to Mr.Thrale, the brewer, in whose lady hefound an agreeable and intelligent companion,at their house at Streatham,where he was domesticated for a considerabletime. In 1767, he had thehonour of a personal interview withGeorge the Third, who was pleased toask him a variety of questions, and tomake sundry observations, which convincedour author that his majesty was,if not the greatest scholar, " the finestgentleman he had ever seen." Whenthe king urged him to continue writing,he said " he thought he had writtenenough." " I should have thought so,too," was the royal reply, " if you hadnot written so well." In 1769, hewas appointed professor in ancientliterature to the Royal Academy ofArts, London; and, in 1770, he published,anonymously, a political pamphlet,entitled the False Alarm, inwhich he endeavoured to justify theexclusion of Mr. Wilkes from the houseof commons, on the ground of incapacitation,by previous expulsion. In1771, appeared his Thoughts on thelate transactions respecting Falkland'sIslands, in which he endeavoured toshow the absurdity of going to war withSpain, respecting a possession not worthholding. His political pamphlets inducedhis friends to make an attempt toprocure him a seat in parliament, andMr. Strahan, the printer, wrote to one ofthe secretaries of the Treasury, recommendinghim as an able auxiliary togovernment. For some reason, however,the minister, Lord North, did notoffer Johnson a seat; which, it is probable,he would have gladly accepted,as, upon being subsequently told thatBurke had said " he certainly wouldhave been the greatest speaker thatevt r was in parliament," he exclaimed,I should like to try my hand now."In 1773, he took a tour to the Hebrides,and returned to London, after astay in Scotland of three months, in thecourse of which he visited its threeprincipal cities, the four universities,the isles of Sky, Ramsay, &c., and sawas much of the' highland and insularlife as was sufficient for his philosophicalcontemplation. The great and learnedtreated him with respect and kindnesswherever he went, and Sir Walter Scotttells us that he was long rememberedamong the lower orders of the Hebrides,by the title of the SassenachMore, the big Englishman. On hisarrival in London, he was much enragedat finding that Mr. Thomas Davies hadpublished, without his permission, twovolumes of Miscellaneous and FugitivePieces, by the author of the Rambler,some of which were not written by him.On his return from the metropolis, Mr.Thrale asked how the affair ended withDavies ? " Why," said Johnson, " Iwas a fierce fellow, and pretended to bevery angry, and Thomas was a good-naturedfellow, and pretended to be verysorry ; so there the matter dropped. 'In July, 1774, he set off, in companywith Mr. Thrale and his family, on atour to Wales, and came back to Londonin September, when he wrote, andin the following month published, apamphlet called The Patriot, composedin anticipation of the general election,in order to predispose the people infavour of government candidates. In1775, he published an account of hisJourney to the Western Islands ofScotland, in which, notwithstanding hisstrong prejudices against that nation, heexpressed himself, upon the whole, in acandid and impartial tone, though heoccasionally exhibited a contempt fortheir learning, and an abhorrence oftheir religion. No one questioned thejust and philosophical views of societywhich it contained, or the elegance andvivacity of the author's descriptions ;but his sentence against the authenticityof the poems ascribed to Ossian, gavesome offence to the Scotch, and so irritatedMr. Macpherson, that he sent hima threatening letter, which was thusanswered by Johnson : " Mr. JamesMacpherson, I received your foolish andimpudent letter: any violence offeredto me, I shall do my best to repel ; andwhat I cannot do for myself, the lawwill do forme. I hope I never shall bedeterred from detecting what I think acheat, by the menaces of a ruffian. Ithought your book an imposture: Ithink it an imposture still," &c. His Tourto the Hebrides was, however, wellspoken of by many natives distinguishedSAMUEL JOHNSON,for their literary abilities ; and Mr.Tatler says, " it is plain Johnson meantto speak well of Scotland ; and he has,in my apprehension, done us greathonour in the most capital article, thecharacter of the inhabitants." In 1775,lie attempted to defend the conduct ofgovernment, with regard to America,in a pamphlet, entitled Taxation noTyranny, written, as Boswell supposes,at the desire of the ruling powers, andwith the same degree of vigour, dictatorialassumption, and malignant sarcasmwhich characterize the rest of his politicalcompositions. It was thrown inhis teeth, that his pension had stimulatedhis pen on these occasions ; but heseems to have been sincere, at least,with regard to America, as some yearspreviously he had described its Christianinhabitants as " a race of convicts, whoought to be thankful for anythingallowed them short of hanging."Shortly after the publication of thispamphlet, which he said " he thoughthe had not been attacked enough, for,"he received, through the interest ofLord North, the degree of doctor of lawsfrom the University of Oxford. He hadobtained, some years before, a similarhonour from Dublin, but did not at thetime choose to assume the title. InOctober, he visited Paris, in companywith the Thales and Mr. Barrett ; hekept a journal of this tour, in which heseems to have thought the French whathe afterwards called them, " much behindhand,stupid, ignorant creatures."In 1777, he exerted himself in behalfof Dr. Dodd, then under sentence ofdeath, from which he endeavoured tosave him by an exertion of his abilities,that does equal honour to his head andheart. He drew up his defence, andtwo petitions, one from Dodd to theking, and the other from his wife to thequeen, two of the most energetic compositionsever penned, though, as iswell known, they failed in their object.In the same year he undertook, for themoderate sum of 210, when requestedto name his own price, to write theLives of the English Poets, of which hepublished the first four volumes inthe early part of 1779, entitled Prefaces,Biographical and Critical, to themost Eminent of the English Poets.He completed this work in 1781, conducingit with a confession that " hehad written it in his usual way, dilatorilyand hastily, unwilling to work, andworking with vigour and haste." Inthe August of the same year he lost hisfriend Mr. Thrale, who appointed himone of his executors, and left him alegacy of 200. After this event, saysBoswell, his visits became less frequentat Streatham. In 1782, his friend Levettdied, whom he had maintained in hishouse for several years ; and his ownhealth becoming seriously affected, heinJune, paid a visit to Oxford, forchange of scene and air. In October,he took a formal leave of Streatham, onwhich occasion he composed a prayer,recommending Mrs. Thrale's family todivine protection. Boswell asserts, thathe quitted this place in consequence ofhis receiving a less cordial welcomethan formerly ; but Mr. Croker observesit was " not because Mrs. Thrale madehim less welcome there, but because she,and he with her, were leaving Streetsfor, six months after this, Johnsonwas domiciliated in Mrs. Thrale'snew residence in Argyll Street InJune, 1783, he was seized with a paralyticstroke, which, for some time, renderedhim speechless : piety was hisconsolation, but he seems to have lookedforward to death with his usual terrorat that event. As he began to recover,he amused himself with reading andconversation, and even contemplatedthe plan of some new works ; and inDecember, " in order to insure himselfsociety, for three days in the week," heinstituted a club, at the Essex Head,Essex Street. In June, 1784, he againwent to Oxford, where he resided withDr. Adams, who, he says, " treated measwell as I could expect or wish."Having expressed a desire of goingto Italy, his friends, not deeming hispension adequate to the support of theexpenses incidental to the journey,made application to Lord Throw,unknown to Johnson, for an augmentationof it by 200. The applicationwas unsuccessful : but the lord chancelloroffered to let him have 500, outof his own purse, under the appellationof a loan, but with the intention of conferringit as a present. Johnson wasso much affected with this offer, that onits being communicated to him, " hepaused," says Boswell, " grew moreand more agitated, and burst into tears,LITERATURE.exclaiming, with fervent emotion, ' Godbless you all !' "He, however, now gradually grewworse, and it was evident to his physicians,Drs. Heberden, Brocklesby, andWarren, that his end was fast approaching.This, though he so much dreaded,he did not shrink from the knowledgeof, and being told by Brocklesby, inanswer to his inquiry as to the extentof his danger, that nothing but a miraclecould save him, he replied " Then Iwill take no more physic, not even myopiates ; for I have prayed that I mayrender up my soul to God unclouded'He adhered to this resolution, but wasso far from refusing surgical aid, thatwhen Mr. Cruickshank scarified his leg,he cried out " Deeper, deeper. I willabide the consequence : you are afraidof your reputation ; but what is that tome?Why hesitate to give me pain,which I do not care for." At anothertime he leaped out of bed and caughtup some lancets, which were taken fromhim in the supposition that he intendedto attempt suicide ; but he immediatelyafterwards seized a pair of scissors, andplunged them into the calf of each leg,for the purpose of relieving them of thewater with which they were swelled.His aversion to the prospect of deathoperated so strongly, that it was sometimebefore he could be prevailed uponto make his will, or even hear the subjectmentioned with patience. Thechief object of his bounty was his servantBarber, to whom he left 70 perannum, besides a very large sum bycodicil. As his end drew near, hetook every opportunity of impressinghis friends with the necessity of preparationfor a future state. To Sirjoshua Reynolds he made three requestsone was to forgive him ^30which he had borrowed of him ; another,that he should carefully read theScriptures : and the last, that he shouldabstain from using his pencil on thesabbath day ; to all of which Sir Joshuaassented. He expressed his firm beliefin the Christian religion ; and, in aconversation with Mr. Windham, said,with respect to testimony, that " wehad not such evidence that Caesar diedin the capitol, as that Christ died in themanner related." In the last days ofhi* illness he grew gradually calmer, andhe at length tranquilly expired on the13th of December, 1785, in the seventy-fifthyear of his age. He was buried inWestminster Abbey, and a monumenthas since been erected to his memoryin St. Paul's, with an inscription, byDr.Parr. Previously to his dissolution, heburnt, indiscriminately, several manuscripts,and, amongst others, two quartovolumes, containing an account of hislife.The reputation of Johnson, as anauthor, was more distinguished than thatof any other literary character whichthis country has produced. His classicalattainments were, however, inconsiderable,and his reading, in our own language,was more cursory than extensive-more varied than profound. It wasan observation of his own, that hethought more than he read ; and hence,probably, arose his contempt of certainauthors, of whose works indolence orprejudice prevented him from readingmore than a portion. We may here,perhaps, be reminded of the number ofquotations in his Dictionary ; but it byno means follows, nor was it indeednecessary, that he should have perusedthe whole of the works quoted from, noreven have made the extracts himself;for it is obvious that the task of selectingpassages containing certain wordsmight have been performed by the leasterudite of his amanuenses, of whom, itis known, he kept six or seven constantlyemployed. That he could not getthrough a book was, with him, a sufficientreason for decrying it ; but, whento his abuse of Milton we add his real oraffected blindness to the merits of Hume,Robertson, Fielding, Swift, Armstrong,and others, we must suspect either theinfallibility or sincerity of Johnson'scritical judgment. His great works, andthose on which his reputation chieflyrests, are his Dictionary, Rambler,Lives of the Poets, and Rasselas. Withrespect to the first, it is impossible todeny him the merit of having laid thefoundation of all subsequent dictionariesof the English language, though itsnumerous imperfections are now generallyacknowledged. Home Tookecalls it " the most faulty and leastvaluable" of any of Johnson's productions; and adds, " that share of meritwhich it possesses makes it by much themore hurtful." Its supposed excellencehas certainly deterred many from enter-samuelJOHNSON.ing the same field, though so much remainedto be done ; and where all thatwas done might have been made moreperfect. This has been abundantlyproved by the edition of Todd, arid theresearches of Eager, Mason and Jod-drew. The chief faults of Johnson arehis insertion of pedantic words of recentinvention and limited use, to the exclusionof several eminent English words,and especially those peculiar to thequaint style of certain establishedwriters, whom he chooses to call " obsolete."As an instance of this, an excellentcritic in the Westminster Review,has pointed out six words in GilesFletcher's short poem of Christ's Victoryand Triumph, not one of whichare to be found in Johnson, viz : latch,organs, orizal, calls, spangles, andbousing can. He is too cumbrous, also,with his authorities ; what need ofauthorities, it has been aptly asked, forthe word hand? With these drawbacks,however, it is still a masterlyand original production, and has manyfeatures which are to be found in noother dictionary. Nothing can be moreexquisitely brief and clear than the descriptionof the different senses, and thequotations alone render the work a fundof instruction and entertainment. Johnsonhad the satisfaction to see it reachfour editions in his life time, and a fifthwas published in the year of his decease.In his Rasselas and his Rambler he isin his peculiar element ; in the one heis the moral dictator, laying down hismaxims with all the force of conviction,and all the eloquence of .truth andgenius ; in the other, he is the enchanter,who fascinates our imagination,the sage who informs our mind, thephilosopher who calms our passions.His Lives of the Poets is a very unequalperformance : it is justly described byDr. Beattie, as a " fund of entertainmentand information ; of striking observationand useful reflection ; of goodsense, and of illiberal prejudices ; ofjust and of unjust criticism. Pastoraland blank verse he seems a determinedenemy to ; something like envy towardsall his contemporaries is manifest;and Dyer, Shenstone, Collins,Akenside, and Gray, are, in particular,treated with injustice. He is too muchthe verbal critic ; there is surely somethingcontemptible in dissecting, almostword by word, every eight or ten-linedepitaph, written by such a man as Pope.A summary of Johnson's character hasbeen ably drawn by Bishop Cleig, whosays : " Without claiming for Johnsonthe highest place among his contemporaries,in any single department ofliterature, we may use one of his ownexpressions, that he brought moremind to every subject, and had a greatervariety of knowledge ready for all occasions,than almost any other man.'Though religious to superstition, hewas in every other respect so remarkablyincredulous, that Hogarth said,while Johnson firmly believed the Bible,he seemed determined to believe nothingelse. The same energy whichwas displayed in his literary productionswere exhibited also in his conversation,which was various, striking, andinstructive: like the sage in Rasselas,he spoke, and attention watched hislips ; he reasoned, and conviction closedhis periods ; when he pleased, he couldbe the greatest sophist that ever contendedin the lists of declamation ; and,perhaps, no man ever equalled him innervous and pointed repartees. But hehad a roughness in his manner whichsubdued the saucy, and terrified themeek; it was only, however, in hismanner ; for no man was more lovedthan Johnson was by those who knewhim ; and his works will be read withveneration for their author, as long asthe language in which they are writtenshall be understood."His style, notwithstanding its decidedmannerism, has formed an era in Englishcomposition ; its chief faults areastudious avoidance of the easy andfamiliar, and a choice of words of Latinetymology, a monotonous rotundity ofperiod, and an unvarying pomp of diction.It is strong, nervous, impetuous,and graceful ; but it has no lights andshades; no fine discord, if we may usean expression applicable to music : allisdignified, cold, and calm : the sagethinks, but the schoolmaster writes.Never was the step from the sublime tothe ridiculous more fully exemplifiedthan in the following sentence, from hisLife of Pope, at whom he has beensneering for building a grotto : " Agrotto is not often the wish or pleasureof an Englishman, who has more frequentneed to solicit than exclude theLITERATURE.sun ; but Pope's excavation was requisiteas an entrance to his garden ; and,as some men try to be proud of theirdefects, he extracted an ornament froman inconvenience, and vanity produceda grotto, where necessity enforced apassage."Johnson's figure was large, robust,and unweildy, from corpulency. Hisappearance was rendered strange andsomewhat uncouth by sudden emotions,which appeared, to a common observer,te be involuntary and convulsive. Hehad the use of only one eye, yet hisvisual perceptions, as far as they extended,were uncommonly quick andaccurate. So morbid was his temperament,that he never enjoyed the freeand vigorous use of his limbs ; and whenhe walked, it was like the stragglinggait of one in fetters. In his dress hewas singular and slovenly ; and thoughhe improved, in some degree, under thelectures of Mrs. Thrale, during his longresidence in her family, yet he couldnever be said to have completely surmountedparticularity.He was fond of good company andgood living, and to the last he knew ofno method of regulating his appetite,but absolute restraint, or unlimited indulgence." Many a day," says Mr.Boswell, " did he fast, many a year refrainfrom wine : but when heeded eat,it was voraciously ; wheji he did drink,it was copiously. He could practiceabstinence, but not temperance." Inconversation he was rude, intemperate,overbearing, and impatient of contradiction; addicted to argument, andambitious of victory, he was equallyregardless of truth and fair reasoningin his approaches to conquest. " Thereis no arguing with him," said Goldsmith,alluding to a speech in one ofGibber's plays ; " for, if his pistol missesfire, he knocks you down with the buttend of it." No man, however, possessedmore of the milk of human kindnessthan Johnson ; was more ready to assistdistress, or conferred a benefit in a moregenerous and delicate manner. " ShouldI ever need assistance," said BishopHowe, " may I have such a benefactoras Johnson." " There was no occasion,"says the same authority, " thatJohnson should teach us to dance, tomake a bow, or to turn a compliment :he could teach us better things." Theflattery of friends, and the homagepaid to his abilities, made him dictatorial,arrogant and rude, and caused himsometimes to exceed the bounds ofpoliteness, and even humanity; butwhen he discovered that he had givenreal cause for offence, he was alwaysready to make reparation. He maintainedunder his roof no less than fourpersons, for several years, two of whomdied in his house ; and he not only contributedto their support, but treatedthem with kindness and affection. Hewas above equivocation, and scornedto convey the language of truth, howeverunpleasant to those who heard him,by any of those circumlocutory channels,which are the medium of discussionin polite society. Laconic and sensiblein his conversation, he despisedverbosity and frivolity in others : tosome one who told him of a gentlemanwho wished, but was afraid, to speak tohim, he said " he need not to havebeen afraid if he had anything rationalto say :" and, to a lady who was zealousin defence of some foolish production,he exclaimed, " Pray, madam, besilent; nonsense can only be defendedby nonsense." He had a somewhatbigotted, but sincere and fervent impressionof religion ; and it is said that,on his paying a visit in Lent, he would,in the course of the evening, go into acorner of the room, when the companywere engaged in conversation, andaudibly repeat his devotions. Some ofhis sayings, as recorded by Boswell, aretrivial and common-place enough ; butthis was to be expected from a manwho followed up Johnson with all thetenacity of a bailiff, and noted down hiswords with all the precision of a spy.Johnson could not go down stairs togive a guinea to a suppliant, but thisbook-keeper of his very echoes mustwalk down stairs after him into theyard, to see what passed."Among the mass of gossip and anecdotewhich has been in circulation ofthis great man, we have selected suchas appears to us the most recent, entertainingand characteristic. His talentfor improvisation appears to have beenextraordinary ; nor was he less felicitousat burlesquing appositions and antithesesof popular poets and dramatists.Some very ingenious lines being quoted,in which there was more of what theSAMUEL JOHNSON.Italians call concert, than sense, hethus parodied them :If th boy, who turnips cries,Cries not when his father dips,'elis a proof that he would ratherHave a turnip than his father.and to the lineWho rules o'er freemen should himself be free,ie answeredWho drives fat oxen, should himself b fat.He used, at times to talk immoderatelyloud, and one evening was doingso behind the scenes, whilst Garrickwas playing King Lear : the actor, oncomingoff, told him to speak in a"ower tone, as he disturbed his feelings.Pol !" said Johnson, " Punch has nofeelings:" a reply which was in accordancewith the great contempt he hadfor actors. Sir Joshua Reynolds havingpainted his portrait, representing himas reading, and near-sighted, he expressedhimself much dissatisfied, saying," It is not friendly to hand downto posterity the imperfections of anyman." Of this circumstance Mrs. Thralesays, " I observed that he would notbe known by posterity, for his defectsonly, let Sir Joshua do his worst;"and when she adverted to his ownpicture painted with the ear-trumpet,and done in this year for Mr. Thrale,she records Johnson to have answeredHe may paint himself as deaf as hechooses; but I will not be blinking Sam."Sir Joshua used to relate a characteristicanecdote of Johnson : about thetime of their first acquaintance, whenthey were one evening together at theMiss Dotterel, the then Duchess ofArgyle and another lady of high rankcame in : Johnson, thinking that theMiss Dotterel were too much engrossedby them, and that he and his friendwere neglected as low company, ofwhom they were somewhat ashamed,grew angry ; and, resolving to shocktheir supposed pride, by making theirgreat visitors imagine they were lowindeed, he addressed himself in aloud tone to Mr. Reynolds, saying,How much do you think you and Icould get in a week, if we were towork as hard as we could?" O'Learywas very anxious to be introduced to Dr.Johnson, and Mr. Murphy took him onemorning to the doctor's lodgings. On his;entering the room, the doctor viewedhim from top to toe, without saying aword to him : at length, darting one oflis severest looks at him, he spoke tohim in the Hebrew language, to whichO'Leary made no reply. Upon which,he doctor said to him, " Why do younot answer me, sir ?" " Faith, sir,"said O'Leary, " I cannot reply to you,because I do not understand the languagein which you are addressing me."Upon this the doctor, with a contemptuoussneer, said to Murphy,1 W r hy, sir, this is a pretty fellow youhave brought hither ; sir, he does notcomprehend the primitive language '"O'Leary immediately bowed very low,and complimented the doctor with along speech in Irish, of which the doctornot understanding a word, made noreply, but looked at Murphy. O'Leary,seeing that the doctor was puzzled athearing a language of which he wasignorant, said to Murphy, pointingto the doctor, " This is a pretty fellowto whom you have brought me: sir,he does not understand the languageof the sister kingdom." Johnson, itseems, was not insensible to praise :soon after the publication of his Lifeof Savage, which was anonymous,Mr. Harte, whilst dining with Cave,spoke very handsomely of the work.The next time Cave met Harte, he toldhim that he had made a man veryhappy the other day at his house, b\the encomiums he bestowed on theauthor of Savage's Life. " How couldthat be ?" says Harte ; " none were presentbut you and I." Cave replied,You might observe I sent a plate ofvictuals behind the screen. Thereskulked the biographer, one Johnson,whose dress was so shabby, that hedurst not make his appearance. Heoverheard our conversation ; and yourapplauding his performance delightedhim exceedingly." The following anecdoteof Johnson's meeting at Glasgow,with Adam Smith, has been furnishedby Sir Walter Scott, which, he says,Mr. Boswell has omitted for obviousreasons : Smith, it is related, afterleaving the party in which he hadmet Johnson, happened to come toanother company, where, knowing thathe had been in "Johnson's society, theywere anxious to know what had passed,and the more so, as Dr. Smith's temperLITERATURE.seemed much ruffled. At first Smithwould only answer, "He's a brutehe's a brute!" but on closer examination,it appeared that Johnson no soonersaw Smith, than he attacked him forsome point of his famous letter on thedeath of Hume. Smith vindicated thetruth of his statement. " What didJohnson say?" was the universal inquiry." Why, he said," replied Smith,with the deepest impression of resentment,"he said, 'you lie"" "Andwhat did you reply ?" <( I said, youare a son of a !" "On such terms,"says Sir Walter, " did these two greatmoralists meet and part, and such wasthe classical dialogue between two greatteachers of philosophy."DAVID HUME.THIS celebrated historian was born atEdinburgh, on the 26th of April, 1711.He was of a good family, both by fatherand mother, and the former dyingwhilst he was an infant, he was broughtup under the care of his mother, whomhe describes as a woman of singularmerit. A passion for literature took possessionof him at a very early period ofhis education, and, in consequence ofautobiography, " I was poring uponPoet and Ennius, Cicero and Virgilwere the authors which I was secretlydevouring." His health, however, becomingimpaired by sedentary application,he, in 1734, went to Bristol, witha view of engaging in mercantile pursuits,but found them so unsuitable tohis disposition, that in 'a few monthsafterwards he took up his residence inFrance, and laid down a plan of lifewhich he steadily and successfully pursued." I resolved," he says, " to makea very rigid frugality supply my deficiencyof fortune ; to maintain unimpairedmy independency ; and to regardevery object as contemptible, exceptthe improvement of my talents in literature."After a stay of three years abroad hereturned to England, and, in 1738, publishedhis Treatise of Human Nature,the fate of which he describes by saying," it fell dead-born from the press."Of too sanguine a temperament to bediscouraged, he continued his literarylabours, and, in 1742, printed, at Edinburgh,the first part of his Essays,which were received in a manner thatfully compensated for his former disappointments.In 1745, he went toEngland as tutor to the young Marquessof Annandale, and after remaining inthat situation for a twelvemonth, hestood candidate for the professorship ofmoral philosophy at Edinburgh, butalthough strongly supported, the notorietyof his sceptical opinions preventedhis success. In 1746, he acceptedan invitation from General St. Clair toattend him as secretary to his expedition,which ended in an incursion onthe coast of France; and, in 1747, heaccompanied him in his military embassyto the courts of Vienna and Turin.During his residence at the latter place,imagining that his Treatise of HumanNature had failed of success from themanner rather than the matter, hepublished the first part of the workanew, under the title of an Inquiry concerningHuman Understanding. Itsnew shape, however, made but littledifference in its success ; and on his returnfrom Italy, Hume observes, " Ihad the mortification to find all Englandin a ferment, on account of Dr. Middleton'sFree Inquiry, while my performancewas entirely overlooked andneglected."His disappointment was increased bythe failure of a new edition of hisEssays; but borne up by the naturalcheerfulness of his disposition, he, in1749, went to his brother's residence inScotland, and composed his PoliticalDiscourses, and Inquiry concerning thePrinciples of Morals, both of whichwere published at Edinburgh in 1752.At this time his former publications hadbegun to attract notice, and more thanone answer had been written to hisEssays, of which, however, he tookDAVID HUME.no notice, having made a fixed resolution,which he inflexibly maintained,never to reply to any body. His PoliticalDiscourses were favourably receivedboth abroad and at home, but hisPrinciples of Morals, although, in hisown opinion, incomparably the best ofall his writings, came, as he says, unnoticedand unobserved into the world.In the year of its publication, alreadymentioned, he was chosen librarian tothe Faculty of Advocates, when thelarge library, of which he had thecommand, suggested to him the idea ofwriting the History of England. " Beingfrightened," "lie says, " with thenotion of continuing a narrative througha period of seventeen hundred years,I commenced with the accession of theHouse of Stuart ; an epoch when Ithought the misrepresentation of factionbegan chiefly to take place." The historyof this period appeared in onequarto volume, in 1754; but instead ofmeeting with the applause which heconfesses he expected, it was assailed,as he tells us, " by one cry of reproach,disapprobation, and even detestation."The only individuals of literary considerationfrom whom he received encouragementto proceed, were the primatesof England and Ireland, Deservingand Stone ; whilst the sale wasso inconsiderable, that, in the course ofa twelvemonth, only forty-five copieswere disposed of. He attributed theopposition it met with to the regret expressedby the author for the fate ofCharles the First and the Earl of Strafford;but, in all probability, it arosefrom the contemptuous tone in whichhe spoke of adverse religious parties.He was so far discouraged by the receptionof his work, that he resolvedto quit his country for ever, and passthe remainder of his days in France.The war, however, breaking out betweenthat country and England, hisintention was frustrated, and he determinedto persevere in his historicaldesign. In the meantime he publishedhis Natural History of Religion,which was answered by Warburton inthe name of Dr. Kurd, in " a pamphlet,"says our author, that " gave mesome consolation for the otherwise indifferentreception of my performance."In 1756, appeared his second volume ofthe History of England, containing theperiod from the death of Charles theFirst till the Revolution ; and, in 1759, itwas succeeded by the History of theHouse of Tudor. This performance wasnot less obnoxious than his first publishedvolume, but being now growncallous against the impressions ofpublic folly," he devoted himself, withcalm perseverance, to the early partof the English History, which he completedin two volumes, in 1761.Notwithstanding the altogether unfavourablereception of his History ofEngland, which has now become a chiefstandard work, our author received asum for the copyright, which, togetherwith a pension he enjoyed throughthe influence of Lord Bute, had procuredhim not only independence butopulence. He therefore meditated passingthe rest of his life in philosophicalretirement, when, in 1763, he acceptedan invitation to accompany the Earl ofHertford on his embassy to Paris, wherehis literary reputation obtained for hima reception which, after the apathy ofhis own countrymen, astonished anddelighted him. He remained at theFrench capital, in the situation of charged'affaires, until the beginning of 1766,when he returned to England in companywith the celebrated Rousseau, whois said to have repaid the delicate andgenerous behaviour of our author withhis usual ingratitude. In 1767, he wasappointed under secretary of state toMr. Conway, and after holding thatsituation for about two years, he returnedto Edinburgh, in 1769, with afortune of 1,000 a year. The nextfour years of his life were passed in theenjoyment of ease and reputation ; thesucceeding portion is best describedtowards the close of his autobiography,dated April 18th, 1776. " In spring1775," he says, " I was struck with adisorder in my bowels, which at firstgave me no alarm, but has since, as Iapprehend it, become mortal and incurable.I now reckon upon a speedydissolution. I have suffered very littlepain from my disorder; and what ismore strange, have, notwithstanding thegreat decline of my person, never suffereda moment's abatement of myspirits; insomuch, that were I to namea period of my life, which I shouldmost choose to pass over again, I mightbe tempted to point to this latter period.LITERATURE.I possess the same ardour as ever induty, and the same gaiety in company.I consider, besides, that a" man of sixty-five,by dying, cuts off only a few yearsof infirmities ; and though 1 see manysymptoms of my literary reputation'sbreaking out at last with additionallustre, 1 know that I could have but afew years to enjoy it. It is difficult tobe more detached from life than I amat present."After having finished the account ofhis life, he, at the request of his friends,went to England for the improvementof his health, but returned with nobenefit, after a few weeks' stay at Londonand Bath. He now employed himselfin correcting his works for a newedition, and considering himself as adying man, talked familiarly, and evenjocularly of his approaching dissolution.To one of his friends, who, struck byhis cheerfulness, could not help expressinghopes of his recovery, he said,Your hopes are groundless ; I amdying as fast as my enemies, if I haveany, could wish, and as easily andcheerfully as my best friends could desire."His weakness increased daily,until the afternoon of the 26th ofAugust, 1776, when he expired, saysDr. Black, " in such a happy composureof mind, that nothing could exceed it."Hume seems to have formed a veryjust estimate of his own character : hedescribes himself as a man of mild disposition,of command of temper, of anopen,' social, and cheerful humour, capableof attachment, but little susceptibleof enmity, and of great moderationin all his passions. This account ofhimself is fully corroborated by Dr.Adam Smith, who speaks of his socialand intellectual qualities in the higheststrain of eulogy : " Upon the whole,"says the doctor, in his concluding remarksupon the death of Hume, " I havealways considered him, both in his lifetimeand since his death, as approachingas nearly to the idea of a perfectly wiseand virtuous man, as, perhaps, thenature of human frailty will permit."Of this frailty he exhibited no inconsiderableportion in treating all systemsof religion as founded in superstition ;and, perhaps, there was a levity of conductimmediately preceding his death,which was beyond the dignity even ofa philosopher, as it was certainly veryopposite to the unpretending resignationof a dying Christian. His personhad no affinity to his mind ; his facewas broad and flat, his mouth wide,his eyes vacant, and the corpulency ofhis whole person is said to have been jbetter fitted to communicate the idea jof a turtle-eating alderman, than of a jrefined philosopher. At Turin he fellin love with a lady, and addressing her,declared that he was " abide, anent.""Oh! pour anent," replied the lady,ce n'est en efFet queene operation ti esnaturelle de votresysteme."In his intellectual character he takeshis place in the first rank of modernphilosophical sceptics, and it must beconfessed, that few writers have insistedon their theories with morevigour, self-command, or ability. Themerit of his History of England is nowgenerally allowed, though notwithstandinghis own claim to perfect impartiality,prejudices, particularly in favourof the House of Stuart, appear in hiswork, and he has been accused of colouringfacts to support his favouriteand somewhat erroneous position thatthe English constitution cannot be consideredas a regular plan of libertybefore the reigns of the two first Stuart.Upon the whole, however, few historiansare more free from prejudice thanHume ; nor is he often excelled in theclearness and eloquence of his style.About seven years after his deathappeared an Essay on Suicide, generallybelieved to have been the productionof his pen, and which, it issaid, would have appeared in his lifetime,had not the booksellers been afraidto publish itAn anecdote of Hume is told in oneof Dr. Beattie's letters to Mrs. Montague,which shows that however sincerea sceptic our author may have been,he admitted the propagation of hisopinions might be destructive to themorals, if not the happiness, of at leastone half of the intellectual world. " Mr.Hume," says Beattie, " was boastingto Doctor Gregory, that among his disciplesin Edinburgh, he had the honourto reckon many of the fair sex. ' Now,tell me,' said the doctor, ' whether, ifyou had a wife or a daughter, youwould wish them to be your disciples ?Think well before you answer me ; for,I assure you, that, whatever your an-laurenceSTERNE.3'23swear is, I will not conceal it." Mr.Hume, with a smile, and some hesitation,made this reply: 'No; 1 believescepticism may be too sturdy a virtuefor a woman'" At another time, Mrs.Mallet, wife of the poet, meeting himat an assembly, boldly accosted him inthese words : " Mr. Hume, give meleave to introduce myself to you ; weDeists ought to know each other."Madam," replied he, " I am noDeist ; I do not style myself so ; neitherdo I desire to be known by that appellation"LAURENCE STERNE.THIS original writer, son of a lieutenantin the army, and great-grandsonof Sterne, Archbishop of York, was bornat Clonmell, in Ireland, on the 24th ofNovember, 1713. After many migrationswith his father's regiment, he was,in the year 1722, put to school at Halifax,having previously learnt to writeand read. " I remained at Halifax,"he says, in his autobiography, " tillabout the latter end of the year 1731,and cannot quite omit mentioning thisanecdote of myself and schoolmaster:he had had the ceiling of the schoolroomnew white-washed the ladderremained there. I, one unlucky day,mounted it, and wrote with a brush, inlargecapital letters, ' Lau. Sterne,'for which the usher severely whippedme. My master was very much hurtat this, and said, before me, that nevershould that name be effaced ; for I was aboy of genius, and he was sure I shouldcome to preferment." In 1732, he wassent to Jesus' College, Cambridge,where he took orders ; and, shortlyafterwards, he was, through the interestof his uncle, presented to theliving of Sutton, in Yorkshire. By thesame influence, after his marriage, in1741, he obtained a prebendary in YorkCathedral ; and, shortly afterwards,by his wife's means, he was appointedto the living of Wellington. He nowhad a quarrel with his uncle, " because,"as he expresses himself, " Iwould not write paragraphs in thenewspapers : though he was a partyman, I was not; and detested suchdirty work, thinking it beneath me."He did duty at Sutton, where he resided,and at Wellington, for twentyyears; during which time, books, painting,fiddling, and shooting were hisamusements.His first work was printed, but notpublished, about 1758, entitled TheHistory of a Watch-coat; in which hehumorously satirizes a greedy churchdignitary of York, after the manner ofSwift. In 1759, appeared, in twovolumes, his Life and Opinions of tristanShandy ; a work which was readwith avidity and admiration; and whilstit drew upon the author a great shareof both praise and censure, obtained forhim fame and emolument, and was themeans of his presentation to the curacyof Cox would, by Lord Falconer,which he calls " a sweet retirement, incomparison of Sutton." The popularityof the work having induced the booksellerto negotiate with Sterne, on verylucrative terms, for a continuance, athird and fourth volume appeared in1761 ; a fifth and sixth, in 1762 ; aseventh and eighth, in 1764; and aninth, in 1766. In the meantime, ourauthor had paid a visit, for the recoveryof his health, to France and Italy,where he picked up the materials forhis Sentimental Journey, which waspublished, in two duodecimo volumes,in 1768. In the March of this year,the effects of a pulmonary consumption,under which Sterne had for some timesuffered, proved fatal to him. He diedin London, leaving a widow, and onedaughter, who published, in 1775, acollection of her father's letters, witha memoir of his life prefixed.In addition to the works alreadymentioned, Sterne was the author ofseveral sermons, Yorick's Meditations,and letters to different persons ; theprincipal of which are those from Yorickand Eliza, supposed to be the authenticcorrespondence of Sterne with a Mrs.Draper.The character of Sterne presentsLITERATURE,nothing to admire, and much to condemn; his own letters show him tohave been a man of little feeling in hisdomestic relations, and his pecuniaryliberality to his wife during her temporaryseparation from him, seems to havebeen exercised rather in the hope ofkeeping her at a distance, than of persuadingher, by his generosity, to return." As to matrimony," he says,in one of his letters, " I should be abeast to rail at it, for my wife is easybut the world is not; and had I staidfrom her a second longer, it wouldhave been a burning shame else shedeclares herself happier without mebut not in anger is this declarationmade, but in pure, sober, good sense,built on experience." In another ofhis letters, he says, " he is gettingmore tired of her than ever." It musthowever, be admitted, that for hisdaughter he entertained a warm andsincere affection.We may collect from his correspondencethat, without much warmthof heart, he was a decided sensualist ;and whatever may have been the effectsof his works, it is clear that their authorwas more solicitous about the gratificationof his own pleasures, than the instructionof mankind. He seems tohave thought highly of his own productions,in reference to which he says,"first, I protest that, in commencingauthor, my end was honest ; and next,that I wrote not lo be fed, but tobe famous." Whether or not a competencygave him independency ofmind, he certainly is not to be chargedwith servility in any part of his writingsor conduct ; but the following extractfrom one of his letters proves that famewas not the sole object of his literarylabours : " I have had," he says, in1765, " a lucrative winter's campaignhere : Shandy sells well. I am taxingthe public with two more volumes ofsermons, which will more than doublethe gains of Shandy. It goes into theworld with a prancing list of de toutela noblesse, xvhich .will bring me inj300, exclusive of the sale of the copy ;so that with all the contempt of moneywhich ma faqon de penser has ever impressedon me, I shall be rich in spiteof myself; but I scorn, you must know,in the high ton I take at present, topocket all this trash. I set out to lay aportion of it in the service of the world,in a tour round Italy, where I shallspring game, or the deuce is in thedice." There is no doubt that Sternehastened his death by dissipation, intowhich his jovial and cheerful disposition,he confesses, frequently led him.Few writings take more hold uponthe feelings than those of Sterne, who,notwithstanding his whimsicality, extravagance,and indecency, produces amotley whole that touches the mostdelicate chords of the heart. Exaggerationof feeling is his grand defect ;and in taking Rabelais for his model,he has 'copied too much the vague unconnected,and often absurd, style ofthat author. He has been both accusedand detected of plagiarism, particularlyof several passages from Burton's Anatomyof Melancholy ; and in alludingto the manner and matter of his works,Sir Walter Scott justly observes that heis at once one of the most simple andmost affected of writers, and one of thegreatest plagiarists and most originalgeniuses that England has produced.Sterne, to use his own words, " carednot a curse for the critics ;" and howfar he was ashamed of the indecencieswhich he, as a clergyman, was reproachedfor giving publicity to inTristan Shandy, will be seen by thefollowing plan which he entered intoat Paris. " Crebillon," he says, " hasmade a convention with me, which, ifhe is not lazy, will be no pas persiflage.As soon as I go to Toulouse, he hasagreed to write me an expostulatoryletter upon the indecorum of T.Shandy, which is to be answered byrecrimination upon the liberties in hisown works ; these are to be printed ether, Crebillon against Sterneterne against Crebillon : the copy tobe sold, and the money equally divided.This is good Swiss policy."The following story of Sterne is alsosaid to have been told by himself, butthe truth of it is somewhat doubtful, ashenever appears to have been in pecuniarydistress. " I happened," he issaid to have related to a friend, " to beacquainted with a young man fromYorkshire, who rented a window in oneof the paved alleys near Cprnhill, forthe sale of stationery. I hired one ofthe panes of glass from my friend, andstuck up the following advertisementJAMES HERVEY.with wafers : ' Epigrams, Anagrams,Paragraph, Chronograms, Monograms,Epitaphs, Epithalamiums, Prologues,Epilogues, Madrigals, Interludes, Advertisements,Letters, Petitions, Memorialson every occasion, Essays onall Subjects, Pamphlets for and againstMinisters, with Sermons upon any Textor for any Sect, to be written here onreasonable terms, byA.B.PHiLOLOGER.'The uncommonness of the titles occasionednumerous applications, and atnight I used privately to glide into theoffice to digest the notes, or heads ofthe day, and receive the earnest, whichwas directed always to be left with thememorandums, the writing to be paidfor on delivery, according to the subject.I soon became disgusted with this employment,and the moment I had realizeda small sum of money, closed thescene."The following epitaph was writtenfor Sterne, by his intimate friendGar rick :Shall pride a heap of sculptured marble raise,Some worthless, unmourned, titled fool to praise?A<1 shall we not, by one poor grave-stone, learnWhere genius, wit, and humour sleep with Sterne ?JAMES HERVEY.This celebrated writer, the son of aclergyman, was born at Harrington,near Northampton, on the 26th ofFebruary, 1713-14. At seven years ofage, he was sent to the free grammarschool of that city, where, it is said,his genius and memory would havemade him a much greater proficient,but for the extraordinary whim of histeacher, who would allow no boy tolearn faster than his own son.In 1731, he entered a student of LincolnCollege, Oxford, where he continuedto reside for about seven years,but only proceeded to the degree ofB. A. Among the books he read duringthis time were Neil's Anatomy ; durham'sPhysico-theological. and Astro-theology; and Spence's Essay onPope's Odyssey, to which he used tosay, he owed more of his improvementof style and composition than toany other work he ever read. At theage of twenty-three, he entered intodeacon's orders, and being urged byhis father to get a curacy in or nearOxford, that he might retain a smallcollege exhibition of the value of about20 per annum, he declined, saying,that he thought it unjust to retain itafter he was in orders, as some otherperson might want its aid, to furtherhis education." He accordingly, in 1736,accepted the curacy of Summer, inHampshire, where he-continued abouta year, when he was invited to StokeAbbey, in Devonshire, the seat of hisfriend, Paul Orchard, Esq. ; during hisresidence with whom, he, in 1740, becamecurate of Bedford. Here, hisstipend being small, he was so muchbeloved, that the parishioners increasedit to ^60 a year, by an annual subscription; and offered to maintain himat their own expense, to prevent his dismissalby a new rector, who, however,deprived him of his curacy in 1742.In the following year, he became curateto his father, then holding the livingof Weston Favell, as well as that ofCollingtree, to both of which he succeededon the death of the former, in1752. He accepted the two livings together,with much reluctance, and, onwaiting upon the Bishop of Peterborough,for institution, he said, " Isuppose your lordship will be surprisedto see James Hervey come to desireyour lordship to permit him to be apluralist; .but I assure you I do it tosatisfy the repeated solicitations of mymother and my sister, and not to pleasemyself." Our author had already establishedhis literary reputation, by thepublication of his celebrated Meditations,the first volume of which appearedin 1746, and the second in 1747.He appears to have formed the plan ofthis work during his residence in Devonshire,his Meditations among theTombs being suggested to him by avisit to the church-yard of Kilkhampton,in Cornwall.After his accession to his father's3-26LITERATURE.livings, he graduated M. A. at ClareHall, Cambridge ; and about the sametime published Remarks on Lord 'sLetters on the Study andUse of History, which, observes Simpson,in his Plea, " contains many piousand satisfactory observations on thehistory of the Old Testament, especiallyon the writings of Moses."In 1753, he published his Thereon andAspasia, in three volumes, octavo, thesuccess of which nearly equalled thatof his Meditations, whilst it broughthim into a controversy with the famousWesley, who opposed him on account ofhis Calvinistic sentiments.The life of this excellent man wasnow drawing to an end, which his greatexertions in the pulpit and the studymaterially contributed to hasten. Hedied of a decline, after extreme suffering,which he bore with singular fortitude,on the 25th of December, 1758.The subject of our memoir was atonce an elegant scholar, a learnedi divine, and a Christian, in the strict| sense of the word. The bias of hisj mind may be collected from the followsing passage in a letter to a friend, ai short time previous to his death : " 1have been," he says "too fond of readingevery thing valuable and elegantthat has been penned in our language ;and been peculiarly charmed with thehistorians, orators, and poets of antiquity:but were I to renew my studies,I would take my leave of those accomplishedtrifles: 1 would resign the delightof modern wits, amusements, andeloquence, and devote my attention tothe Scriptures of Truth. I would sitwith much greater assiduity at mydivine Master's feet, and desire to knownothing in comparison of Jesus Christ,and Him crucified."His mode of preaching was peculiarlysimple and impressive, and no ministerever took a more anxious interest inthe spiritual welfare of his parishioners,at whose houses he was a frequent andfamiliar visitor. His generosity andbounty scarcely left him a sufficientsum for his own subsistence ; the profitsarising from the sale of his Meditations,which amounted to 700, he devotedentirely to charitable purposes;and the little 'left by him at his death,he directed might be laid out in thepurchase of clothing for the poor.In addition to the publications alreadymentioned, he was the author of severalletters and sermons, all of whichare to be found in the genuine editionof his works, in six volumes, octavo. Hehas been charged with carrying hisCalvinistic notions to the verge of Antinomianism,with respect to the imputedrighteousness of Christ; but hiswritings on this subject have never beenconsidered as seriously objectionable.His Meditations have furnished manyof our poets with beautiful ideas ; and,notwithstanding their somewhat tooflowery style, will probably always retaintheir original popularity.WILLIAM Whetstone.WILLIAM Whetstone, the son ofan uneducated gentleman farmer, wasborn at Hales-owen, in Shropshire, inNovember, 1714, and received the elementsof instruction from a villagedame, whom he has celebrated in hispoem of The School-mistress. Hisfondness for books, in his childhood,was such that he frequently carried oneto bed with him; and, it is said, thatwhen his request had been neglected toprocure a new one when any of hisfamily went to market, his motherwrapped up a piece of wood of thesame form, and pacified him for thenight. His first scholastic educationwas at the grammar-school of Hales-owen,and afterwards at the academyof a clergyman at Solihull, under whomhe acquired a cultivated taste, and aconsiderable degree of classical knowledge.In 1732, at which time he hadlost his father, he was entered a memberof Pembroke College, Oxford, andhad some thoughts of taking his degrees,and proceeding to study for aprofession ; but deriving sufficient fromhis paternal fortune to gratify presentWILLIAM Whetstone,wishes, he renounced all further viewsof an active life. He accordingly retiredto his residence at the Leases,the embellishments of which formedone of his most favourite pursuits, and,in 1737, he evinced how successfully hehad cultivated poetry, by the publicationof a small Miscellany, which appearedwithout his name.He then left Staffordshire, and passedmuch of his time in Bath and London,where he published, in 1740, his Judgmentof Hercules, addressed to Mr.Lyttleton, and, in 1742, The Schoolmistress.In 1745, he finally retired tothe Leases, and devoted his time andfortune to those rural embellishments,which have made that place so celebrated." Here," says Johnson, " hebegan to point his prospects, to diversifyhis surface, to entangle his walks, andto wind his waters ; which he did withsuch judgment and such fancy, asmade his little domain the envy of thegreat and the admiration of the skilful; a place to be visited by travellers,and copied by designers." The celebritywhich his residence thus acquired,and his desire of appearing in bettercircumstances than his means admitted,soon brought on pecuniary embarrassments,and rendered him the wretchedinhabitant of the Eden he had createdfor the delight of others. For the careof his grounds, he appears totally tohave neglected that of his house ; andwhen," says our previous authority,he came home from his walks, hemight find his floors flooded by a showerthrough the broken roofs ; but couldspare no money for its reparation." Torelieve his distresses, an application, itis said, was made to Lord Bute to granthim a pension, but before the result ofit could be known, he was carried offby a putrid fever, on the llth of February,1763, and was buried in thechurch-yard of Hales-owen.According to Dodsley, tenderness wasthe peculiar characteristic of Shenstone ;he was generous and benevolent to allwithin his influence, but if once offended,he was not easily reconciled.I never," he used to say', " will be avery revengeful enemy ; but I cannot,it is not in my nature, to be half afriend." His want of economy considerablyincumbered his fortune, but heleft more than sufficient to pay all hisdebts, and by his will appropriated hiswhole estate for that purpose. His personwas above the middle height, andlargely and awkwardly formed, and hiscountenance, until he engaged in conversation,did not strike the beholderas pleasing. In his youth he was accounteda beau, but latterly he becamenegligent in his dress, and was remarkablefor wearing his hair, which wasquite grey very early, in a particularmanner. Gray's description of him bordersupon caricature: " Poor man !" hesaid, after reading his poems, " he wasalways wishing for money, for fame,and other distinctions ; and his wholephilosophy consisted in living againsthis will in retirement, and in a placewhich his taste had adorned ; but whichhe only enjoyed when people of notecame to see and commend it; his correspondenceis about nothing else butthis place and his own writings, withtwo or three neighbouring clergymen,who wrote verses too." He was nevermarried ; " though," says Johnson, " hemight have obtained the lady, whoevershe was, to whom his Pastoral Balladwas addressed." The reverse of this appearsin the ballad itself; and althoughthe narrowness of his fortune might,in general, have deterred him frommarriage, and rendered some of hisattachments transitory, yet the one alludedto, says Dodsley, " was with difficultysurmounted," and but for theobduracy of the lady, would doubtlesshave terminated in matrimony. It hasbeen supposed that his Elegy onJessy related to an amour of his own,but his friends affirm that it was suggestedby the story of Miss Godfrey inRichardson's Pamela.His poems, consisting chiefly of elegies,odes, and ballads, are elegant,harmonious, tender, and correct insentiment ; and contain descriptionspleasing and natural, but verging onfeebleness, and wanting in that powerof imagination, and splendour andenergy of diction, which characterizecompositions of a higher order. HisPastoral Ballad is a master-piece ofits sort; but The School-mistress, apoem in the Spenserian stanza, is generallyconsidered the most pleasing ofhis performances. His prose writingsare by no means contemptible ; displaying,as they do, good sense and cuitt-LITERATURE.dated taste, with just, and sometimesnew and acute observations, on mankind.The following anecdote is told ofShenstone : he was one day walkingthrough his romantic retreat in companywith his Delia, (whose real namewas Wilmot,) when a man rushed outof a thicket, and presenting a pistol tohis breast, demanded his money. Whetstonewas surprised, and Delia fainted.Money," said the robber, " is notworth struggling for; you cannot bepoorer than I am." " Unhappy man !"exclaimed Shenstone, throwing his purseto him, " take it, and fly as quick aspossible." the man did so, threw hispistol in the water, and instantly disappeared.Shenstone ordered his footboyto follow the robber, and observewhere he went. In two hours the boyreturned, and informed his master thathe followed him to Hales-owen, wherehe lived; that he went to the door ofhis house, and peeping through thekey-hole, saw the man throw the purseon the ground, and say to his wife,Take the dear-bought price of myhonesty ;" then placing two of his children,one on, each knee, he said tothem, " I have ruined my soul to keepyou from starving ;" and immediatelyburst into a flood of tears. Shenstoneon hearing this, lost no time in inquiringthe man's character, and foundthat he was a labourer oppressed bywant and a numerous family ; but hadthe reputation of being honest and industrious.Shenstone went to his house ;the poor man fell at his feet, and imploredmercy. The poet took him homewith him, and provided him with employment.JOHN BROWN.JOHN BROWN was born at Roth-bury,in Northumberland, on the 5th ofNovember, 1715. He received the firstpart of his education at the grammarschool of Wilton, in Cumberland, andin 1732 he entered St. John's College,Cambridge, where he remained, withgreat reputation, until 1735, in whichyear he graduated B. A. Having takenorders, he settled as a minor canon andlecturer in Carlisle, where he acted avery distinguished part, in favour ofgovernment, on the urge of that placeby the rebels in 1745. Six years previouslyhe had graduated M. A. ; and,in 1746, he published two sermons onthe subject of the rebellion, which procuredhim the favour of the Whig prelates; and Dr. Osbaldiston, Bishop ofCarlisle, solicited and obtained for himthe living of Norland in Westmorland..About the same time he resigned hisminor canonship, in consequence of his,one day, omitting the Athanasian creed,which, though accidental, was the occasionof a reproof from the chapter,which Brown resented by taking theabove step.Shortly afterwards he became knownto the public as a tolerable poet, bythe production of a poem entitled, Honour,and another called an Essayon Satire, inscribed to Warburton, towhose edition of Pope's works it hasbeen prefixed. In 1750, becoming acquaintedwith Mr. Allen, of Prior Park,near Bath, he preached in that citytwo sermons against gaming, which aresaid to have induced the magistratesto order the suppression of all publicgaming-tables. In 1751, he at onceestablished his reputation as a writer,by the publication of his celebratedEssays on the Characteristics of theEarl "of Shaftesbury ; a work which,whilst it refuted many of that nobleman'spositions, was remarkable for theelegance and spirit of its style, and itstotal freedom from controversial bitterness.It was answered by Mr. Berkeley,and an anonymous writer; but in amanner that retarded neither the reputationnor sale of the Essays, which,in a few years, reached a fifth edition.In 1754, he published a sermon Onthe Use and Abuse of Externals inReligion ; and in the following year hebecame D. D., and produced, at DruryLane Theatre, his tragedy of Barbarossa,which was received with ap-johnBROWN.pause, and still retains possession ofthe stage. In 1756, he was less successfulin his tragedy of Athelstan ; andit is to be observed, that he did notgive his name publicly to either of theseperformances.A distinguished era of his life maybesaid to have commenced in 1757,when he published his celebrated Estimateof the Manners and Principlesof the Times. Seven editions wereprinted in the course of a year: uponthe higher ranks of life, whom he representedas sunk in luxury, effeminacy,and frivolity, it is said to have made aconsiderable impression ; and few publicationswere, at the time, more universallyread or talked of. It met, however,with many answerers and antagonists,but had the support of no less a writerthan Voltaire. " This work," he says,"roused the sensibility of the Englishnation, and produced the following consequences: they attacked, almost atoneand the same time, all the seacoastsof France, and her possessionsin Asia, Africa, and America." In1758, Brown published a second volumeof The Estimate, which did not addto his reputation, and created him manyenemies, from the tone of vanity andarrogance pervading it, and which nowbegan to form too conspicuous a featurein his character. The storm raisedagainst him, both by critics and friends,induced him to retire into the country,where he wrote an Explanatory Defenceof the Estimate ; but the subjecthad ceased to excite its former interest,and its revival was received with comparativeapathy. A display of his highand sensitive spirit had also alienatedfrom him many of his patrons, andhis church preferment closed with apresentation to the vicarage of St.Nicholas, in Newcastle - upon - Tyne,when he resigned a living in Essex,that he had previously obtained fromLord-chancellor Hardwicke, which hispride now hindered him from retaining.He seems, however, to have beenappointed one of the chaplains in ordinaryto his majesty, and would probablyhave met with further advancement,but for the death of Dr. Osbaldiston,soon after his translation to the see ofLondon.From 17CO to 17G5 he published, successively,an Additional Dialogue ofthe Dead between Pericles and Cosmo(a vindication of Pitt) ; The Cure ofSaul, a sacred ode ; Dissertation onthe Rise, Union, &c. of Poetry andMusic; History of the Rise and Progressof Poetry ; and Thoughts onCivil Liberty, Licentiousness, and Faction.In this last piece he threw outsome ideas upon national education,which called forth the animadversionsof Dr. Priestley ; but, being communicatedto Dr. Damages, who was thenin Russia, for the purpose of advisingthe empress as to the establishment ofcertain schools in her dominions, ourauthor was addressed on the subject,and invited to a correspondence. Heaccordingly drew up a paper, containinga scheme not only of education, but oflegislation, which so pleased the empress,that she gave him an invitationto her court 111 health, however, andthe advice of his friends, dissuaded himfrom the journey, for the expenses ofwhich he had been assigned 1,000;his enemies accused him of appropriatingthe whole, but it seems that he hadonly drawn 200, of which he returnedabove half. The mortification he feltat the stop put to his designs in Russiaconsiderably agitated his spirits, andas he was subject to frenzy, probablyderanged his mind. He fell into anirrecoverable state of dejection andmelancholy, and on the 23d of September,1766, put a period to his existencewith a razor, as he lay in his bed.In addition to the works before-mentioned,Dr. Brown wrote severalsermons, and A Letter to Dr. Louth,in answer to one in which that divinecharged him with an obsequious admirationof Warburton. He also left, inmanuscript, an unfinished work on ThePrinciples of Christian Legislation, thepublication of which he directed by hiswill.If Dr. Brown is to be estimated bythe temporary popularity of his works,and the able antagonists they raisedup against him, he must undoubtedlyrank high among the authors of thepreceding century. He certainly possessed,in an eminent degree, whatmay be called speculative talent : hissermons are powerful and instructive ;his poems not destitute of sublimityand imagination; and his essays onpoetry and music evince a scientificLITERATURE.genius of no mean order. In the earlypart of his career he advocated liberalopinions, and his conduct was in accordancewith his principles ; but theseseem to have undergone a considerablechange in his late years, when hisworks betrayed a strong bias towardsauthority.JOHN HAWKESWORTH.JOHN HAWKESWORTH, the sonof a watchmaker, was born at Bromley,in Kent, in 1715, according to somewriters, to others, at London, in 1719.His parents, who were dissenters, destinedhim for trade, and he was at firstapprenticed to his father ; but, dislikinga business so mechanical, he becameclerk either to a writing stationer, or anattorney, and, by some means or other,fitted himself for the profession of aman of letters. Some essays in theGentleman's Magazine introduced himto the notice of Cave, and, about 1744,he became Dr. Johnson's successor inthat periodical, as compiler of the parliamentarydebates. His other productionsin this publication were chieflypoetical, and in general appeared underthe signature of H. Greville. In 1752,with the assistance of Johnson, Bathurst,and Wanton, he commenced publishinga set of periodical papers, entitled TheAdventurer, which was terminated in1754, and afterwards printed in fourduodecimo volumes: of the one hundredand forty numbers they contained,about half were written by HawksThis production brought our authorinto much repute, and Archbishop Herringwas so pleased with the moraltendency of his writings, that he conferredupon him the degree of D.C.L.Elated by this dignity, which was themeans of estranging from him thefriendship of Dr. Johnson, Hawksattempted to get admitted as anadvocate into the ecclesiastical courts,but desisted from his purpose, aftersome preparatory studies, on findingI himself strongly opposed. About thistime, he appears to have resided athis native place, and to have assistedhis wife, who kept a boarding-schoolfor young ladies, in the education ofher pupils. Literature, however, formedhis chief pursuit : in 1756, he alteredfor the stage, at the desire of Garrick,Dryden's comedy of Arnphytrion ; andin 1 760, he composed an oratorio,.,calledZimri, which was produced at CoventGarden, and displayed to advantagethe poetical capacities of its author.This was succeeded, in 1761, by hisdramatic entertainment, entitled Edgarand Emmeline, acted at Drury Lane ;and in the same year he published hiscelebrated oriental tale of Alcoran andHamlet. He next edited the works, andwrote a Lite of Swift; published threevolumes of the dean's letters in 1766;and, in 1768, appeared his translationof Telemachus.His popularity as a writer was nowat its height, and in 1772, he was selected,by the Earl of Sandwich, the firstlord of the admiralty, to compile intoone narrative an account of all thevoyages of discovery made by commandof 'the king, to that period of his reign.This work, for which he received theenormous sum of 6,000, was printedin three volumes, quarto, adorned withcharts, maps, views, &c., and containedthe voyages of Byron, Wallis, Carteret,and Cook. It was at first read withavidity, and praised by the critics ; butobjections were soon taken against it,which gave Hawkesworth vexations,that more than counterbalanced thesatisfaction arising from his profits.Some nautical omissions were detected;his descriptions of the licentious mannersof the South Sea Islands, werethought too inflammatory : and, in hispreface he had made some unnecessaryattacks upon the popular doctrine of aparticular providence. In other respectshis task obtained the praise of livelyand elegant narration, and of tolerablefidelity with respect to matters of factHawkesworth made but one feeble replyto the numerous attacks that werelevelled against this work, after the publicationof which he had sufficient in-THOMAS GRAY,terest to get himself appointed an EastIndia director. Ill health, however,prevented him from taking an activepart in the duties of his office, and heexpired at Bromley, on the 16th of November,1773. His death was doubtlesslyhastened by the reception his lastwork met with ; and, indeed, he maybesaid to have died of criticism.Hawkesworth was undoubtedly oneof the most elegant English writers ofthe last century, and his eastern tales,and domestic stories in The Adventurer,exhibit a fine imagination and avery considerable knowledge of thehuman heart. His morality is as pure,and conveyed in a more entertainingmanner than that of Johnson, whosestyle in The Rambler he somewhat resembles,but with less pomp of diction.In his Telemachus, he has left all formertranslators far behind him ; and hisAlcoran and Hamlet stands among thefirst class of serious and dignified romances.In his private character he was muchrespected and beloved; his mannerswere those of the gentleman and thescholar, though he is said to have beenoccasionally violent in his temper, andto have been somewhat addicted to thepleasures of the table.THOMAS GRAY.THOMAS GRAY, the only son of amoney scrivener, was born on Cornwall,London, on the 26th of December,1716. He received his education atEton, and Peter-house, Cambridge,where he wrote some Latin poems,which obtained him an early reputation,and were inserted in the MusaeEtonenses. In 1738, he removed toLondon with the intention of studyingfor the bar, but having previouslyformed an acquaintance with HoraceWalpole, he accepted an invitation toaccompany him abroad, where theyquarrelled, and returned home separately.It is probable that Gray receivedan insult not to be forgiven, forwe learn from Cole, in his AthenaCantabrigienses, that when matters weremade up between them, and our authoraccepted Walpole's invitation to StrawberryHill, he told his host that hecame to wait on him as civility required,but by no means would he everbe there on the terms of his formerfriendship, which he had totally cancelled.During Gray's residence on thecontinent, he not only formed an acquaintancewith the native languageand customs, but made some progressin the study of architecture, painting,and music.On the death of his father, Gray, whowas left but a small property, retired toCambridge, and took his degree in civillaw, but, at the same time, renouncedall thoughts of going to the bar. Literarypursuits now occupied him closelyfor some years, in the course of whichhe read almost every English author ofnote, besides Propertius, Ovid, Petrarchand others, from some of whose workshe made translations. So tardy, however,was he in the production of hisown compositions, that although hisOde on a Distant Prospect of Eton Collegewas finished in 1742, it did notappear until 1747 ; and it was only inconsequenceof the printing of a surreptitiouscopy, that, in 1751, he publishedhis Elegy written in a CountryChurch-yard. No poem ever producedso great a sensation ; although publishedanonymously, it quickly ran througheleven editions ; it was translated intonearly all the modern languages, as wellas into Latin, by Anstey, Roberts, andLloyd; and into Greek, by DoctorsCooke, Carbury, and Conte ; and numerousother elegant and able classics.In the two following years he appearsto have written an ode on the Progressof Poetry, and his celebrated ode ofThe Bard, together with some fragments;but he complains, about thisperiod, nevertheless, of being preventedfrom applying himself closely to poetry,from listlessness and a depression ofspirits.In 1756, he, in consequence of theannoyance of some collegians, whoseapartments adjoined his own, removedLITERATURE.to Pembroke Hall, in the same university,an event which he describes " asan' era in a life so barren of events ashis." This remove, however, has beenexplained, by other of his contemporaries,to have originated in his greatdread of fire ; and for his better chanceof escape, in case of accident, he is saidto have practised a descent from hisfront window into the court below, bymeans of a rope. This coming to theears of some mischievous students, theyfrequently annoyed him by giving analarm of fire in the night ; and on oneoccasion, a butt of water having beenplaced below to receive him, he unconsciouslyimmersed himself therein.In 1757, he published the odes be-aforementioned,and in the same yearhe declined the office of laureate, whichwas offered him on the death of Gibber.In 1759, he removed to London, andresided for three years in the neighbourhoodof the British Museum, whichhe attended for the purpose of transcribingthe Harleian and Cottonianmanuscripts. Being disappointed in obtainingthe Cambridge professorship ofmodern history, which he had solicitedfrom Lord Bute, and finding his healthrequire change of air, he, in 1765, tooka journey into Scotland, where he wasintroduced to the most eminent men ofliterature of that country. His accountof this journey, " so far as it extends,"says Dr. Johnson, " is curious andelegant ; for as his comprehension wassingular, his curiosity extended to allthe works of art, all the appearancesof nature, and all the monumentsof past events." Part of the summerof the years 176G and 1767 he passedin journeying through England. In1768, the death of Mr. Brocket againleaving the Cambridge professorshipof modern history vacant, he was appointedto the chair by the Duke ofGrafton ; and in the following year |he wrote his famous Installation Ode :a production, says Dyer, in his Historyof Cambridge, in which he speaks ofthe duke in the language of gratitude ;but, with great poetical management,steers clear of the language of sycophancy.Soon after he had acceptedthe office, he grew melancholy anddejected, and had some thoughts of resigninghis professorship, from a disinclinationto perform the duties, althoughhe was only bound to read one lectureper term. It was his intention, however,to have made the office less of asinecure than his predecessors, but hisill health and inactive habits did notsurfer him to do more than to sketch aplan for his inauguration speech, shortlyafter which he died, on the 30th ofJuly, 1771.Gray was small of stature, and finicalin his appearance and gait; he paid afoppish attention to dress; and, althoughhe had humour and a quick sense of theridiculous, was so fastidiously delicate,that the least tendency to coarseness,or vulgar or unrefined manners, wassure to disturb his equanimity. This,Mason attributes to " an affectation indelicacyand effeminacy," rather " thanto the things themselves ;" adding, thatGray " chose to put on this appearancebefore persons whom he did not wishto please." Whatever were his peculiarities,no one has disputed his amiabledisposition, and exemplary mode of life.He was temperate, sincere, of strictmorality, and so independent, that hecarried his fear of receiving favours to ablameable extent. Notwithstanding hishigh reputation, he exhibited no sign ofvanity, and bore the attacks of criticswith the most easy negligence.It has been truly observed of Gray,that no modern poet has left so manyexamples of what he designed, or solittle executed ; for what he did not atonce complete, he seldom had sufficientregard for to return to. The little, however,which he has left behind him, hassecured him lasting popularity as a lyricpoet; and if a judgment may be formedfrom his fragment of An Essay on theAlliance of Education and Government,he had equal capacities for excellencein the didactic style. As a writerof Latin verse he has been equalledby few ; and his letters, which are to befind in the account of his life, by hisfriend Mason, have been universallyadmired. In allusion to that portion ofthem describing his travels, Dr. Johnsonsays, " he that reads his epistolarynarrative wishes, that to travel, and totell his travels, had been more of theemployment of Gray." In his poeticalcompositions he is lofty, energetic, andharmonious ; and, to quote the opinionof the celebrated scholar and traveller,Clarke, " his writings, both in styleHORACE \V A L P O L E .and diction, were a century before theage in which he wrote."Beattie says of him " Setting asidehis merit as a poet, which, however, inmy opinion, is greater than any of hiscontemporaries can boast, in this or inany other nation, I found him possessedof the most exact taste, the soundestjudgment, and the most extensivelearning."HORACE WALPOLE.THE exact year in which this noblemanwas born', we have been unable toascertain with certainty: 1715-16-17and 1718 have been assigned by hisdifferent biographers, but, according tothe Gentleman's Magazine, which isno bad authority for dates, his birthtook place in 1716. He was the thirdand youngest son of the first Earl ofOrford, by his first wife, and receivedthe early part of his education at Eton,where, as has been slated in our memoirof that poet, he became acquaintedwith Gray. From Eton he proceeded,in 1734, to King's College, Cambridge,in honour of the founder of which,Henry the Sixth, he wrote someverses that gave no unfavourable omenof his future abilities. They were probablythe first production of his pen,and were dated February 1738 ; in thesummer of which year he was appointedinspector-general of the exportsand imports, a place which he soonafter exchanged for that of usher of theExchequer. In 1739, he went abroadwith Gray, from whom he parted atReggio, in 1741, as he acknowledged toMr. Mason, by his own fault; but Walpole'ssubsequent conduct seems tohave been more friendly and generousthan that of the poet, though their reconciliationdid not revive the formercordiality of either. On his return toEngland, the subject of our memoirwas chosen member of parliament forWellington, in Cornwall ; and in March,1742, he made an animated speech inopposition to a motion for an inquiry jinto the political conduct of his father. !He sat as a borough member in severalsubsequent parliaments, and terminated ihis political career, in 1768, without any Iother senatorial reputation than that ofconsistency in his Whig principles.A most important era in his life wasthe purchase of his villa at StrawberryHill, near Twickenham, in 1747. Herehe occupied himself in the collection ofpaintings and curiosities, and havingadorned, and extended the size of, hishouse, it became a very fashionableresort for the literati of the metropolis,to whom, every summer, he gave adaily conversazione. In 1749, he wasnearly killed by the accidental dischargeof a highwayman's pistol, afterhe had robbed our author, who hashumorously related the story in apaper in The World, to which he communicatedNos. Six, Eight, Ten, Fourteen,Twenty-eight, One Hundred andThree, One Hundred and Sixty-eight,and One Hundred and Ninety-five.In 1752, appeared his first regularpublication, entitled sedes Walpoliana,being a description of his father's splendidmansion at Houghton, in Norfolk.In 1757, he opened a printing-pressat Strawberry Hill, the first productionof which was Gray's Odes, andsubsequently were published, an editionand translation of part of Helter'sTravels, Lord Wentworth's Account ofRussia, Life of Lord Herbert of Cher-bury,&c., being his Catalogue ofRoyal and Noble Authors. Of thesehe printed but a few copies, and byparting with them only as presents, hispress soon became an object of fameand curiosity. In 1761 appeared, intwo volumes, quarto, his Anecdotesof Painting in England, compiled fromthe papers of the artist, George Vertue,to which two additional volumes weresubsequently added. In 1764, he wroteand published a pamphlet in defenceof the conduct of his friend, GeneralConway, who had been dismissed fromthe army on account of a vote givenin parliament on the question of generalwarrants. In 1705, he published,as a translation from the Italian, thewell-known romance of The Castle off.334LITERATURE,Otranto ; but in the following year, inasecond edition, he acknowledged himselfto be the original author, in 1766,he drew just censure upon himself forinflaming the dispute between Rousseauand the historian Hume, by writingto the former a letter in French, underthe name of the King of Prussia, inwhich he displayed more wit than liberalityor benevolence towards authorsby profession.It was about this time, being at Paris,that he became acquainted with Madamedu Defraud, to whom, althoughblind and seventy years of age, he issaid to have remained warmly attacheduntil her death in 1780. His conduct andletters justify the assertion ; on her pensionof six thousand francs being reducedto a moiety of that sum, he insisted onpaying her the other half ; the only bequests,however, which she left to Walpolewere her dog and her manuscripts.In 1768, the subject of our memoir,as has been already stated, retired frompublic life, and iii the same year heproduced his Historic Doubts of the Lifeand Reign of King Richard the Third.His object was to clear the characterof that monarch from the obloquy ordinarilyattached to it ; but his arguments,more ingenious than accurate,failed to convince the public in general,and were refuted for the most part byanswers made to the work. In particular,the evidence from the wardrobe-rollwas controverted by Dr. Millerand Mr. Masters, in papers read beforethe Society of Antiquaries; which sodisgusted Wai pole, that he ordered hisname to be struck out of the list of theirmembers. In the year last-mentionedhe printed fifty copies of the tragedyof The Mysterious Mother, which heatfirst professed to have founded ona story he had heard in his youth, butsubsequently discovering that it hadappeared in Bishop Hall's works, andhad been twice dramatized, he appearsto have been anxious to suppress it.Some years afterwards, extracts from itbeing given in Footfall's Public Advertiser,he wrote a very contemptuousletter to the proprietor, indignantlycomplaining of the publication of histragedy, demanding its discontinuance,and stating that he would purchase itssuppression at any price. This, however,seems to have been a piece ofhypocrisy and affectation ; as he had,at that time, printed the tragedy in thefirst volume of his collected works,and was, in reality, pleased rather thanoffended with the praises of Footfall,though he affected to despise them.About this time he was concerned inthe transactions that occurred betweenhim and the unfortunate Chatterton,in our memoir of whom it will be seenthat Walpole did not deserve the extentof censure which has been bestowedon him.In 1771 and 1775, he again visitedParis; and, in 1791, he succeeded, bythe death of his nephew, to the title ofEarl of Orford, but this elevation madeso little alteration in his habits andmanners, that he did not even troublehimself .to take his seat in the houseof peers. He continued to pass histime in the pursuit of literature, andthe society of his friends, until theperiod of his death, which took placeon the 2nd of March, 1797. He diedof the gout, of which he had beenafflicted, at intervals, throughout hislife, and left a fortune of 91,000.In person Mr. Walpole was shortand slender; his countenance long retainedits boyish appearance, and was,upon the whole, prepossessing; his eyeswere particularly fine ; but his smile issaid to have been un pleasing, and hislaugh uncouth. His manners wereagreeable, and he greatly excelled inconversation, but he was never knownto wound the feelings of any one forthe sake of exciting a smile in others,although he is said to have talked aswittily as he wrote. He possessed akind and obliging disposition, but in apecuniary sense, no man was less of apatron ; " an artist," he used to say,"has his pencils, and an author hispens, and the public must reward themas it happens." It does not appearthat he, in one single instance, assistedan author or artist with money ; and heleft the whole of his property to personsin his own sphere, who were probablyin no want of addition to theirfortunes. His pride of birth was paramountto the fame of arts, letters, orphilosophy, and led him to despisenature and humour in every form thatwas not aristocratic. For this reason heaffected a great dislike of Fielding'sTom Jones : " it might," he said, " beHUGH BLAIR.nature ; it might be humour ; but it wasof A kind which could not interest him."He professed humility, and deferenceto the public taste, but no man wasmore solicitous of obtaining its applause,or more impatient of its disapprobation.In his habits he was somewhateffeminate and luxurious ; when hisfriends used to smile at the care hetook of his person, he would say,"My back is the same with my face,and my neck is like my nose." Hewas, however, totally free from intemperance; and coffee and ice-waterare said to have been his favourite, andalmost his only, beverage. An editionof his works was published in 1798,containing, besides those already mentioned,his letters to a variety of correspondents,written with much wit.Sir Walter Scott speaks very highly ofthis part of Walpole's performances,and there are some ci itics who preferhis epistolary productions even to thoseof Warburton. His Anecdotes of Painting,and Catalogue of Royal andNoble Authors, are the works on whichhis reputation chiefly rests; they areuseful and curious of their class, butdo not entitle the author to a place inthe foremost ranks of literature.HUGH BLAIR.HUGH BLAIR, descended from RobertBlair, chaplain to Charles the First,and son of a merchant, who lost thegreater part of his fortune in the SouthSea scheme, was born at Edinburghon the 7th of April, 1718. After having,gone through a course of educationat the high school, he, in 1730, enteredthe University of Edinburgh, where hespent eleven years in the study ofliterature, philosophy and divinity. Inthe logic class he particularly excelled ;and his Essay on the Beautiful, a subjectproposed by the professor, washighly applauded, and appointed to bepublicly read. Having graduated A.M.in 1739, he was, on the 23rd of October,1741, licensed to preach by the presbytery; and, in the September of thefollowing year, he was presented to theliving of Colessie, in Fif'eshire. In July,1743, he was elected minister of theCanongate Church at Edinburgh, fromwhich he was translated, in 1754, inconsequenceof a call from the towncouncil, to Lady Tester's Church, in thesame city; and, in 1758, to the firstcharge in the high church, being themost honourable clerical situation inScotland. In 1757, the University ofSt. Andrew created him D.D. ; at whichtime he had obtained great reputationas a preacher, but, as an author, hadwritten nothing besides two sermons,and a few articles in the EdinburghReview. In 1759, he prepared a courseof lectures on composition, and deliveredthem with such success, that theuniversity instituted a rhetorical classunder his direction ; and the kingfounded a professorship of rhetoric andbelles letters, in 1762, when Dr. Blairwas appointed to the chair, with asalary of 70. About the same timehe gave to the public his Dissertationon the Poems of Ossian ; in which, inone of the finest specimens of criticismsever produced, he zealously advocatedtheir authenticity. In 1773, the firstuniform edition "of the works of theBritish poets was published under hissuperintendence, and he also engagedin anew edition of the works of Shakspeare.In 1777, appeared the firstvolume of 'his Sermons, which Strahanpurchased for 100, on the recommendationof Dr. Johnson. They weresucceeded by three additional volumes,for which he received 1,500, and hewas further rewarded, at the request ofQueen Charlotte, with a pension of200 per annum. In 1783, he resignedhis professorship, and published hisLectures on Composition, which containan accurate analysis of the principles ofliterary composition, in every species ofwriting, and an able digest of the rulesof eloquence, as applicable to the oratoryof the pulpit, the bar, and of popularassemblies. On the death of Dr. Robertson,in 1793. it was expected that Dr.Blair would have succeeded him, asLITERATURE.principal of the university, according tothe wish of the former ; and Blair issaid to have felt the oversight keenly atseeing the appointment given to another.In his seventy-ninth year he preachedthe annual sermon for the benefit of thesons of the clergy ; his last, but by nomeans least forcible effort, in the pulpit.In the summer of 1800, he began toprepare an additional volume of hisSermons for the press, but did not liveto publish them, his death taking placein the December of the same year. Hehad married, in 1748, his cousin, MissBannatine, by whom he had a son anda daughter, both of whom he survived,together with his wife.The Lectures and Sermons of Dr.Blair still continue to hold a high rankinpublic estimation, though the latter,from their general want of profundity,have been considered rather as treatisesthan sermons. They were, however,the first regular didactic orations thathad been heard in Scotland, and havebeen justly described as occupying amiddle place between the dry metaphysicaldiscussions of one class ofpreachers, and the loose, incoherent declamationof another ; and as blendingtogether, in the happiest manner, thelight of argument with the warmth ofexhortation. The private character ofDr. Blair was, in every respect, that ofthe divine and the philanthropist : witheminent talents and inflexible integrity,he possessed a mind of the most unsuspectingsimplicity; "which," says hisbiographer, Dr. Finlayson, "while itsecured to the last his own relish of life,was wonderfully calculated to endearhim to his friends, and to render him aninvaluable member of every society towhich he belonged."WILLIAM ROBERTSON,WILLIAM ROBERTSON, the son of ja clergyman, was born at Borthwick, inMid Lothian, Scotland, in the year 1721,and received the rudiments of educationat the school of Dalkeith. In 1733, liejoined his family, which had removed toEdinburgh, where he studied for thechurch, of which he was admitted amember in 1741 ; and, in 1743, he waspresented, by the Earl of Hopetown,with the living of Gladsmuir, in EastLothian. Not long afterwards he lostboth his parents, when, although his incomedid not exceed 100 per annum,he undertook the care and education ofhis six sisters and a younger brother. In1751, he married his cousin, Miss MaryNisbet ; at this time he had obtainedgreat popularly as a preacher, and wasalso one of the most eloquent speakersin the general assembly of the church ofScotland. In 1754, he became memberof the Select Society in Edinburgh, andwas one of those who, in 1757, mosteloquently defended Mr. Home, forwriting the tragedy of Douglas, themerits of which were not consideredsufficient to atone for the author's departurefrom the austerity expected inapresbyterian divine. In 1758, ourauthor went to London to arrange forthe publication of his History of Scotland,which appeared in the Februaryof the following year, and was receivedwith the highest approbation. It quicklyreached a second edition, and producedcomplimentary letters from HoraceWalpole, Garrick, Sir Gilbert Elliott,and David Hume, who, in one of hisepistles to Robertson, says that everyear is fatigued " by noisy and endless,and repeated praises of the History ofScotland," and concludes, " I believethere is scarce another instance of a firstperformance being so near perfection."Robertson reaped no less profit thanfame by the publication of this work, andhad the satisfaction of seeing it reach afourteenth edition previous to his death.Preferments now crowded upon him :in the year last mentioned, he was appointedchaplain of Stirling Castle ; in761, one of his majesty's chaplains inordinary for Scotland; in 1762, principalof the University of Edinburgh;and two years afterwards he was chosenking's historiographer, for Scotland, anoffice which was revived in his favourwith a salary of j200 per annum. Hehad long meditated a History of Eng-WILLIAM ROBERTSON.land, and was encouraged by the Britishgovernment to proceed in the work,which, it seems, he had only hithertodeferred in consequence of his determinationto throw no impediment in thesuccess of Mr. Hume's publication onthe same subject. Having, however,made some progress in his History ofCharles the Fifth, his health, on thecompletion of that work, in 1769, sayshis biographer, Dugald Stewart, " wastoo much impaired, and his life too faradvanced, to allow him to think of anundertaking so vast in itself, and whichMr. Hume had already executed withso splendid and merited a reputation."His History of Charles the Fifth waspublished in three octavo volumes, andthe very high expectations that had beenformed respecting it, were not disappointed.Hume, who had discouragedhim at the outset of the work, bytelling him it required a knowledgewhich it would be the work of half alife to acquire, was the first, and mostzealous in its praise ; he said that it hadfew equals in nobleness, dignity, andelegance of composition, and ownedthat it excelled " in a sensible degree,"his History of Scotland. The eulogiumof Voltaire should not be omitted : " IIy a quatre jours," he writes in a letter,from the Chateau de Ferney, " que j'airecu le beau present dont vous m'avezhonore. Je le lis malgre.les fluxionshorrible qui me font craindre depeidreretirement les yeux. II me fait oubliertons mes maux. C'est a vous et a M.Hume qu'il appartient d'ecrire histoire.Vous eyes eloquent, savant, etimpartial. Je me joins a europe pourvous estimer." The introductory volume,in which is traced the progress ofsociety in Europe, from the subversionof the Roman empire to the beginningthe sixteenth century, exhibited marksof Robertson's extensive and variousreading, digested with the soundestjudgment, and met with particular approbation.The whole work was translatedinto Trench, and besides gainingthe author a high degree of popularityamong foreign men of letters, so gratifiedthe Empress of Russia, that she senthim a valuable diamond snuff-box.In 1777, appeared his History ofAmerica, in which, to use the words ofBurke to the author, " Every thinghas been done which was so naturallyto be expected from the author of theHistory of Scotland, and of the Age ofCharles the Fifth." It is, upon thewhole, perhaps, the most praiseworthyand objectionable of his works : out ofmaterials shapeless and disjointed, hehas produced a symmetrical whole, admirablyarranged, and his delineation ofsavage manners, and comparison of abarbarian with a civilized state of society,is skilful and masterly. An ineffaceableblemish, however, upon his reputationas a historian, will be perpetuated bythis work, in his disposition to veil or topalliate the enormities oi the Spaniardsin their American conquests. On thispoint, none of his biographers haveattempted to defend him; and Mr.Bryan Edwards justly characterizes itas one of those melancholy passagesin the history of human nature,' wherea benevolent mind, shrinking fromthe contemplation of facts. wishes toresist conviction, and to relieve itself byincredulity." It is supposed that theassistance he received in the way ofcommunication from the Spanish court,seduced him to "the temperate spirit,"as Mr. Gibbon expresses it, " withwhich he had related this portion oftheir story ;" and this suspicion wasconfirmed, by hi* election into the RoyalAcademy of History at Madrid, in testimonyof their approbation of the industryand care with which he hadapplied to the study of Spanish history.Dr. Robertson's last performance appearedin 1791, under the title of AnHistorical Disquisition concerning theknowledge which the Ancients had ofIndia, and the Progress of Trade withthat country prior to the discovery ofthe Cape of Good Hope. It was begunin the sixty-eighth year of his age, andin twelve months "brought to a conclusion; exhibiting, nevertheless, saysDugald Stewart, " in every part, adiligence in research, a soundness ofjudgment, and a perspicuity of method,not inferior to those which distinguishhis other performances." After thepublication of this work, his healthbegan apparently to decline, and uponan attack of the jaundice, he retired toa country-house in the neighbourhoodof Edinburgh, where he died, on thellth of June, 1793.In person, Dr. Robertson was ratherabove the middle size; and his form,I 333LITERATURE.though it did not convey the idea ofmuch activity, announced vigour ofbody, and a healthful constitution. Heappeared, says Mr. Stewart," to greateradvantage in his clerical dress ; and wasmore remarkable for gravity and dignityin discharging the functions of hispublic stations, than for ease or gracein private society. His moral characterwas unimpeachable, and both in publicand private life, his conduct was amiableand exemplary. "He enjoyed," saysDr. Erskine, " the bounties of Providencewithout running into riot; wastemperate without austerity; condescendingand affable without meanness ;and in expense neither sordid nor prodigal.He could feel an injury, and yetbridle his passion ; was grave, notsullen ; steady, not obstinate ; friendly,not officious ; prudent and cautious,not timid." As a member of the generalassembly of the church of Scotland,he distinguished himself by his eloquencein support of the laws of patronage; and of an impartial exercise ofthe judicial power of the church. Inthe former of these respects, his exertionsare supposed not only to haveproduced in the ecclesiastical establishmenta tranquillity unknown in formertimes, but to have contributed, in nosmall degree, to the peace and goodorder of the country. Such, indeed,was his influence in tins assembly, thatthe period from his appointment as principalof the university, till his retirementfrom public life, was distinguishedby the name of Dr. Robertson's Administration.The academical reputationof Edinburgh was materially extendedby the improvements and reforms whichhe introduced into the university ; " andif," says Dugald Stewart, " as a seat oflearning, Edinburgh has of late morethan formerly attracted the notice ofthe world, much must be ascribed tothe influence of his example, and to thelustre of his name." His merits as apreacher were of no mean order, asmay be seen from his Sermon on thesituation of the world at the time ofChrist's appearance, the only one heever published. It reached five editions,and obtained great celebrity on thecontinent, through a German translation,by Being. His merits as a historianhave been ably delineated by histalented biographers, and the testimoniesto them, of Hume, Gibbon, Burke,Horace Walpole, and, in fact, of all theenn'nent men of letters of his time, aretoo well known to need recapitulation.In accuracy of facts, and the art of narration,he has no equal ; his style is notalways so simple as could be wished,but it is totally free from Scepticism ;and his diction, at once flowing andmajestic, harmonious beyond that ofmost English writers. His chief fault,perhaps, is a caution, bordering oncoldness, in his expression of moraland political feelings, but this is compensatedfor by an absence of prejudiceand passion, and a pervading tone ofcalm sagacity, not always preserved inthe compositions of a less phlegmaticor more enthusiastic writer.TOBIAS GEORGE SMOLLETT.Ellis humorous writer, the youngestson of a gentleman of good family, wasborn at Dalquhurn, in Dumbartonshire,in the year 1721. Even in his childhood,he discovered indications of alively wit and vigorous understanding,and on being sent to school at Dumbarton,he not only excelled in hisstudies, but gave proofs of a poeticalgenius, in some verses to the memoryof Wallace, and some satires upon hisschool bello ws. On leaving school, heremoved to Glasgow, where he wasapprenticed to a surgeon, and attendedthe university lectures on medicineand anatomy. Literary pursuits, however,were not unattended to ; a perusalof Buchanan's History of Scotland socaptivated him with the Latin language,that he devoted himself to thecultivation of it with great ardour ;and in his eighteenth year, he hadcompleted a tragedy, which he afterwardspublished under the title of theRegicide, an extraordinary productionat so early a period of his life.TOBIAS GEORGE SMOLLETT,Smollett, having lost his father inhis infancy, had been hitherto supportedby his grandfather, Sir JamesSmollett; but his death taking placeabout this period, our author was leftwholly dependent upon his own exertionsfor his subsistence. Accordingly,on the termination of his apprenticeship,in his nineteenth year, he proceededto London, and after havingin vain attempted to bring out histragedy, he accepted the situation of asurgeon's mate in the navy, and inthis capacity acted at the unfortunateexpedition to Cartagena in 1741, ofwhich he drew up an account, displayinggreat powers of observation anddepth of reflection. On his arrival inthe West Indies, he quitted the navyin disgust, and after residing some timein Jamaica, returned to England in1746, with that knowledge of the languageand manners of sailors, whichhe has so amusingly displayed in hisnovels. About this time, the accountscirculated of the severities which hadfollowed the battle of Culloden, rousedthe indignation of our author, and ledto the composition of his poem, entitledThe Tears of Scotland. Its publicationplaced him high in the rankof minor poets, but gave uneasiness tohis friends, whose advice for its suppressionhe was so far from following,that he republished it with an additionalstanza, expressing his feelings in stillstronger terms. His poem was followedby two satires, entitled Advice, andReproof, in which he lashes, withunmerciful acrimony, the vices of thepowerful ; and in the latter he attacksmanagers and players, in consequenceof a quarrel with Rich, for whom hehad written an opera, entitled Alcestis,but which, in consequence of a disputebetween the manager and the author,was never produced.About 1747, he married a Miss Las-celles,with whom he had become acquaintedin Jamaica ; a lady of beautyand accomplishments, and from whomhe expected a fortune, of which, however,he received so little, that hisstyle of living soon brought him intoPecuniary difficulties. To relieve themeagain had recourse to his pen, andin 1748, he produced his celebratednovel of Frederick Random, a workfounded upon the plan of Le Sage'sGil Bias, and to the humour and entertainmentof which he was indebted foran immediate accession of fame andfortune. Lady Worthy Montagu madecertain that the work was by Fielding,and in a letter to her daughter, thusunconsciously compliments the realauthor ; " Fielding has a fund of truehumour. I guessed R. Random to behis, though without his name." Thisnovel, which had some allusion to hisown history, and contained severalscenes actually drawn from life, wassucceeded, in 1749, by his Regicide,which he published by subscription. Jnthe summer of 1750 he visited Paris,for the purpose of enlarging his knowledgeof the world, and the charactershe became acquainted with duringhis residence abroad, were portrayedto the public in his Adventures ofPeregrine Pickle, which appeared in1751. It was read with avidity, andsoon reached a second edition ; in thepreface to which he says he has " endeavouredto render it less unworthy ofthe public acceptance, by retrenchingthe superfluities of the first, reformingits manners, and correcting its expression; and flatters himself that he hasexpunged every adventure, phrase, andinsinuation, that could be construed bythe most delicate reader into a trespassupon the rules of decorum." In thisnovel he seems to have exerted all hispowers of humorous invention, andhis success was proportionate, thoughit must be confessed that he oftenamuses his reader at the expense ofdelicacy and morality. He adoptedthe same plan that he observed inFrederick Random, of inserting manyreal characters and incidents ; and theanecdotes respecting Lady Vane, thematerials of which she herself furnished,contributed not a little to thepopularity of the work.About this^period, Smollett havingobtained, probably from a foreign university,his degree of M. L). endeavouredto attract notice in his medicalcharacter, by the publication of anEssay on the Use of the Bath Waters.His unaccommodating temper, however,want of experience, and disdainof the petty arts of fawning and finesse,joined to the reputation, which his publicationshad acquired for him, of ageneral satirist and censor of manners,LITERATURE.rendered the experiment unsuccessful,and he soon gave up all thoughts ofpractice. Retiring, therefore, to Chelsea,he devoted the whole of his timeto literary occupation, and, in 1753,published his Adventures of FerdinandCount Fathom. His account ofa law-suit inserted in this performance,drew on him the resentment ofthe lawyers, which was shortly afterwardsmanifested, on the trial of ourauthor, for chastising a Mr. Gordon,when the counsel for the prosecutorabused Smollett in language, which inducedthe latter to demand an apology.In 1755, appeared his translation of DonQuixote, in which he was charged withbetraying ignorance of the Spanish language; but on this point he is defendedby one of his biographers, Dr. Moore,who says that " although he never wasin Spain, he certainly had a very considerableknowledge of the language."Be this as it may, Smollett had requisitesfor such a work, of which fewtranslators could boast ; a completeknowledge of his own language, andthe power of adapting it, with admirablefelicity, to phraseology, solemn, familiar,comical, and burlesque.In 1756, Smollett undertook the chiefdirection of The Critical Review, anewliterary journal, in which he displayedhis satirical and acrimonious spirit, in amanner that raised him a host of literaryenemies. Among others, he offendedAdmiral Knowles, by severelyreflecting upon his conduct in theunfortunate expedition to Rochford,respecting which the admiral had publisheda pamphlet. A prosecution wascommenced against the printer of theReview for a libel ; but on the intimationof the admiral's counsel, that hisclient's object " was not with a view topunish a wretched printer, but to discoverwho had written the article ; thatif he proved to be a gentleman, anotherkind of satisfaction might be demandedof him ;" Smollett avowed himself tobe the author, and that he was readyto give the satisfaction alluded to. Theadmiral, however, instead of sendinga challenge to, commenced a new prosecutionagainst, our author, who was,in consequence, fined 100, and sentencedto three months' imprisonment.His next publication appeared withouthis name, under the title of ACompendium of Authentic and EntertainingVoyages, &c., in seven volumes ;and in 1757, a two-act comedy ofhis composition, called The Reprisal,was acted at Drury Lane. In 1758,appeared his Complete History ofEngland, from the descent of JuliusCaesar to the Treaty of Aix-la-Cha-pelle, in four volumes, quarto ; a workwhich he is said to have composedand finished for the press in fourteenmonths. In the year following, thehistory was reprinted in numbers, andin that form the weekly sale amountedto ten thousand ; on its completion, itwas published in eleven volumes, witha dedication to Mr. Pitt. In this publication,he was accused of defectionfrom his Whig principles, a chargewhich he ingeniously replied to in aletter to Dr. Moore : " Whatever maybeits defect," he says, alluding tohis History, " I protest before God Ihave, as far as in me lay, adhered totruth, without espousing any faction,though I own I sat down to write witha warm side to those principles in whichI was educated ; but in the course ofmy inquiries, some of the Whig ministersturned out such a set of sordidknaves, that I could not help stigmatizingthem for their want of integrityand sentiment." In 1762, hepublished his Sir Launcelot Greaves,the whole of which had previously appeared,in detached portions, in TheBritish Magazine. Much of it waswritten during his confinement inprison, and he described in the novelmany of the characters which he theremet with. " This work," says Dr.Moore, ' seems to have been conceivedand executed with precipitation : someparts of it are, however, delightfullywritten." About this time he was alsoengaged in writing for the modern partsof The Universal History, to which heis supposed to have contributed theHistories of France, Italy, and Germany.At the commencement of the reign ofGeorge the Third, when Lord Bute wasappointed prime minister, Smollettundertook to write in favour of hisadministration, and for that purposebrought out a paper called TheBriton. This led to the establishmentof the famous North Briton, which wasbrought out in opposition to Smol-TOBIAS GEORGE SMOLLETT.lett's by Wilkes, who, on hearing thatLord Bute had engaged the assistanceof the former, said, " After havingdistributed among his adherents all theplaces under government, his lordshipis determined, it would seem, to monopolizethe wit also." Mr. Wilkes'sgrand point of attack against the ministerwas with reference to his country,and Smollett finding the whole Scottishnation included in the attack, consideredhimself personally affronted, andreplied with a keenness and asperitythat soon dissolved the friendship thathad previously subsisted between himselfand Mr. Wilkes. The Briton wasnot received by the public so favourablyas the author's former writings hadbeen ; and " he had reason to regret,"says Dr. Moore, " that he ever becamea party writer, by which he lost someof his old friends, and acquired butvery cold-hearted new ones in theirstead."About the year 1763, the loss of hisdaughter and only child severely affectedhim ; and his own health havingbeen injured by too intense applicationto study, he, at the request of his wife,left England, and remained in Franceand Italy until 1765. In the followingyear, he published an Account of hisTravels, in letters, in one of which hedescribes himself, at the period of hisdeparture from England, as " traducedby malice, persecuted by faction, abandonedby false patrons, and overwhelmedby domestic calamity." In thisstate of mind it is not singular that heshould have viewed every thing with agloomy and querulous eye, and thusgained a title to the character of" Smellunder which name, Sterne hasrepresented him in his SentimentalJourney. In 1766 was published, intwo volumes, quarto, after it had previouslyappeared in numbers, his Continuationof the History of England,taken up from the Revolution, whereHume left it, and brought down to theyear 1765. After a visit to Scotland,Smollett, still a valetudinarian, visitedBath, where it is probable he wrote hisHistory and Adventures of an Atom,which appeared in 1769, in two volumes,duodecimo. This publication wasin ridicule of different administrations,especially those of Lord Chatham ; andhe also found reasons for altering hisopinion of Lord Bute and Mr. Pitt. Continuedill-health induced him to complywith the advice of his physicians,in making a second tour to Italy, wherehe arrived in the early part of 1770.He took up his residence near Leghorn,after having made a vain attemptto obtain the appointment of Englishconsul ; and here, under the influence ofincreasing disease and mental disappointment,he composed The Expeditionof Humphrey Clinker, which, in theopinion of many, is the most entertainingand agreeable of all his works. Thiswas the last flash of his genius ; he diedin the neighbourhood of the town abovementioned,on the 21st of October,1771, in the fifty-first year of his age.A monument was erected to his memoryby his wife, with a Latin inscriptionby Dr. Armstrong ; and three yearsafter his death, a monumental pillarwas also erected in honour of him, onthe banks of the Severn, near the housewhere he was born, by his cousin, JamesSmollett, Esq., with a Latin inscription,revised and corrected by Dr.Johnson.In person, Smollett was stout andwell-proportioned, and had an engagingcountenance ; his manner was reserved,and had an air of dignity about it, thatseemed to indicate he was not unconsciousof his own powers. His dispositionwas generous and humane ;though free from vanity, he had a considerableshare of pride and sensibility ;and his passions, easily moved, weretoo impetuous when roused. " Hewas," says Dr. Moore, " of an intrepid,independent, imprudent disposition ;equally incapable of deceit and adulation,and more disposed to cultivate theacquaintance of those he could serve,than of those who could serve him."He is said to have drawn his own character,and* described his manner ofliving, in the Expedition of HumphreyClinker, where young Belford, introducedto Dick Ivy, is supposed to dinewith him at his house in Chelsea. Inthis sketch he describes himself as " oneof the few writers of the age that standupon their own foundation, withoutpatronage, and above dependence," andadds, " S is not without weaknessand caprice ; yet he is certainly good-humouredand civilized ; nor do 1 findthat there is any thing overbearing,LITERATURE.cruel, or implacable in his disposition."He died so poor, that the tragedy ofVenice Preserved was performed forthe benefit of his widow, some timeafter his death, with a prologue, writtenby Houston Nicholson, Esq., in whichthe various works of Smollett areenumerated.His fame as a writer will be perpetuatedonly by his works of fiction ;the historian will be forgotten in thenovelist, and if not, he is, in this character,too much surpassed by Hume,Robertson, and Gibbon, to make a permanentimpression on posterity. Withthese, however, he is not unworthy ofcomparison; for, although immeasurablydistanced by them in the qualitiesof judgment, accuracy, and impartiality; in elegance and animation ofstyle, he is not exceeded by any ofthem. He has been accused of mutabilityin his political sentiments, andhe certainly has bestowed upon thesame persons both praise and invective ;but he did this from no sordid motive ;and if, in the heat of prejudice, he doesnot always preserve his consistency, henever once seems to have forfeited hisindependence.No author approaches him in fecundityand versatility of writing; andwhether we view him as a poet, novelist,historian, or critic, he presents uswith a degree of excellence in each,that few could have obtained, who hadattempted all of these departments ofliterature. No review has yet appearedequal to The Critical Review, for ana-libationand research ; and, to saynothing of the merits of the subject ofour memoir as a novelist, his poetryalone would entitle him to a distinguishedrank among the bards of thelast century. His Tears of Scotland,and Ode to Leven Water, evince greattenderness, polish, and feeling; and Dr.Aikin justly remarks, that his Ode toIndependence has, perhaps, few superiorsin the lyric strain.The following characteristic andaffecting anecdote is told by Dr. Moore,of Smollett, on his going to Scotlandto visit his mother, as a stranger, aftera long separation from her: With theconnivance of Mrs. Telfer, on his arrival,he was introduced to his motheras a gentleman from the West Indies,who was intimately acquainted withher son. The better to support hisassumed character, lie endeavoured topreserve a very serious countenance,approaching to a frown ; but while theold lady's eyes were rivetted with akind of wild and eager stare on hiscountenance, he could not refrain fromsmiling : she immediately sprung fromher chair, and throwing her arms roundhis neck, exclaimed, " Ah, my son !my son ! 1 have found you at* last !"She afterwards told him, that if he hadkept his austere look, and continued togloom, he might have escaped detectionsome time longer ; " but your oldroguish smile," added she, " betrayedyou at once."MARK AKENSIDE.MARK AKENSIDE, the son of abutcher, at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, wasborn there on November the 9th, 1721.His parents were dissenters, and, beingintended for a minister of that sect, hewas, in 1739, sent to the University ofEdinburgh, after having completed thefirst part of his education at the gram-mareschalof his native town. Preferring,however, the study of physic tothat of divinity, he honourably returneda sum he had received from the dissenters'fund for the assistance of youngmen of scanty fortune, about to becomepastors ; and, in 1741, he went to Leyden,where, on the 16th of May, 1744,he took his degree of M.D. His thesisupon this occasion, was published, entitledDe Ort et Incremento FoetusHumani ; and in the same year appearedhis Pleasures of Imagination.When the copy was first presented toDodsley, the publisher, for the price of120, he consulted Pope as to the valueof the work, who, having looked into it,advised him not to make a niggardlyoffer, for " this was no every daywriter." His poem was received withMARK AKENSIDE,great applause, and at once establishedhis poetical fame ; but a portion of it, inwhich he had adopted Shaftesbury'sassertion of the efficacy of ridicule forthe discovery of truth, drew upon himthe attack ot Warburton, against whomhe was defended by an anonymousfriend, afterwards discovered to be Mr.Jeremiah Tyson.His next publication was An Epistleto Curio, under which name he attackedPulteney, Earl of Bath, on accountof his political conduct, with greatvehemence. Johnson calls it "a veryacrimonious epistle;" whilst Hutchinson,in his Biographia Medica, terms it animpressive, moral, and sensible production."In 1745, he published hisfirst collection of odes, and shortly afterwardshe commenced the practice ofhis profession at Northampton. Fromhence he removed to Hampstead, wherehe continued about two years and ahalf, and then fixed his residence inLondon, where he would, in all probability,have fallen into indigence, butfor the assistance of Mr. Tyson, whoallowed him j300 a-year. In time,however, he acquired a tolerable shareof practice, and considerable medicalreputation ; and he was successivelyappointed a fellow of the Royal Society,physician to St. Thomas's Hospital, andone of the physicians to the queen,having been previously admitted, bymandamus, to the degree of M.D. atCambridge, and elected a fellow of theRoyal College of" Physicians in London.In his medical character, however, henever attained to considerable eminence,though he might probably have doneso, had not a putrid fever cut short hisexistence, and deprived him of life onthe 23rd of June, 1770, in the forty-ninthyear of his age. In addition "tothe works already mentioned, Akensidepublished several professional treatises,most of which appeared in the PhilosophicalTransactions; besides hisDissertation de Dysentery, which hasbeen justly commended as an elegantspecimen of Latinity, and was twicetranslated into English. His poemswere collected and published in a quartovolume in 1772.As a poet, Akenside's reputation restssolely upon his Pleasures of Imagination,"which, for chasteness of design,purity of moral, and richness of imagery,must ever be admired. The remark,however, of Johnson, is in some measurejust, that " the reader wanders throughthe gay diffusion, sometimes amazed,and sometimes delighted ; but, aftermany turnings in the flowery labyrinth,comes out as he went in." His versificationis one of the most perfect modelsof blank verse ; " his periods," saysMrs. Barbauld, " are long but harmonious; the cadences fall with grace, andthe measure is supported with uniformdignity." From a desire, however, toavoid low and trivial expressions, heoccasionally approaches nearer to stiffnessthan stateliness ; becomes obscurethrough fear of simplicity, and feeblethrough too rich a redundancy of ornament.Of his odes, Johnson observes,nothing favourable can be said ; andw hi respect to his lyrics, that histhoughts are cold, and his words inelegant;but his odes to the Bishop ofWinchester, to the Earl of Huntingdon,to Mr. Hall, to Dr. Harding, and tothe celebrated Charles Townshend, aresufficient evidence that the great critic'sopinion was not well considered.Nicholls says, in his Literary Anecdotes,that Mr. Elliott, father of LordMio, being commended on all sidesfor an admirable speech made by himin support of the Scotch militia, replied,if I was above myself, I can accountfor it ; for I had been animated by thesublime ode of Dr. Akenside."Various representations of the characterof our poet have been given ;some affirming that he was morose,haughty, servile, and deistical; andothers, that he was friendly and liberal,benevolent, and consistently independent.Certain it is, that he had morephilosophy than religion ; that, on hisappointment of physician to the queen,he changed more than one line of hisverses in a second edition, to accommodatethem" to the politics of the court ;and that whatever his conduct mighthave been among friends, it was withstrangers repulsive and disgusting. Hisgreatest praise is, that he was a man ofhonour and morality, and a lover andencourager of virtue and learning. Thephysician in Peregrine Pickle is wellknown to have been intended, bySmollett, for Akenside ; it is, doubtless,overdrawn, but it is not so wide of themark as Mr. D' Israeli, in his CalamitiesLITERATURE.of Authors, seems to insinuate. SirJohn Hawkins describes him as a mostentertaining companion ; and says, " hisconversation was of the most delightfulkind, learned, instructive, and, withoutany affectation of wit, cheerful, and entertaining."As a physician, Dr. Lett-somrelates him to have been themost supercilious and unfeeling one, inhis treatment of pupils and patients atthe hospital, he had ever known. Oneof the latter, not being able to swallowthe boluses of bark, ordered by A ken-side,he directed the sister of the wardto discharge the sufferer from the hospital; adding, " he shall not die undermy care." Sometimes he would ordersome of the patients, on his visitingdays, to precede him with brooms toclear the way and prevent the diseasedfrom too nearly approaching him ; and,being upbraided, on one of these occasions,for his cruelty, by one of thegovernors, " Know," said he, " thouart a servant of this charity." Hewould, however, at times, condescendto explain, skilfully, a case to his pupils,of which, notwithstanding his irritabletemper, he had a greater number thanthe more urbane and equally able Dr.Russell.A peculiarity of Akenside was theneatness and elegance of his dress ;he wore a large white stiff curled wig,and carried a long sword ; and this,together with a hitch in his gait, anda pale, pompous, and solemn countenance,made his appearance altogetherunpromising, if not grotesque. Henever married, and is said to havespoken of females with harshness anddisgust, in consequence of a disappointmentin love ; but " hapless," observesDr. Lettsom, " must have been thatfemale, who should have been placedunder his tyranny."WILLIAM COLLINS.WILLIAM COLLINS, the son of ahatter, was born at Chichester, about theyear 1721. He was educated at WinchesterSchool, and, at the age of nineteen,stood first on the list of scholarsupon the foundation, for New College,Oxford, but there being no vacancy, hewas admitted a commoner of Queen's,and, in 1741, was elected a demy ofMagdalen College. His literary exercisesat the university are said to haveexhibited much genius and great indolence,and a mind ill calculated to poreover the intricate and puzzling problemsof Euclid. Whilst he wasat Magdalen College, he wrote hispoetical epistle to Sir Thomas Hammer,and his Oriental Eclogues, which, inthe year 1742, were published underthe title of Persian Eclogues. Thebest of these is Hassan the CamelDriver ; but the whole evince muchpoetical taste and feeling, though, itseems, they met with but moderatesuccess. After having graduated B.A.he, in 1744, came to London, with noother prospects than those of a literaryadventurer, with many projects in hishead, and little money in his pocket.This was soon dissipated, and althoughhe had abilities that would have quicklysupplied his pecuniary wants, his naturalindolence would not suffer him toact beyond the sketch of a plan or atitle-page. Among other schemes, hepublished proposals for the History ofthe Revival of Learning, but it does notappear that a page of it was ever written.At length, in 1746, after having enduredthe servility of dependence to amost degrading extent, he publishedhis Odes, descriptive and allegorical,the sale of which, it is said, was notsufficient to pay for the printing. Suchwas the disgust of Collins, that he returnedto the publisher, Millar, thetrifling advance that was made to him,and burnt all the unsold copies. His indignationis not to be wondered at, whenit is considered, that among these odeswere some that are now the most popularin our language, and that one of themwas his celebrated Ode to the Passions.His pecuniary distress now increased,and being arrested shortly afterwards,he procured his release by an advancefrom the booksellers, on his undertakinga translation of Aristotle's Poetics.WILLIAM COLLINS,On his getting out of the hands of thebailiff, he paid a visit to his uncle,Colonel Martin, then with his regimentin Flanders, who treated him withgreat kindness, and at his death, bequeathedto him a legacy of 2,000.He was now raised to a state of comparativeaffluence, but no sooner were hisphysical comforts secured, than a depressionof spirits succeeded, whichended in an almost absolute alienationof mind. To use the words of Dr. Johnson," Collins, who, while he studied tolive, felt no evil but poverty, no soonerlived to study, than his life was assailedby the more dreadful calamities ofdisease and insanity."On his feeling the first approachesof this dreadful malady, he took to thebottle for relief, and, in the same hope,passed some time in France; but, onhis return to England, he relapsed intoa state that led to his confinementin a house of lunatics, whence he afterwardsreturned to the care of his sisterin Chichester, where he died in 1756.In his last moments he had many lucidintervals, and Dr. Johnson, who visitedhim a short time before his death, foundhim with the New Testament : " Ihave but one book," said Collins, " butthat is the best." He was also visitedat Chichester, by Dr. Wanton and hisbrother, to whom he spoke with disapprobationof his Oriental eclogues, asnot sufficiently expressive of Asiaticmanners, and" called them his IrishEclogues. Collins's malady was a deficiencyrather of his vital than intellectualpowers, and much of that"abandonment of soul," which markedthe close of his life, has been ascribedto his attachment to a young ladywho did not return his passion, Theobject of his adoration was born theday before him ; and to this circumstancehe made, in one of his gay moments,the following happy allusion.Yours is a hard case," said a friend ;It is so, indeed," said Collins ; " forI came into the world a day after thefair."At Chichester, says Mr. D' Israeli,tradition has preserved some strikingand affecting occurrences of the lastdays of the unhappy Collins. He would,it is said, haunt the aisles and cloistersof the cathedral, roving nights anddays together ; and when the choristerschaunted their anthem, the listeningand bewildered poet, carried out ofhimself by the solemn strains and hisown too susceptible imagination, moanedand shrieked, and awoke a sadnessand terror most affecting in so solemna place.The character of Collins appears tohave been amiable, and though he wasgiven to idleness and dissipation, hismorals, says Johnson, were pure, andhis opinions pious. " His appearance,"adds the doctor, " was decent and manly ;his knowledge considerable ; his viewsextensive ; his conversation elegant, andhis disposition cheerful. ' He was sofree from vanity with respect to hisown compositions, that alter showingthem to a friend, he would often snatchthem away and throw them into thefire ; and it is probable that many ofhis finest pieces were thus destroyed.As a poet, he is incontestably one ofthe finest ode writers this countryhas produced ; both his temperamentand his genius were, in the strictestsense of the word, poetical ; and, underhappier circumstances, he would probablyhave left behind him memorialsof excellence in more than one style ofpoetry. In splendour and sublimity ofthought, originality of idea, and 'felicityof expression, he is surpassed bynone of his contemporaries ; but hesometimes loses himself in flights ofwild grandeur, where the generality ofreaders will find it hard to follow him,Johnson says that his diction was oftenharsh, unskilfully laboured, and injudiciouslyselected; and that his poemsupon the whole extort praise, withoutaffording pleasure : but the reputationof Collins is too firmly established tobe affected by the censures even of thegreat critic, who has considered hisworks in the double character of friendand biographer.LITERATURE.CHRISTOPHER SMART.CHRISTOPHER SMART was bornat Sliipbourne, in Kent, on the llth ofApril, 1722, and received the first partof his education at Maidstone and Durham,whence, in 1739, he was sent toCambridge, and admitted of PembrokeHall. He is said to have evinced ataste for poetry at the early age of fouryears, and he was enabled to pursuehis future studies, by the bounty of theDuchess of Cleveland, who allowed hima pension of 40 a year until her deathin 1742; and by the Barnard family, towhose liberality he was probably indebtedfor his subsequent subsistence atthe university, his gratitude for which isexpressed in his Ode to Lord Barnard.During the early part of his residence atCambridge, he wrote the Tripos Poems,and shortly afterwards translated intoLatin, successively, Pope's Ode on St.Cecilia's Day, and his Essay on Criticism.In 1743, he graduated B.A., andobtained a fellowship in July, 1745 ;about which time he wrote a comedy,called A Trip to Cambridge ; but a ludicroussoliloquy of the Princess Periwinkle,printed in The Old Woman'sMagazine, and a few songs, are all thathave been preserved of it, though itappears to have been acted, with applause,at his college. In 1747, hegraduated M A., and for the next sixsuccessive years, with the exception ofthe fifth, he" obtained the Newtonian prizefor his poems, entitled The Eternity,The Immensity, The Omniscience, ThePower, and The Goodness of theSupreme Being: all of which he subsequentlypublished.In 1753, he married the daughter-in-lawof Mr. Newbery, a projector ofvarious periodical miscellanies, in whichhe had been assisted by Smart, particularlyin The Student, or Oxford andCambridge Miscellany ; and The Midwife,or Old Woman's Magazine. Duringthe publication of the latter work, Smartprinted his prologue and epilogue toOthello, when acted at Drury LaneTheatre by the Laval family ; a productionof which he thought so highly,that he gave a solemn notice of his intentionto prosecute all who shouldpirate them, or any part of them. Hehad already published a collection ofhis poems, which, though generallypraised, called forth some animadversionsfrom the reviewers, which madeour author their implacable enemy ;and in the year last-mentioned, he produceda satire, called The Hi Iliad,named after Dr. John Hill, whom hesupposed to be the author of the criticismson his poems, in The MonthlyReview. It was a most bitter and ablesatire ; but, considering the contemptiblecharacter of the critic it attacked,exhibited more acerbity than judgment.Hill had the credit of writing aMartial, which only served to set oft'the merit of the other.Between 1754 and 1756, Smart labouredunder a dangerous illness,brought on by intemperance, and pecuniaryembarrassments, which preyedupon his mind to such a degree, that hewas for some time in a state of lunacy,that rendered his confinement necessary.He had previously entered intoan engagement to write in The UniversalVisitor and Memorialist, and in no otherwork ; to secure his" profits in whichDr. Johnson kindly contributed a fewpapers ; " not then," he added, " knowingthe terms on which Smart wasengaged to write, and thinking I wasdoing him good. I hoped his witswould soon return to him. Mine returnedto me, and I wrote in TheUniversal Visitor no longer." Afterhis recovery, he appears to have receiveda pension of ^,50 a year from theTreasury ; and, in 1757, he publisheda prose translation of the works ofHorace, from which he derived moreprofit than fame. Pecuniary distresses,however, seem to have again come uponhim, for, in 1759, Garrick gave him theprofits of a free benefit, and he also seemsto have received assistance from Dr.James, Dr. Burney, and other eminent |literary men of his day. In 1763, hepublished A Song to David, whichCHRISTOPHER SMART.has justly been deemed a wonder inthe moral world, and no less deservingthe investigation of the philosophers,than the admiration of the lovers ofpoetry. It was composed while theunfortunate bard was confined in amad-house : and, in the absence ofpen, ink, and paper, which were deniedhim, was written on the walls of hisroom with a key. It is a sublime production,and glows with religious fervour.His Song to David was followedby a small volume of Poems on SeveralOccasions; and, in 1764, by Hannah,an oratorio, and an Ode to the Earl ofNorthumberland ; in all of which hedisplayed that fine though wild fervour,which proceeds from a disturbed andpoetic imagination. In 1765, he publisheda poetical translation of the Fablesof Phaedrus, which, though executedwith neatness and fidelity, has neverobtained popularity. His Translationsof Psalms, which followed in the sameyear, scarcely rose above the level ofSternhold and Hopkins, and showed themental powers of the author to belamentably on the decay ; nor was hislast publication, in 1768, entitled theParables of our Lord done into FamiliarVerse, a happier effort. Its not knownin. what manner he passed his latteryears, but probably in poverty and embarrassment,as he died in the rules ofthe King's Bench, on the 18th ofMay, 1770, leaving a widow and twodaughters.The character of Smart was a singularmixture of piety and dissipation, conceitand reserve : he was liberal to afault, shy in company, though engagingin conversation ; vain of his own abilities,pleasing in his manners, andslovenly in his habits. His madness,according to Dr. Johnson, discovereditself chiefly in unnecessary deviationsfrom the usual customs of the world,in things not improper in themselves.He would fall, it is said, upon hisknees, and say his prayers in thestreet, or in any unusual place, andinsist on people praying with him.The following anecdote is told of hisbashfulness : Having undertaken tointroduce his wife to Lord Darlington,with whom he was well acquainted, hehad no sooner mentioned her name tohis lordship, than he retreated suddenly,as if stricken with a panic, from theroom, and from the house, leaving herto follow, overwhelmed with confusion.As a poet, Smart has been raised, bysome, to a level with Gray and Mason ; jand he is certainly not inferior to either iin originality of thought or refinement of itaste. His fables possess great merit; 'his religious poems are animated and isublime, and his translations of Horace ;faithful and spirited. Both himself and ihis works were held in esteem by manyof the literary men of eminence of hisday, and Pope, Johnson, Garrick, andHawkesworth, were among his intimatefriends.WILLIAM MASON.WILLIAM MASON, the son of thevicar of Trinity Hall, in the East Ridingof Yorkshire, "was born there in 1725.His father seems to have been his earlyinstructor, and, as he acknowledges inan Epistolary Address, written in histwenty-first year, indulged his youthfulfancy in its bent for poetry andpainting. In 1742-3, he was sent toSt. John's College, Cambridge, wherehe graduated M. A. ; but little is recordedof his early academical career,except that he published his Monody tothe Memory of Pope, in 1747. In thesame year he became acquainted withGray, who had just migrated from PeterHouse to Pembroke Hall, and throughthe interest of Gray, he writes, "I havehad the honour, since I came here last,to be elected bv the fellows of Pembroke,into their society ; but the master,who has the power of a negative,has made use of it on this occasion ;"and his election, in consequence, wasnot confirmed until 1749. In the previousyear, he had published his poemof Isis", to which we have alluded in ourmemoir of Thomas Wharton, by whomit vas successfully answered. In 1752,he published his Elfride, a dramaticLITERATURE.poem, which was afterwards adapted tothe stage, and produced at Covent Garden,by Colman, with music by Dr. Arne,but met with little success, which wasnot increased on a subsequent representation,with the author's ownalterations. On the first occasion he issaid to have been so much offended withthe alterations, that he meditated retaliating,in a very angry address toColman ; who, on his part, threatenedto introduce a chorus of Greek washerwomeninto some future stage entertainment.In the year 1754, he tookholy orders, and he was, shortly after,through the in rest of the Earl of Wilderness,appointed a king's chaplain,and preferred to the living of Aston.The reputation his odes in his Elfridehad acquired for him, in that species ofcomposition, encouraged him, in 1756,to publish four productions of the sameclass, entitled Memory, Independency,Melancholy, and the Fate of Tyranny ;which, instead, however,of being favourablyreceived, as he had anticipated,were criticised with great seventy ; andColman and Lloyd published two excellentparodies on one of them. Onthe death of Cibber, the poet laureate,he was proposed as his successor ; but,instead of an offer of the appointment,Lord John Cavendish apologised tohim, on the ground, that, " being inorders, he was thought, merely on thataccount, less eligible for the office thanalayman." In noticing this circumstancein his Life of whitehead, hesays, " a reason so politely put, I wasglad to hear assigned ; and if I hadthought it a weak one, they who knowme will readily believe that I am thelast man in the world who would haveattempted to controvert it." The opinionis, that if expected to fulfil its duties, hewould not have esteemed himself honouredby the appointment ; for thoughby his mediation the office was tenderedto his friend Gray, it was " with permissionto hold it as a mere sinecure."The fame he had apparently lost bythe severity with which his odes werehandled, he amply recovered by thepublication of his Caractacus, in 1759,a dramatic poem, in the style of hisElfride, but with more poetry andpassion, and with touches of nature,which, although sometimes spoiled byuseless expletives, are, in general, just,natural, and affecting. In 1776, it.was arranged and produced at CoventGarden, where it was received withconsiderable applause, but it has obtainedno permanent rank upon thestage. He, in the interval, (in 1762,)published three elegies, which havebeen pronounced elegant, tender, andcorrect, beyond similar productions ofany of his contemporaries. These, withallhis former pieces, except the InstallationOde, and the Isis, were collectedand published in one volume, in1764, prefaced by an exquisite dedicatorysonnet to his patron, the Earl ofHolder esse. In the same year theking preferred him to the canonry andprebend of Driffield, together with theprecentorship to the see of Bristol, allattached to the cathedral church ofYork. At this time his principal residencewas at Aston, where his literarypursuits did not prevent him frommost assiduously discharging his clericalduties. In September, 1765, he marrieda daughter of William Sherman, Esq.,of Kingston-upon-Hull ; but she diedof a decline, at Bristol, in 1767, duringwhich interval, it is said, he had littleintermission Jo watching the progressof the consumption which terminatedher life : and the lines he wrote on theoccasion were so full of tender regret,that it would not be easy to discover amore touching effusion in the wholerange of elegiac poetry.In 1772, he published the first partof his famous work on the English Garden,a production, says Wanton, inwhich " didactic poetry is brought toperfection, by the happy combinationof judicious precepts with the mostelegant ornaments of language andimagery." The work was read withavidity ; and the remaining books werepublished at intervals sufficiently distantto admit all the niceties of polishand correction, which he so studiouslyattended to. In 1775, he published hisLife of Gray, who had left him all hisbooks, manuscripts, &c., and a legacyof 5QQ. The work was written in anengaging manner, and as impartiallyas could be expected from a friend andlegatee ; it went through several editions,and is still popular. He nowturned his attention to politics ; andhis progress in his opinions are an admirableexposition of the vicissitudes toW1T.IIAM MASON,which eager assertors of theoretic libertyare subject. His political creedhe published in 1779, in the shape ofan Ode to a Naval Officer of Great Britain,written immediately after the trialof Admiral Keppel. He disapprovedof the conduct of the British governmenttowards America; thought thedecision of parliament on the Middlesexelection a violation of the rights of thepeople ; and gave such offence at court,that he found it convenient to resignhis chaplaincy to the king. His tastefor the arts led him very early in life toundertake, merely as a school exercise,it is said, to translate Du Frenzy's Artof Painting ; but finding it more difficultthan he had imagined, he laid itby, and it would probably never haveappeared, had not Sir Joshua Reynoldsrequested a sight of it, and offered toillustrate it by a series of notes. Itwas accordingly published in 1783, andwas very favourably received. To thissucceeded his last poetical publication,entitled A Secular Ode in Commemorationof the Glorious Revolution of 1688 ;and shortly after, he wrote the Life ofhis friend, William Whitehead. In1795, he printed his Es^-ay, Historicaland Critical, on English Church Musicawork deserving of more attention thanit has received. At the age of seventy-two,up to which time he had enjoyedrobust health, he received a hurt in hisfoot, while stepping into his carriage,which ended in mortification, and producedhis death on the 7th of April,1797.When Mason was at Cambridge, hewas described, by Gray, as a young manof much fancy, little judgment, and agood deal of modesty ;" " a good andwell-meaning creature," he adds, " butinsimplicity a child : he reads little ornothing, writes abundance, and thatwith a design to make a fortune by it ;is a little vain, but in so harmless andcomical a way, that it does not offend ;a little ambitious, but withal so ignorantof the world and its ways, that this doesnot hurt him in one's opinion; so sincereand undisguised, that no mind witha spark of generosity would ever thinkof hurting him, he lies so open to injury; but so indolent, that it he cannotovercome this habit, all his good qualitieswill signify nothing at all." Inmany of these respects, his acquaintancewith the world materially altered hischaracter; but, upon the whole, he maybesaid to have resembled the portrait,with little variation, to the end of hislife.His knowledge of music was veryaccurate ; Dr. Burney observes, that hewas not only an excellent poet andan able divine, but a dilettante painterand musician ; and in the last capacitiesan acute critic." And Dr. Gleig,in an elaborate article on that subject,in his Supplement to the EncyclopaediaBritannica, goes so far as to attribute tohim the improvement, if not the invention,of the piano-forte. As a poet,his name has been so frequently coupledwith that of Gray, and their meritshave been supposed to approach sonearly, that what has been said of theone, will, in some degree, apply to theother. His compositions have ah thevariety of a fertile invention ; andhis correctness is almost proverbial.In the edition of English Poets, publishedin 1810, it is said, that Masonleft his poems, and some unpublishedworks, tor the benefit of a charitableinstitution.THOMAS Wanton.LTHOMAS Wanton, son of a clergyman,was born at his father's vicarageof Basingstoke, in Hampshire, in theyear 1728. He was for some timeplaced at Basingstoke School, and fromhis earliest years discovered a fondnessfor reading, and a taste for poetry. InMarch, 1743, he was admitted a commonerof Trinity College, Oxford, andwas soon after elected a scholar. In1745, he seems to have furnished oneor two pieces to Dodsley's Museum ;but his first detached publication washis Pleasures of Melancholy, of whichthe original copy is said to differ materiallyfrom that he afterwards insertedLITERATURE.in his works. In 1749, at which timehe had taken his bachelor's degree, hewas encouraged by the head of his college,Dr. Huddesford, to publish hisTriumph of Isis ; occasioned by theappearance of Mason's Isis, in which theloyalty of the Oxonians was called inquestion, in consequence of a riot bysome of the students. This publicationgained him great reputation, and Masonacknowledged its superiority to hisown. In 1750, he contributed a fewpieces to The Student, or Oxford andCambridge Miscellany, amongst whichhis Progress of Discontent particularlyadded to his fame. His talents nowbegan to be generally acknowledged inhis university, arid he was appointedto hold the office of poet laureate, inthe common room of Trinity College.In the year last-mentioned, he graduatedM. A. ; and succeeded to a fellowshipin 1751, in which year hepublished Newmarket, a satire ; AnOde to Music ; and Verses on theDeath of Frederick, Prince of Wales ;which were inserted in the Oxford collection,under the assumed name ofJohn Whether. In 1753, he publisheda collection of poems, at Edinburgh ;and about a year afterwards, he printedhis Observations on the Faerie Queeneof Spenser, a work by which he establishedhis character as an acute critic,and opened that new field of criticismand illustration, in which Steevens,Malone, Reed, Todd, and others, havefigured so conspicuously. On the resignationof Professor Hawkins, in 1757,he was elected professor of poetry,which office he held for the ten yearsto which it is limited ; and during thisperiod, he increased his reputation bythe elegance and originality of his lectures.In the year 1760, he printed ahumorous piece, entitled A Companionto the Guide, and a Guide to the Companion,which quickly passed throughthree editions, and a fourth appearedin 1806. In 1767, he took the degreeof B. D.; in 1771, he was elected aF. R. S. ; and in the October of the sameyear, he was instituted to the smallliving of Haddington, in Oxfordshire.In 1774, he published the first volumeof the most important of all his works,his History of English Poetry ; a secondvolume appeared in 1778, and athird in 1781. This was to have beensucceeded by a fourth, and from the research,judgment and taste displayed inthe three first, it is to be regretted thathe did not carry his whole design intoexecution.He had for some time been makingcollections for a parochial History ofOxfordshire ; and, as a specimen, heprinted a few copies of the History ofHaddington, which were distributedamongst his friends ; but, in 1782, anedition was offered to the public. Sometimeafterwards, he was promoted to adonative in Somersetshire ; and in 1785,he succeeded the present Lord Swellas Camden professor of history, and alsosucceeded Whitehead in the office ofpoet laureate. An attack of the goutrendered his removal to B.ith necessary,in 1789; and in May of the followingyear, he died at Oxford, from the effectsof paralysis ; and was buried withacademical honours, in the chapel ofTrinity College.He 'is described as having been of atemper habitually calm, and of a dispositiongentle, friendly, and forgiving;although 'Mr. Man, who prefixed hislife to a posthumous edition of hispoems, affirms that Dr. Johnson saidof him, " he was the only man of geniusthat he knew without a heart." He isalso charged, but upon no very cleargrounds, with having been a lover oflow company, and that he disgraced hischaracter by a constant association withhumble tradesmen, mechanics, or peasants.In addition to the works alreadymentioned, he wrote Numbers Thirty-three,Ninety-three, and Ninety-six ofThe Idler; a Description of the'City ofWinchester ; an edition of Theocritus ;the Life and Literary Remains of Dr.Ralph Bathurst; Life of Sir T. 1'ope ;An Inquiry into the Authenticity ofthe Poems attributed to Rowley ; andan edition of the smaller poems ofMilton, with curious and valuable notes.In 1802, his Poetical Works, with anaccount of his life above alluded to,appeared, in two volumes, octavo; buthis reputation rests principally on hisHistory of Engli h Poetry, an editionof which, in four octavo volumes, withnotes and index, was published a fewyears ago.OLIVER G O L l> S M I T H .OLIVER GOLDSMITH.OLIVER GOLDSMITH, the son ofa clergyman, was, according to somewriters, born in 1729, at Elphin, inRoscommon. Ireland ; but, accordingto the inscription on his monument, atFemes, in the province of Leinster, onthe 29th of November, 1731. Afterha. ing acquired the rudiments of educationat a private school, he was, inJune, 1744, admitted a sizer of TrinityCollege, Dublin, where lie graduatedB. A., in 1749, but did not display remarkableabilities in the course of hisacademical studies. Being destinedfor the medical profession, he attendedsome courses of anatomy in Dublin ;and, in 1751, entered the University otEdinburgh, where he studied medicineunder the different professors. Histhoughtless, though generous, disposition,soon involved him in difficulties ;and in order to avoid arrest for the debtof a friend, for which he lead made himselfresponsible, he was obliged to quitScotland abruptly. He arrived at sunderlandin the early part o: 1754, whenhis person was secured, but, being released,through the friendship of Dr.Sleigh, he sailed to Rotterdam ; and,after visiting great part of Flanders,proceeded to Louvain, where he remainedsome time, at the expense othis uncle, and took his degree of bachelorin physic. Hence, it is said, withonly one clean shirt, and no money inhis pocket, he set out on foot fur Geneva,which he reached by a circuitous route,in the course of which he supportedhimself by his abilities, musical andclassical. "My learning," he says,procured me a favourable reception atmost of the religious houses I visited,and whenever 1 approached a peasant'shouse, I played one of my most merrytunes, and that generally procured menot only a lodging, but subsistence forthe next day ; this, however, was notthe case with the rich, who generallydespised both me and my music."On his arrival at Geneva, he wasappointed tutor and travelling companionto a young gentleman of fortune,with whom he continued until theyentered the south of France, where, inconsequenceof a disagreement, theyparted. Goldsmith, however, did notturn his steps homeward, till he hadstill further gratified his passion fortravel, although he was obliged to resortto his flute, as before, for lodgingand subsistence. The death of hisuncle, during our author's stay abroad,had reduced him to these exigencies,and on his arrival in London, in thewinter of 1758, a few halfpence constitutedthe whole of his finances. Inthis extremity, he applied for employmentto the apothecaries, but hisawkward appearance, and broad Irishaccent, were much against him ; andit was only from motives of humanity,that a chemist, at length, consented totake him into his service. Hearing,however, that his old friend, Dr. Sleigh,was in London, he paid him a visit, andaccepted an asylum in his house, butsoon afterwards left it, for an ushershipat the Rev. Dr. Miller's academy atPelham. In this situation he did notremain long; for, having obtained onereputation iron critic ; sis he had writtenin i he Monthly Review, he enteredinto an engagement with the proprietor,and, coming to London, took lodgingsnear the Old Bailey, and commencedauthorship as a profession. Besideswriting for The Review, lie produced aweekly pamphlet, called The Bee; AnInquiry into the Present State of Learningin Europe; and contributed severalEssays to The Public Ledger, in whichhisCiiizen of the World appeared, underthe title of Chinese Letters. Thesepublications had brought him both fameand emolument, and, in 1765, at whichtime he resided in the Temple, headded to them by the production of hiscelebrated poem of The Traveller.This had been written during his residenceabroad, and was revised andprinted at the recommendation of Dr.Johnson, his acquaintance with whomwas soon followed by that of othereminent literary characters of the day.In 1766, appeared his Vicar of Wakefield,and his History of England, in aLITERATURE.series of letters, two of his most successfulperformances, and which were receivedwith immediate applause. In1768, his comedy of The Good-naturedMan was brought out at Covent Garden,with a prologue by Dr. Johnson ;but the success of it was not proportionateto its merits. In 1770, appearedhis exquisite poem of TheDeserted Village, for which he received100, but could hardly be prevailedupon to accept it, until satisfied that theprofits of the bookseller could affordthat sum. It is, indeed, said by oneof his biographers, that lie went backand returned the money, observing,he had not been easy since he receivedit ;" and left it to the bookseller to payhim according to the profits of the sale.In 1772, was acted his celebratedcomedy of She Stoops to Conquer, concerningthe acceptance and success ofwhich he appears to have been equallyanxious and doubtful. His letter to Col-man,about this time, does not representhis circumstances in a very favourablelight : " I have, as you know," hesays, " a large sum of money to makeupshortly ; by accepting my play, Ican readily satisfy my creditors thatway ; at any rate, I must look about tosome certainty to be prepared. ForGod's sake, take the play, and let usmake the best of it ; and let me havethe same measure, at least, which youhave given as bad plays as mine."During the first performance of thecomedy, he is said to have walked allthe time in St. James's Park, in greatuneasiness, until, thinking it must beover, he hastened to the theatre. Hisears were assailed with hisses as he enteredthe green-room ; when he eagerlyinquired of Mr. Colman the cause.Pshaw ! pshaw !" said Colman, " don'tbe afraid of squibs, when we have beensitting on a barrel of gunpowder thesetwo hours." The fact was, that thecomedy had been completely successful,and that it was the farce which hadexcited these sounds so terrific to Goldsmith.In the following year, his last theatricalpiece, entitled The Grumbler, afarce, altered from Sedley, was acted,for the benefit of Mr. Quick ; but it wasnot repeated, and was never printed.His other productions are, a RomanHistory, a History of England, in fourvolumes, a Grecian History, and aHistory of the Earth and AnimatedNature, compiled from Buffon andothers. He had acquired more than asufficiency, by his writings, for his comfortsand necessaries ; but his indiscriminateand improvident liberality,added to a passion for gaming, renderedhis emoluments comparatively useless;and at length threw him into a state ofdespondency, which terminated in anervous fever, and deprived him of lifeon the 4th of April, 1774. He wasburied in the Temple Church, and amonument was afterwards erected tohis memory in Westminster Abbey, atthe expense of a literary club to whichhe belonged, with an inscription by Dr.Johnson. He is described as a " poet,natural philosopher, and historian ; wholeft no species of writing untouched, orunadorned by his pen, whether to movelaughter, or draw tears. He was apowerful master over the affections,though, at the same time, a gentletyrant; of a genius at once sublime,lively, and equal to every subject : inexpression at once noble, pure, anddelicate."The character of Goldsmith was inthe highest degree good-natured andbenevolent ; he was every one's friend,and any one's dupe; retaining, as hedid, amid all his worldly experience, hisnatural simplicity and philanthropy ofheart. But he was not truly estimable :for he was, with all his good qualities, improvident,dissipated, and meanly jealousof a literary rival. He was also, at times,impetuous and passionate ; but correctedhimself upon a moment's reflection; and it is said his servants wouldthrow themselves in his way upon theseoccasions, as they were certain of beingrewarded after the anger of their masterhad subsided. Mrs. Piozzi describeshim as a poor fretful creature, eaten upwith affectation and envy, and the onlyperson she ever knew who acknowledgedhimself to be envious. It isknown that he used his pen better thanhis tongue; and the same lady callshis conversation a strange mixture ofabsurdity and silliness. Some one whosaw him for the first time in company,declared he was " the most solemncoxcomb he had ever met with ;" andthe phrase of " inspired idiot" is wellknown as applied to him. As an authorOLIVER GOLDSMITH.he is to be considered in the characterof a poet, historical compiler, novelist,essayist, and dramatist ; in all of whichlie has been so far successful, as toleave some work in these respectivedepartments of literature, alone sufficientto perpetuate his reputation. Itis as a poet, however, that he will bechiefly esteemed; The Traveller, TheDeserted Village, and The Hermit, areunrivalled in their class ; and, thoughDr. Aikin has placed them at the headof the minor compositions, will alwaysretain their original popularity. Hisliterary qualifications cannot be betterdescribed than in the words of Dr.Johnson, who calls him " a man ofsuch variety of powers, and such felicityof performance, that he always seemedto do best that which he was doing: aman, who had the art of being minute,without tediousness ; and general, withoutconfusion ; whose language wascopious, without exuberance ; exact,without constraint ; and easy, withoutweakness." Johnson was always readyto testify to the merits of Goldsmith ;and being, one day, of a party at SirJoshua Reynolds's, where several affirmedthat the author of The Travellerhad neither talent nor originality, herose with great dignity, looked themfull in the face, and exclaimed, " Ifnobody was suffered to abuse poor Gold,but those who could write as well, hewould have few censors."Many anecdotes are told of his creduloussimplicity, and indiscriminatebenevolence. Sitting, one evening, atthe tavern where he was accustomed totake his supper, he called for a muttonchop, which was no sooner placed onthe table, than a gentleman near him,with whom he was intimately acquainted,showed great tokens of uneasiness,and wondered how the doctorcould suffer the waiter to place such astinking chop before him. " Stinking!"said Goldsmith, " in good truth I donot smell it." " I never smelled anythingmore unpleasant in my life,"answered the gentleman ; " the fellowdeserves a caning for bringing you meatunfit to eat." " In good troth," saidthe poet, relying on his judgment, " Ithink so too ; but 1 will be less severein my punishment." He instantly calledthe waiter, and insisted that he should eatthe chop, as a punishment. The waiterresisted, but the doctor threatened toknock him down with his cane if hedid not immediately comply. When hehad eaten half the chop, the doctor gavehim a glass of wine, thinking that itwould make the remainder of the sentenceless painful to him. When, thewaiter had finished his repast, Goldsmith'sfriend burst into a loud haugh.What ails you now?" said the poet.Indeed, my good friend," said theother, " I never could think that anyman, whose knowledge of letters is soextensive as yours, could be so great adupe to a stroke of humour : the chopwas as fine a one as I ever saw in univlife." "Was it?" said Dr. Goldsmith,then I will never give credit to whatyou say again ; and so, in good truth,1 think I am even with you." Beingpressed by his tailor for a debt, he appointeda day for payment, and procuredthe money in due time; butbefore the tailor came, Glover called onthe doctor, and related a piteous tale ofhis goods being seized for rent Thethoughtless and benevolent Goldsmithimmediately gave Glover all the moneyhe possessed. When the tailor arrived,Goldsmith assured him that had liecalled a little earlier he should havehad his money ; " but," added he, " Ihave just parted with every penny Ihad in the world to a friend in distress.I should have been a cruel wretch, youknow, not to have relieved him when itwas in my power." In the suite of thedoctor's pensioners was one Jack Islington,who had served the doctor somany tricks, that he despaired of gettingany more money from him, withoutresorting to a chef-d'uzuvre once for all.He accordingly called on the doctor onemorning, and running about the roomin a fit of joy, told him his fortune wasmade. " How so, Jack?" says the doctor.Why," replied Jack, " the Duchess ofMarlborough, you must know, has longhad a strange* penchant for a pair ofwhite mice ; now, as 1 knew they weresometimes to be had in the East Indies,I commissioned a friend of mine, whowas going out there, to get them forme,and he is this morning arrived withtwo of the most beautiful little animalsin nature." After Jack had finishedthis account with a transport of joy, helengthened his visage, by telling thedoctor all was ruined, for without twoLITERATU RE.guineas, to buy a cage for the mice, hecould not present them. The doctor,unfortunately, as he said himself, hadbut half-a-guinea in the world, whichhe offered him. But Pilkington was octobe beat out of his scheme ; he perceivedthe doctor's watch hanging upin his room, and after premising on theindelicacy of the proposal, hinted thatif he could spare that watch for a week,he could raise a few guineas on it,which he would repay him with gratitude.The doctor accordingly tookdown the watch, and gave it to him,which Jack immediately carried to thepawnbroker's, raised hat he could onit, and never once looked after the doctor,till he sent to borrow another haif-a-guinea from him on his death-bed,which the other, under such circumstances,very generously sent him.One afternoon, as Colonel O' Moore andMr. Burke were going to dine with SirJoshua Reynolds, they observed Goldsmith(also on his way to Sir Joshua's)standing near a crowd of people, whowere staring and shouting at someforeign women in the windows of oneof the houses in Leicester Square. " ObserveGoldsmith." said Mr. Burke toColonel Moore, and mark whatpasses between him and me by-and-byat Sir Joshua's.'* They passed on, andarrived ueforeGoldsmith, w no came soonalter, and Mr. Burke affected to receive1 him very coolly. This seemed to vexpoor Goldsmith, who begged Mr. Burkewould tell him how he had the misfortuneto offend him. Burke appearedvery reluctant to speak, but, alter agood deal of pressing, said " that hewas really ashamed to keep up an intimacywith one who could be guilty ofsuch monstrous indiscretions as Goldsmithhad just exhibited in the square."Goldsmith, with great earnestness, protestedhe was unconscious of what wasmeant. ' Why," said Burke, " didyou not exclaim, as you were lookingup at those women, What stupid beaststhe crowd must be for staring with suchadmiration at those painted Jezebels,while a man of my talents passes byunnoticed?" Goldsmith was horror-struck,and said, " Surely, surely, mydear friend, I did not say so." " Nay."i replied Burke, " if you had not saidso, how should I have known it ?"That's true," answered Goldsmith,with great humility : " 1 am very sorry ;it was very foolish : I do recollect thatsomething of the kind passed throughn, y mind, but 1 did not think I haduttered it."CHARLES CHURCHILL.CHARLES CHURCHILL, the sonof the curate of St. John's, Westminster,was born in that parish in February,1731. He received his education atWestminster School, but distinguishedhimself more by his wit and vivacitythan his application to study ; beingrefused admittance to the University ofOxford, on account of deficiency inclassical knowledge. This rejectionwas the origin of the hatred which heafterwards expressed in his works towardsthat university ; from which,however, it is said, that he was repulsedonly on account of the satirical answerswhich he gave to the trifling questionsthat were proposed to him. Matt r thisevent he returned to Westminster,where he was rapidly advancing in hisstudies, when, at the age of little morethan seventeen, he had the imprudenceto marry a young lady of the neighbourhood,which was the source ofmany of his future difficulties. Hewas. however, together with his wife,received into his father's house, wherehe remained studious and tranquil until1751, when he retired to Sunderland,and prepared himself, by a fit course ofreading, for entering the church. Atthe customary age he was ordaineddeacon ; and when a little turned offive-and-twenty, he was ordained priest,by Dr. Sherlock, Bishop ot London,who, alter having examined our author,is said to have exclaimed, " Good God !before what sort pt an examiner mustthis gentleman have been, when hewas pronounced to be deficient insc. elastic education ?"CHARLES CHURCHILL.After this period of his life, the majorityof his biographers assert that heretired to Wales upon a curacy of j30a-year, and turned cyder merchant ; aspeculation which failed, and terminatedin a sort of rural bankruptcy. This iscontradicted by the editor of his works,in 1804. who, in an account of his lifedrawn from the most authentic sources,says that Churchill succeeded to hisfather's curacy of Farnham, in Essex.At this place, according to the latterauthority, he opened a school, but gaveit up on "the death of his father, in 1758,when he came to London, and was appointedto the situation of the former,as curate and lecturer of St. John's.He fulfilled the duties of his office forsome time with great credit and regularity; and, to improve his finances,taught young ladies, at a boarding-school,to read and write English, andgave private lessons in the classics tothe youth of the other sex. " Such,"says his latest biographer, " was CharlesChurchill, until he was twenty-sevenyears of age ; at which time a totalalteration took place in his generalsystem of conduct and behaviour inlife." This alteration is to be dated fromthe renewal of his intimacy with hisfriend, Robert Lloyd, the poet, whoselively and generous, but dissipated disposition,began soon to infect Churchill,and to involve him in pecuniary difficulties,from which he saw no prospectof relief. In this exigency, his friend'sfather, Dr. Lloyd, then second masterof Westminster School, advanced asufficient sum to pay his creditors acomposition of five shillings in thepound, though, to the honour ofChurchill, he afterwards paid themtheir whole demands. At this time heappears to have been intimate withseveral of the wits ; and a desire ofsharing their reputation and of improvinghis circumstances, incited himto a display of his poetical talents. Hisfirst productions were The Bard, andThe Conclave ; neither of which wereprinted, his earliest publication beingthat of The Kosciad, which appearedwithout his name in 1761. It becameat once popular; but the real authorwas so little suspected, that many ofthe reviewers ascribed it to differentwriters by name; and The Critical Reviewdeclared it, in positive terms, tobe the production of Lloyd. To asecond edition Churchill prefixed hisname, and the actors having been loudin their censure against it, he afterwardsjustified his remarks, in An Apology,addressed to the Critical Reviewers ;in which the profession of a player wastreated with equal humour and contempt.These performances obtained for him.immediate celebrity, and an introductionto the first wits of the day, andencouraged him to persevere in a pursuitwhich he found to be more agreeablethan the duties of a parish curate. Hisconduct altered with his sentiments;he plunged into dissipation ; quarrelledand parted from his wife; dressed in ablue coat, and gold-laced waistcoat;and was guilty of so many indiscretions,that at length such an outcry was raisedagainst him, as induced him to resignthe curacy and lectureship of St. John's.His letter" to a friend after this step hadbeen taken, strongly depicts the recklessnessof his character at this periodof his life : " I have got rid," he says,of both my causes of complaint : thewoman I was tired of, and the gownI was displeased with. Why should Ibreathe in wretchedness and a rustygown, when my muse can furnish mewith felicity and a laced coat ? Besides,why should I play the hypocrite? Whyshould I seem contented with my lowlysituation, when I am ambitious to aspireat, and wish for, a much higher ? Whyshould I be called to account, by a dullphlegmatic * * * for not wearing whitethread stockings, when I desire to wearwhite silk ones, and a sword ? In short,I have looked into myself, and I havefound I am better qualified to be a gt riflemanthan a poor curate. I find nopricks of conscience for what I havedone, but am much easier in my mind.I feel myself in the situation of a manthat miscarried a d d heavy loadfor a long way, and then sets it down."He now frequented taverns, and tookpart in the principal midnight orgies,which are faithfully described by CharlesJohnson, in his Adventures of a Guinea.The reproaches which his conduct calledforth he attempted to defend publiclyin a poem, entitled Night, in which hemerely argued that open and avowedprofligacy is less criminal than hypocriticalsanctity. His next publication wasLITERATURE.The Ghost, founded on a ridiculous imposturecarried on in Cock Lane, Smithfield,which did not add much to theauthor's popularity. He was more successfulin the Prophecy of Famine, aScots pastoral, which immediately raisedhim to the first degree of rank as apolitical satirist, and was highly praisedby Wilkes, who called it at once personal,poetical, and political. At thistime he seers to have had some sharein the North Briton, and he was includedin the warrant issued for theapprehension of Wilkes, who preventedhis being taken, by addressing him, beforethe officers, in the name of Thompson.Soon afterwards, he published AnEpistle to Hogarth, whose death it issaid to have hastened, after he hadmade a feeble attempt to retaliate onthe poet, by caricaturing him in a printof a pug-dog and a bear. In 1763, hepublished The Conference, in which heexpressed his contrition for his previousseduction and abandonment of a tradesman'sdaughter, in Westminster, andwhom, in the above year, he thoughthimself bound in honour to take intohis protection. About the same period,he successively published The Duellist,and The Author, one of the mostpleasing of his productions. " It is butjustice," said the Critical Reviewers,to acknowledge that Mr. Churchill'sreputation as a poet seems to rise andincrease with every performance. TheConference was much superior to TheGhost, and The Author is, in our opinion,a better poem than The Conference.The sentiments throughout are, for thepost part, noble and manly, the satirefinely pointed, and the expression strongand nervous."In 1764, he poured forth several newproductions, " evidently," says Dr.Aikin, " inspired by no other musethan necessity, and accumulating all thefaults with few of the beauties of theformer." The titles of tluse poemswere Gotham, The Candidate, TheTimes, Independence, and The Journey; besides a volume of Sermons,almost beneath notice. In the Octoberof the year last-mentioned, he paid avisit to'Wilkes, at Bologna, where hewas seized with a miliary fever, whichcarried him off, on the 4th of November,in ike thirty-fourth year of his.age. He was buried at Dover, and thefollowing line, from his own works, wasinscribed on his tombstone ;Life to the last enjoyed, here Churchill lies.The natural disposition of Churchillwas frank, open, warm, generous, andbenevolent; and, in his boyhood, hegave proofs of a high and noble spirit,almost amounting to heroism. In theearly part of his clerical career, nothingcould be more exemplary than his conduct,and he was, for a time, equallybeloved and respected. As hi* poeticaltalents developed themselves, his characterchanged, and he can be onlyafterwards contemplated as a witty,reckless, but not remorseless, debauchee.He still preserved his warmth of heart,and his independence of mind ; and itis said that he refused an offer of '300per annum to eea>e from writing againstcertain political measures, and threatenedto kick out of his house the partiesby whom the proposition was made tohim. Something, however, like heartlessnessappears in his bitter attacksupon Hogarth and others ; but it wasthe fault of Churchill never to let anarrow rest in his quiver; his bow ofsatire was always ready, and whenonce bent, he took the first mark thatpresented itself, heedless of the justiceof the aim or the depth of the wound.Still, with all his irregularities and vices,he possessed qualities which captivatedand endeared him to, those who knewhim thoroughly ; his friends were enthusiasticallydevoted to him. Lloydfollowed him to the grave with a brokenheart ; and Wilkes testified his affectionfor him, by the erection of a pillar to hismemory, in the grove of Saudham College,in the Isle of Wight.The writings of Churchill have beendescribed to be like his life, irregular,unequal, and inconsistent. He was aprofessed imitator of Dryden ; butamid much strength, fire and brilliancy,is to be found the roughness of Oldhamand Donne, and a carelessness whichhe used to pass off as the result ofdesign. The temporary nature of hissubjects have caused a gradual declineof his former popularity ; and Byron,therefore, not unaptly speaks of himas one " who blazed the comet of aseason." It is not strange that he shouldhave received little applause from hiscontemporaries, against one or other ofWILLIAM COWPER.whom he was continually levelling hissatirical shafts ; whence Johnson, whomhe satirized in The Ghost, under thename of Compose, said, with moreacrimony than propriety, " that hethought Churchill a shallow fellow inthe beginning, and had seen no reasonfor altering his opinion." Cowper, however,has paid a tribute to his talents,which more than compensates for thesilence of greater critics, worse poets,and inferior men : the lines will befound in his Table Talk.If brighter beams than all he threw not forth,Twas negligence in him, not want of worth ;Surly and slovenly, and bold, and coarse,Too proud for art, and trusting in mere force;Spendthrift alike of money and of wit,Always at .peed, and never drawn? bitsstruck the lyre in such a careless mood.And o disdained the rules he understood ;The laurel seemed to wait on Ins command,He snatched it rudely from the Muse's band.WILLIAM COWPER.WILLIAM, son of the Reverend Dr.John Cowper, chaplain to George theSecond, was born at Berkhampstead,in Hertfordshire, of which place hisfather was rector, on the 26th of November,1731. "Me received the earliestrudiments of education at a day-schoolin his native village ; and in his seventhyear, at which time he lost his mother,he was placed under the care of Dr.Pitman, of Market Street, where heremained about eighteen months, whenhe was removed, in consequence ofsome specks appearing in his eyes,from which blindness was apprehended."My father," he says in one of his letters," alarmed for the consequences,sent me to a female oculist, of great renownat that time, in whose house Iabode two years, but to no good purpose.From her I went to Westminster School,where, at the age of fourteen, the smallpoxseized me, and proved the betteroculist of the two, for it delivered mefrom them all." During his stay atthis school, he was remarkable alikefor his close attention to his studies,and his gentle disposition, which exposedhim to insults and cruelties fromhis schoolfellows, that he never recollectedbut with anguish. His own forcibleexpression, says his biographer,Hayley, rep resented him at Westminster,as not daring to raise his eye abovethe shoe-buckle of the elder boys.He let Westminster in 1749; and,about three months aUerwartis, wasplaced with Mr. Chapman, a solicitor, inLondon ; but, from the following passagein a letter to his relative, Lady jHesketh, he does not appear to havepaid much attention to legal studies.He says, in a playful remonstranceI did actually live three years withMr. Chapman, a solicitor, that is to say,I slept three years in his house ; but Ilived, that is to say, I spent my days inSouthampton Row, as you very wellremember. There was 1, and the futurelord-chancellor (Thurlow), constantlyemployed from morning till night ingiggling and making giggle, instead ofstudying law." On leaving Mr. Chapman,he took chambers in, and becamea student of, the Middle Temple ; and,forming an intimacy with his schoolfellows,the elder Colman, Bonnet,Thornton and Lloyd, he assisted thetwo first in their celebrated periodical,The Connoisseur; and otherwise indulgedhis taste for the belles lettres,both in prose and poetry.Success at the bar, with Cowper'sframe of mind, his friends had littlehopes of, and, therefore, procured forhim the situation of reading-clerk, andclerk of the private committees in thehouse of lords, to which he was appointedin his thirty-first year. Beingunable, however, to undergo the torture,as he called it, of reading in public, heresigned these offices after a week'sstruggle, and accepted that of clerk ofthe journals, in which it was supposedhis personal appearance would not berequired in the house of lords. A parliamentarydispute, however, making itnecessary for him to appear at the barof the house, that his fitness for the employmentmight be publicly acknowledged,his nerves were so wrought uponby the idea of such a public exhibition ofLITE RATURE.himself, which he called a mortal poison,that the strength of his reason gaveway, and on the arrival of the periodfor his appearance, he was no longer inpossession of his intellectual powers.In this distressing state, it was foundnecessary to place him under the careof Dr. Cotton, in an asylum at St.Albans, where he remained from December,1763, until the July of thefollowing year, in a state of mentalaberration, and of a religious despondencyto such a degree, that he is saidto have been in continual expectationof being instantly plunged into eternalpunishment. His mind at length becomingmore composed, he began toderive consolation from those truthswhich had before seemed so terrible tohim ; and at the invitation of his brotherJohn, a clergyman, and fellow of Cambridge,he removed to Huntingdon, inorder to be near him. He had not beenlong here before his acquaintance commencedwith the Unwind, into whosefamily he was introduced by Mr. hawthorneUnwin, who, struck with theappearance of Cowper, had accosted himduring a walk, which was the beginningof their subsequent intimacy. He continuedto reside with them in theirhouse at Huntingdon, until the deathof the elder Mr. Unwin, in July, 1767,to which our author thus alludes in aletter to Lady Hesketh. " The effectof it upon my circumstances will onlybe a change of the place of my abode ;for 1 shall still, by God's leave, continuewith Mrs. Unwin, whose behaviour tomehas always been that of a mother toa son." With this lady (the Mary ofhis poems,) and her daughter, he removed,in the following October, toOlney, in Buckinghamshire, on thesolicitation of the Rev. Mr. Newton, therector of that place, and with whomCowper formed one of the most closeand delightful friendships of his lite.Religious meditation and the exercise ofcharity, in which he was encouraged byan annual allowance, for that purpose,of 200 a-year, from John Thornton,Esquire, formed his chief occupation ;and, writing to decline the invitation ofa friend, in 1769, he says, he " prefershis home to any other spot on earth."Among other employments, he composedsixty-eight hymns, which wereinserted in Mr. Newton's collections, andhe personally directed the prayers anddevotions of the poor. Such a life, however,had a tendency to increase themorbid propensity of his frame, whichwas increased in March, 1770, by thedeath of his brother John, whom hehad taken great pains to imbue withhis own religious views, and, after somedifficulty, succeeded. In 1773, he "sunkinto such severe paroxysms of religiousdespondency," says Hay ley, " that herequired an attendant of the most gentle,vigilant, and inflexible spirit;" and,he adds, " such an attendant he foundin his faithful guardian, Mrs. Unwin,who watched over him during this longfit of depressive malady, extendedthrough several years, with that perfectmixture of tenderness and fortitude,which constitutes the inestimable influenceof maternal protection."In the beginning of 1778, his mindbegan to recover itself; but, before itwas sufficiently established to allow ofhis return to literary pursuits, heamused himself in educating a groupof tame hares, an account of which hewrote in prose for The Gentleman'sMagazine. In the summer of the sameyear, having completely regained theuse of his faculties, he resumed his correspondencewith his friends, anddiverted himself by drawing, carpentering,and gardening. " I am pleased,"he says, in a letter, dated 1780, to Mr.Newton, who had removed to London,with a frame of four lights, doubtfulwhether the few pines it contains willever be worth a farthing ; amuse myselfwith a green-house, which Lord Bute'sgardener could take upon his back, andwalk away with ; and when 1 have paidit the accustomed visit, and watered it,and given it air, I say to myself ' Thisis not mine ; 'tis a plaything lent mefor the present : I must leave it soon.' "In the last-mentioned and the followingyear he wrote several poems, besides atranslation of some of the spiritualsongs of Madame Guion ; and, in 1782,an octavo volume was published, at theexpense of Johnson, of St. Paul'sChurch-yard, who took the whole riskupon himself. The principal subjectsare Table Talk, The Progress of Error,Truth, Expostulation, Hope, Retirement,Charity, and Conversation, bywhich he at once established his reputationas a poet, though they gainedrWILLIAM Cowper.him no popularity. His eulogy on\Y hatfield, who at that time was lookedupon as a fanatic ; his acrimonious censureof Charles Wesley, for allowingsacred music to form part of his occupationon Sundays, and other occasionaltouches of austerity, excited prejudicesagainst his first volume, the merit ofwhich deserved a success it did notmeet with.About a year preceding the publicationof his first volume of Poems, Cowperhad formed an acquaintance withLady Austen, widow of Sir RobertAusten, who exercised a very happy influenceover his genius. To his intimacywith this lady we are indebted for hisfamous poem of John Gilpin, the story ofwhich she related to him one night, forthe purpose of arousing his spirits fromtheir almost habitual gloom. " Its effecton the fancy of Cowper," says Hayley,had the air of enchantment : he informedher the next morning, that convulsionsof laughter, brought on by hisrecollections of the story, had kept himwaking during the greatest part of thenight, and that he had turned it into aballad'' It was first printed, it appears,in the Public Advertiser, to which paperit was sent by Mrs. Unwin ; where thelate Mr. Henderson, the actor, happeningto see it, conceiving it eminentlyqualified to display his rich comicpowers, he read it at the Freemason'sHall, in the course of entertainmentsgiven there by himself and the l:tteThomas Sheridan. It then becameextremely popular among all classes ofreaders; but it was not known to beCowper's till it was added to his secondvolume. At Lady Austen's suggestion,he also composed The Tasks promising,one day, to write if she would furnishthe subject. " Oh !" she is said to havereplied, '* you can never be in want ofa subject : you can write upon any:write upon this sofa !"In 1784, he began his translation ofHomer, and in the same year terminatedhis intercourse with Lady Austen ;whose lively interest in the poet hadexcited a jealousy in the breast of Mrs.Unwin, who, feeling herself eclipsed,says Mr. Hayley, by the brilliancy ofthe poet's new friend, began to fear hermental influence over him. Cowpernow felt that he must either relinquishhis ancient friend, whom he regardedwith the love of a child, or his newassociate, whom he idolized with theaffection of a sister, and whose heartand mind were peculiarly congenial tohis own. Gratitude determined himhow to act ; and, with a resolution anddelicacy, adds Mr. Hayley, that did thehighest honour to his feelings, he wrotean explanatory farewell letter to LadyAusten, which she lamented, when appliedto, by his biographer, tor a copy,that in a moment of natural mortification,she had burnt. In 1785, appearedhis second volume of poems, includingThe Task, Tirocinium, The Epistle toJoseph Hill, Esquire, and the divertingHistory of John Gilpin. The translationof his Homer, amid variousinterruptions, was continued at intervals,and was published in two volumes,quarto, in 1791. During the compositionof this work, it is said, he atfirst declined, as he had done in theprogress of his other works, shewingspecimens to his friends ; and when Mr.Unwin informed him that a gentlemanwanted a sample, he humorously replied,When I deal in wine, cloth, or cheese,I will give samples ; but of verse, never.No consideration'' he added, " wouldhave induced me to comply with thegentleman's demand, unless he couldhave assured me that his wife hadlonged." Though the first edition wasquickly disposed of, the general receptionof his Homer was not such asto answer his expectations. He, therefore,began a revision of it ; and aboutthe same time meditated an edition ofMilton's works, and a new didacticpoem, to be called The Four Ages.His mental powers, however, beingagain impaired by a relapse of his oldmalady, he became totally incapacitatedfrom pursuing these and all other literarypursuits. In this situation he wasvisited by Lady Hesketh, who paid himthe same attention he had hitherto receivedfrom Mrs. Unwin, who wasnow in a state of second childhood, andas imbecile as the poet himself. In1794, a pension of .300 per annumwas procured for him, from government,through the influence of KarlSpencer ; and shortly afterwards he wasremoved, together with Mrs. Unwin, byhis friend and kinsman, the Rev Dr.Johnson, to Dream, in Norfolk.Here, in 1796, he lost Mrs. Unwin ; andLITERATUREfrom 1797 to 1799 he completed, bysnatches, the revisal of his Homer, andwas sensible enough to compose a feworiginal verses, and to resume his correspondencewith Lady Hesketh. Inthe beginning of 1800, he exhibitedsymptoms of dropsy, which made suchrapid progress, that it terminated hisexistence on the following 25th of April.His remains were deposited in St. Edmund'sChapel, in Dream Church,where Lady Hesketh caused a marbletablet to be erected to his memory,on which was inscribed some elegantverses from Mr. Hayley's pen.The whole figure and appearance ofCowper were interesting ; it might beseen at first sight that he was what iscalled well-bred; and even a momentaryobserver could not fail to perceivethat he was a man of no ordinary mind.Like Pope and some others, he was precociousin the display of talent, thoughit was not till he had attained the age offifty, that he wrote with a view to publication.His first poetical production isstated to have been a translation of apoem of Tibullus, made at the age offourteen ; but, as little more of hisjuvenile poetry has been preserved thanthe above, all the steps of his progressto that perfection which produced TheTask cannot now be traced. It is to beregretted that the selfishness of Mrs.Unwin put an end to his intimacy withLady Austen, as her conversationgreatly enlivened his social hours, andembraced that variety of subject, which,more than any thing, tended to keepoff his natural gloom. The slownesswith which he composed his Homer,and his abandonment of some of his literarydesigns, may he attributed to othercauses than menial imbecility. "Solong," he says in one oi his letters, " as1 am pleased with an employment, I amcapable of unwearied application, becausemy feelings are all of the intensekind: I never," he adds, " received alittle pleasure from any thing in mylife ; it I am delighted, it is in the extreme.The unhappy consequence ofthis temperament is, that attachmentto any occupation seldom outlives thenovelty of it." In Cowper, the virtuesof the man and the genius of the poetwere inseparable ; in every thing hedid, said, or wrote, his aim was thepromotion of the highest interests ofmankind, the advancement of religionand morality. His biographers agreein ascribing to him a vigour of sentimentand a knowledge of human nature,scarcely equalled, and rarely, ifever, surpassed by any of our poets.Fox, in speaking of The Task, says,that the author has, in a great degree,reconciled him to blank verse, and thatthere are few things superior to thatpoem in our language ; whilst GilbertWakefield as vehemently condemns hisHomer, and calls the beginning ofthe tenth Odyssey the most calamitousspecimen of want of ear that ever cameunder his notice. Without doubt, thegeneral effect of the work is bald andprosaic, but it exceeds Pope's translationin fidelity and exactness. A writer inthe Edinburgh Review, in comparingthe merits of Pope and Cowper, s-iys,Scarcely a particle of breath tiivmeinspires the blank and frigid version ofthe latter ; he is more correct thanPope in giving the mere sense of theoriginal, but to its tone and spirit he is,in a different manner, equally unfaithful."The man of genius, however,(adds the same author,) the scholar, andthe critic, the man of the world, andthe moral and pious man, all found inthe works of Cowper something to excitetheir surprise ; something to admire ;something congenial with their habitsof taste, feeling, and judgment ; andsucceeding years of familiar intercoursewith his writings have led posterity tocontemplate him as one of the best ofmen, and most favoured of poets.ERASMUS DARWIN.ERASMUS DARWIN was the sonof a barrister, and was born at Elveston,or Elton, in Nottinghamshire, on thethe rudiments of education at the grammar-school of Chesterfield, whence, in1753-4, he removed to St. John's of December, 1731. He received ! lege, Cambridge ; and, being intend edERASMUS DARWIN,for the medical profession, graduatedM. B. in 1755. Before leaving theuniversity, he had composed a poemon the death of Frederick, Prince ofWales, which was printed among theCambridge collection of verses on thatoccasion ; but the merits of this productiondid not rise above mediocrity.Having taken his degree of M. D. atEdinburgh, he commenced the practiceof his profession at Nottingham,but shortly afterwards removed to Lichfield,where his fortunate cure of apatient, who had been given over bya celebrated physician, established hisreputation, and was the foundation ofhis prosperity. In 1757, he married aMiss Howard, whom he lost, thirteenyears afterwards, alter having had byher five children; and, in 1781, he unitedhimself to the widow of Colonel Pole, towhom he had been long previouslyattached. He shortly afterwards removedto Derby, where he completedhis celebrated poem of The BotanicGarden, which was published in 1791,consisting of two parts, The Economy ofVegetation, and The Loves of thePlants, with philosophical notes. Apoem of such singular construction, andso ably executed, created a great sensationin the literary world, and placedthe name of Darwin, says Dr.Aikin,highamong the poets of the time. In 1794,he published the first, and in 1796, thesecond volume of his Zoonomia, or TheLaws of Organic Life; the purpose ofwhich was to reduce the facts relatingto animal life into classes, oideis, genera,and species ; and, by comparing themwith each other, to unravel the theoryof diseases. His fundamental notion inthis comprehensive work, was, that man,animals, and vegetables, all took theirorigin from living filaments, susceptibleof irritation, which is the agent that setsthem in motion. In 1800. appearedhis Phytologia, or The Philosophy ofAgriculture and Gardening, in which,says his biographer, in the EdinburghEncyclopaedia, " his conviction thatvegetables are remote links in the chainof sentient existence, often hinted atin the notes to The Botanic Garden, ishere avowed in a regular system." In1801, he removed to an old mansion,near Derby, and died there on the 10thof April, 1802 ; after having preparedfor the press a poem, called The Templeof Nature, or the Origin of Society, publishedin 1803; and which, with twopapers in the Philosophical Transactions,and his share of the Englishtranslation of the Systema VegetabiLuinof Linnaeus, constitute, in addition tothose previously mentioned, the wholeof Darwin's acknowledged works.In person, the subject of pur memoirwas above the middle size; of anathletic but somewhat corpulent body ;with a countenance, bearing traces ofthe small-pox ; a stoop in the shoulders,and a lameness, which rendered himunwieldy in his appearance. He stammeredto such a degree, that he wasalmost unintelligible, yet nothing somuch annoyed him as to be anticipatedin his words. He possessed an ardentmind, a cheerful but hasty temper, andgreat humanity and benevolence ofdisposition ; which was particularlyconspicuous in his care of brute animals,and even insects. He was supposed,says Dr. Aikin, " to sit loose to religioussentiments, and was vulgarlycharged with Atheism ; though a poemof his is extant, in which, with greatforce and beauty, he refutes the atheisticsystem." As a poet, the reputation ofDarwin has greatly declined, in consequence,probably, of his addressingthe reason and the imagination, withouttouching, or but rarely, the heart. Fewpoets have better succeeded in delightingthe eye, the taste, and the fancy ;and in perspicuity of style, he hasfew equals. The merit of originalityhas been, by some critics, denied toDarwin, in his composition of The BotanicGarden, which he is accused ofhaving closely copied from HenryBrooke's poem of Universal Beauty,and a Latin poem by De La Croix,entitled Connubial Forum. There iscertainly a similarity to those work?,both in design and expression, in TheBotanic Garden; but the probabilitythat he borrowed his plan from them,though it may detract from its originality,does not render less meritorious his ownhappy combination of philosophy andpoetry. Dr. Darwin had not more singularideas in his capacity of poet andphilosopher, than in that of physician ;and if correct theory may be inferredfrom successful practice, his professionalknowledge must have been equallynovel and profound. If he had anyLITtKATURE.dogma, it was shown in iii prohibitionof all vinous fluids, but he was an advocatefor free eating, a plan which heboth recommended and followed. Byhis second wife, our author left six children; and he had also two naturaldaughters, for whom, it is said, he drewup a Treatise on Female Education,which was published, but never becamepopularGEORGE Coleman, THE ELDER.GEORGE Coleman, the son ofThomas Colman, Esq., liriii-h residentat the court of the grand duke, wasborn at Florence, about the year 1733,and educated at Westminster School,and Christchurch College, Oxford,where he graduated M.A. in 1758. Hehad previously given a proof of his extraordinarytalents, by publishing, duringhis residence at the university, inconjunction with his schoolfellow,Bonne! Thornton, a periodical, calledThe Connoisseur, which began in January,1754, and was concluded in September,1756. On coming to London,he was recommended by his friendsto fix upon the law for his profession,and he was received with marked attentionby Lord Bath, whose wire was thesister of Mr. Colman's mother. Havingentered himself of Lincoln's Inn, hewas in due time called to the bar, butsoon verified the prediction of Wycherley,that " Apollo and Lyttleton seldommeet in the same brain," by abandoningWestminster Hall for the court of theM uses.His earliest poetical productions wereA Copy of Verses addressed to hisCousin, Lord Pulteney ; followed byOdes to Oblivion and Obscurity, insertedin The St. James's Magazine ;and, in 1760, his first dramatic piece,Polly Honeycomb, was acted at DruryLane. In the succeeding year he producedThe Jealous Wife; and, aboutthe same time, becoming a proprietor ofThe St. James's Chronicle, he exertedIii prosaic talents in a series of Essaysand humorous Sketches; a selectionfrom which was inserted among hisprose works, published by himself, in1787. In 1764, the death of Lord Bathleft him in possession of a handsomeannuity, which received an increaseon the" decease of General Pulteney,in 1767. In the previous year he hadproduced, in conjunction with Garrick,The Clandestine Marriage, and he hadalso acquired considerable reputationfor classical scholarship, by a translationof all the plays of Terence intoa sort of English Iambic verse. In1768, he purchased a share in the propertyand management of Covent GardenTheatre ; but, evincing a dispositionto domineer over his partners, Messrs.Powell, Harris, and Rutherford, he,after a severe contest, which was madepublic, sold his share, and purchased, ofFoote, the Haymarket Theatre. Thishe managed with great spirit and judgment,and brought forward several newperformers and pieces of merit, especiallyin comedy. In 1783, he publisheda translation of Horace's Art of Poetry,with a commentary prefixed, in whichhe supported, with much learning, ingenuity,and modesty, an hypothesis,that Horace had written that poemsimply with a view of dissuading oneof the sons of Pisa, who had eitherwritten or meditated a poetical work,from giving it to the public. The productionadded greatly to his reputationas a classic scholar, and the Bishop ofWorcester, in speaking of it to Dr.Douglas, the Bishop of Salisbury, said,Give l%y compliments to Mr. Colman,and thank him for the handsome mannerin which he has treated me, andtell him that I think he is right." In1790, he was attacked by a paralyticstroke, and shortly afterwards, givingsigns of mental derangement, the managementof the theatre was vested inhis son ; and our author was removedto a lunatic asylum at Haddington,where he died, on the 14th of August,1794. After his death, a pamphlet appeared,entitled Some Particulars of theLife of George Colman, Esq., writtenby himself, and delivered to his executor,for publication after his decease ;JOHN Horne TOOKE.in which he refutes a report of his havingbeen the son of the Earl of Bath,and of having lost the favour of thatnobleman through his play-house connexion.It appears, however, thatGeneral Pulteney had so far departedfrom the intentions of his predecessortowards Mr. Colman, as to leave himan annuity of 400, instead of the Newportestate, worth several thousands perannum, which the former Lord Bathhad, in several wills, actually bequeathedto the subject of our memoir.Mr. Colman had the reputation ofbeing a witty, pleasant, and ingeniousman ; agreeable in his manners, and amost facetious and entertaining companion.Both as a scholar and a dramatisthe stands high among thewriters of his time: it is in the lattercharacter, however, that he will bechiefly remembered, particularly by hisshare in the Clandestine Marriage, aproduction which, in point of naturalhumorous portraiture, is exceeded byno comedy of modern times.JOHN HORNE TOOKE.John HORNE TOOKE, the son ofa poulterer, in Newport Market, wasborn in Newport Street, Westminster,in June, 1736. His father being inaffluent circumstances, sent him first toWestminster, and afterwards to EtonSchool, where he remained five or sixyears, without particularly distinguishinghimself. The accidental loss ofan eye occasioned his removal soonerthan 'was intended, and in 1755, he wasadmitted of St. John's College, Cain-bridge,where he graduated B.A. Atwhat time he left the university is uncertain; but on quitting it, he acceptedthe place of an usher in a school atBlack heath, and soon afterwards, at therequest of his father, took deacon'senters, and officiated as a curate inKent. His own predilection for thelaw, however, had induced him to enterhimself, in 1756, a student of the InnerTemple ; but, in 1760, he was persuadedto return to the church, and in the sameyear, received priest s orders, and wasinducted to the chapelry of New Brentford,which his father had purchasedfor him. For about three years heperformed the duties of his office withdecency and regularity, and took somepains to study the elements of medicine,for the benefit of the poorer membersof his congregation. In 1763, he wentabroad, as tutor to the son of Mr.Ewes ; and, on his return, in 1765, hewrote an anonymous pamphlet in behalfof Wilkes, to whom he was personallyintroduced on a second visit to the continent,where he laid aside his clericalcharacter, and evinced a complete contemptfor his profession. " It is true,"he says, in a letter to Wilkes, " ti.at Ihave suffered the infectious hand of abishop to he waved over me; whose Iimposition, like the sop given to Judas,is only a signal for the devil to enter;but I hope I have escaped the contagion."He arrived in England in 1766.prepared to plunge into the vortex of *politics, and immediately rendered him {self conspicuous by the share which ihe took in the election of Wilkes for <Middlesex, whose return his exertions \greatly contributed to secure. Suchwas his zeal, that he pledged his creditfor the expenses, and is said to havedeclared, in the hearing of his Brentfordparishioners, that " in a cause sojust and so holy, he would dye his blackcoat red." He next took an opportunityof opposing government, by supportingthe widow Bigby, in an appeal of blood,the convicted murderer of whose husbandhad Received a pardon, throughthe influence, as was supposed, of anobleman, who kept, as a mistress, thesister of one of the criminals. He was,however, disappointed in his end, bythe widow's acceptance of a pecuniarycompensation ; and he, suspecting, it issaid, " that the late Mr. Murphy hadnegotiated the arrangement, hated himtill the time of his death." He thenused his exertions in bringing to justice| the perpetrators of some acts of violencearising out of the Middlesexelection ; and showed his intimate knowledgeof the law, and his acuteness inthe application of it, by foiling a prosecutionagainst him for a libel on theLITERATURE.Honourable George Uns >w. At hisinstigation, it is said, Mr. Beckford, thenlord mayor, made a verbal reply to theking's answer to a remonstrance fromthe city of London ; and that replywas drawn up by him, as inscribed onMr. Beckford's statue, in Guildhall.He is also said to have been the founderof the Society for Supporting the Billof Rights : and he obtained the liberationof the printer, langley, who hadbeen somewhat summarily committedJo prison, by Lord Mansfield, lor refusingto appear for the purpose ofanswering to interrogatories.In 1770, and the following year, aquarrel with Wilkes rendered our authorfor some time unpopular, though hischarges against the former, respectingthe Bill of Rights, appear to have hadsome foundation. Several letters publiclypassed between them, which onlyexposed both parties to censure andridicule ; and the Association was shortlyafterwards dissolved, and incorporatedinto the Constitutional Society. In1771, he, with some opposition, graduatedM.A. at Cambridge; and, on hisreturn to London, he instigated twoprinters of newspapers to a publicationof the parliamentary debates, whichwas unsuccessfully opposed by, and hassince suffered no impediment from, thehouse of commons. About the sametime he engaged in a literary duel withJunius, in which the general opinionwas, that he came off victor, and " thatlie displayed," says Dr. Aikin, " if notthe brilliancy of style proper to his antagonist,at least, as much energy andkeenness of sarcasm." In 1773, heresigned his living at Brentford, and,as far as he could, his clerical gown ;but the ejection of this did not, as weshall presently see, enable him to exchangeit for another. He now studiedthe law, and whilst thus employed, anevent occurred which gave him an opportunityof publicly displaying hiscourage and abilities, and was themeans of considerably improving hisfuture fortune. Mr. Tooke, of Parley,in Surrey, having in vain opposed aninclosure bill, which threatened toinjure his estate, applied to our authorfor advice, who immediately offered towrite a libel on the speaker, as the bestmeans of effecting his object. Theprinter of The Public Advertiser, inwhich journal it was published, was inconsequencesummoned before thehouse of commons, when he gave upMr. Home as the writer; adding, thathe was then in the gallery to answer forhimself. On being called to the bar, hemade an animated speech against thebill, which was reconsidered by thehouse, and finally modified in such amanner as to remove the fears of Mr.Tooke, who, out of gratitude, appointedMr. Home his heir. It was in consequenceof this that he subsequently tookthe name of his benefactor, though itseems that he never received more than8,000 from first to last, the principallegatee, after all, being a Mr. Beadle.On the arrival of the news of thebattle of Lexington, the ConstitutionalSociety subscribed jglOO for the widowsand children of the Americans who hadfallen in it, which was announced inan advertisement, signed John Home,describing the sufferers as * Englishmenwho were inhumanly butchered bythe king's troops, for preferring death toslavery." A prosecution was in consequencecommenced against him, and,being brought to trial, in July, 1777,he was, in spite of his own ingeniousdefence, found guilty of libel, and sentencedto twelve months imprisonmentin the King's Bench, and a fine ofJg200. During his confinement, heemployed himself in drawing up a Letterto Mr. Dunning, containing somegrammatical criticisms on his indictment,which he more fully discussed inhis subsequent philological work. Afterhis release, in 1779, he applied to becalled to the bar, and was refused, onaccount of his being still a clergyman;although, probably the real ground of hisrejection was the determined hostilityhe had shewn to the ruling powers.Exasperated by this disappointment,which, as he was eminently qualified forthe profession of the law, destroyed allhis future prospects, he looked roundabouthim, with double bitterness, forevery opportunity of annoying the existinggovernment. Accordingly, in 1780,he published a pamphlet, entitled Facts,in which he inveighed, with great acrimony,against the administration ofLord North, particularly with referenceto the war. Towards the conclusion ofthis, he attempted to establish himselfas a farmer, in Huntingdonshire, butJOHN HORNE TOOKEsoon became disgusted with agriculture,and returned to London, where he occupied,for some years, a house nearSoho Square. In 1782, he addressed toDunning (afterwards Lord Ashburton),A Letter on Parliamentary Reform, containingthe sketch of a plan, of whichit is unnecessary to say more, than thathe disapproved of universal suffrage,and sided rather with Pitt than Fox.In 1786, he published his celebratedwork, entitled Pea Ptereonta,or Diversionsof Parley, in one octavo volume,at the end of which he says, " I knowfor what building I am* laying thefoundation ; and am myself well satisfiedof its importance." It was undoubtedlya masterly performance, anddeservedly raised him to a high rankamong philologists, " causing him,"says Dr. Aikin, " to be considered bymany as destined to form a new era inthe philosophy connected with thoseinquiries." The work was subsequentlyenlarged by the author to two quartovolumes, the first part of which appearedin 1798, and the second in 1805.In 1788, he published a political pamphlet,entitled Two Pair of Portraits, inwhich he drew a contrast, to the advantageof the latter, between the twoFoxes and the two Pitt's, of the pastand present generations. In 1790, hebecame a candidate for the representationof Westminster, in opposition toMr. Fox and Lord Hood ; and, though-he lost his election, polled seventeenhundred votes, without solicitation orcorruption. In consequence of his defeat,he presented a petition to thehouse of commons, but so filled withcoarse invective, and containing suchlittle ground of complaint, that it wasdeclared frivolous and vexatious. In1794, his opinions in favour of theFrench revolution, and his known hostilityto government, led to his arrest,and trial for high treason, of which hewas acquitted by the jury, after eightminutes' consideration. It is said, thaton his committal to the Tower, heburst into tears ; upon being informedof which, Wilkes observed, " I knewhe was a knave, but I never thoughthim a coward." Be this as it may, noprisoner ever carried himself with morefirmness, courage, and self-possession,on his trial, than Home Tooke ; thoughsome, attributing his conduct to a consciousnessof security, have called hiscoolness impudence. After his acquittal,he is reported to have remarked to afriend, that if a certain song, exhibitedat the trial of Hardy, had been producedagainst him, he should have sungit to the jury ; that, as there was notreason in the words, they might judgeif there was any in the music.In 1796, he was again an unsuccessfulcandidate for Westminster, in oppositionto Fox and Sir Alan Gardener, butpolled nearly double the number ofvotes he had obtained in his firstattempt. At length, in the teeth ofhis perpetual sarcasms against rottenboroughs, he, in 1801, upon the nominationof Lord Camelford, entered thehouse of commons as member for OldSarum ; but his parliamentary careerwas neither long nor distinguished. Anattempt was made to exclude him, onthe ground of his being a clergyman inorders; but Lord Sidmouth (then Mr.Addington) preferred the milder courseof bringing in an act declaratory of thefuture ineligibility of persons in thesituation of our author, who accordinglyretired from parliament on its dissolution,in 1802. His last public effort, asaparty man, was made in behalf ofMr. Paul, as candidate for Westminster;but he deserted this gentlemanin a subsequent contest. The latteryears of his life were passed at his residenceat Wimbledon, where he enjoyedthe society of a select circle of friends,and exhibited to the last his usualserenity of temper, and wit and cheerfulnessin conversation. He died onthe 19th of March, 1812, and wasburied at Baling Church, though hehad desired, in his will, to be interredin his own garden, and that no funeralservice should be read over his remains.He was never married, but left somenatural daughters, to whom he bequeathedhis property. It has beensaid that the epitaph he wished to beplaced on his tomb was the word ' Content;' but whether, if such were hiswish, it was to be in reference to the pastorfuture, is doubtful.The personal appearance of Mr,Tooke was altogether pleasing, andneither his countenance nor mannerspartook of the sternness which his publicconduct would have led one to expect.With an unaltered brow, saysLITERATURE.one of his biographers, lie could beeither facetious or sarcastic, and h's featuresseldom disclosed what was passingwithin. His manners were polished,and his appearance was that of a gentlemanof the old school. The former,it is said, displayed grace, frankness,vivacity, and dignity, which is attributedby some to his association with heirs ofthe nobility at Eton and Westminster,and to his admission, when a boy, onceor twice a week, at Leicester House, asaplayfellow to George the Third.The effect which an association with hisfuture monarch may have had upon hismanners, is doubtful ; but any one whois practically acquainted with the habitsof boys at the schools just mentioned,must smile at the idea of hearing eitherdenominated a seminary for manners.In the ordinary intercourse of life, Mr.Tooke was kind, friendly, and hospitable; and though his temper was not,perhaps, naturally good, he had so completelysubdued it, as never to manifest,under any provocation, the slightestmark of irritability. In the popularsense of the word, his morality, as agentleman, has never been impeached ;but in his habits and discourse he displayeda libertinism ill becoming hischaracter. The restraints of his processionseem latterly to have irritatedhim ; he could not throw them all off;but he was anxious, says the reviewerof his life in The Quarterly Review, " toshow, that in licentiousness at least, hecould be a layman." His conversationwas delightful in the extreme ; neatness,grace, rapidity, and pleasantry,were its characteristics ; and he couldridicule an acquaintance to his own face,with an art, a force, and even a politeness,which were absolutely irresistible.Altogether, says the writer last mentioned,while he is alluding to the patiencewith which he endured theinfirmities of his latter years, Mr. Tookedisplayed " a manly spirit and a practicalphilosophy, which, if they had beenbrought to bear upon his moral, as wellas his physical condition, might haveproduced, not the very imperfect characterwe have been attempting todelineate, but the venerable portrait ofa truly wise and virtuous man."As a writer he can scarcely be rankedamong philosophers, being more ingeniousthan profound, and sagaciouswithout a corresponding degree of penetration.The principal feature of hisDiversions is the satisfactory manner inwhich he has proved that all wordswere originally borrowed from the objectsof external perception. His doctrine,that all parts of speech may beresolved, more or less, completely intonouns and verbs, may be traced to theworks of Aristotle ; and Dugald Stewarthas ably exposed the fallacy of the systemwhich confounds the definition of aterm with its etymology. Upon thewhole, however, his Diversions is amasterly and original performance, andentitles him to a very high rank amongphilological writers. It is to be observed,that even in a composition ofthis nature, the author could not refrainfrom introducing some satirical strictureson various literary characters. Hehas, indeed, been appropriately describedas " the Ishmael of politics andliterature : his hand was against everyman, and every man's hand was againsthim." He does not seem to have beenseriously affected by the dangerous situationinto which his political sentimentsbrought him : as he was returning fromthe Old Bailey to Newgate, one coldnight, a lady placed a silk handkerchiefround his neck, upon which he gailysaid, " Take care, madam, what youare about, for I am rather ticklish inthat place just now." During his trialfor high treason, he is said to haveexpressed a wish to speak in his owndefence ; and to have sent a message toErskine, to that effect, saying, " I'll behanged if I don't 1" to which Erskinewrote back," You'll be hanged if you do."JAMES Battle.JAMES Battle, the son of a shopkeeper,was born at Latirencekirk, Kin-cardiganshire,Scotland, on the 5th ofNovember, 1736. He received the rudimentsof education at the parish school,where he pursued his studies withJAMES B E A IT 1 E .avidity, and in consequence of his turnfor poetry, went by the name of the Poet.In 1749, he entered Marischal College,Aberdeen, where his abilities procuredfor him a bursary, and he passed fouryears in studying Greek philosophyand divinity. Having taken the degreeof M. A., he was, in 1753, appointedschoolmaster of the parish of Fortune,and he also filled the office of precentor,or parish clerk. His talents gained himthe attention of the gentry in the neighbourhood,and in 1758, he was elected toan ushership in the grammar-school ofAberdeen, having previously failed inan attempt to obtain the same situation.His abilities quickly extended his reputationand the sphere of his acquaintance; and, in October, 1760, whenonly twenty-four years of age, he wasinstalled professor of moral philosophyand logic in Marischal College. AtAberdeen, he became a member of theWise Club, and distinguished himselfby the essays which he contributed;and, in the year just mentioned, hepublished a small volume of poems ofordinary merit. In the days of hisfame he bought up and destroyed asmany copies as he could find of thiscollection, and was ashamed to printthe greater part of them, in companywith his Minstrel.In 1763, he paid a visit to London,and in the following year, he publishedsome satirical verses on the Deathof Churchill ; but they do not seem tohave attracted more than local notice.He, probably, thought highly of themhimself, for, in a letter to Sir W. Forbes,he says " I do not think them theworst part of my writings ;" though hethought proper to reject them from thelater editions of his works. In 1766, hetells the same friend that he has beenmuch engaged in metaphysics, and hasbeen labouring all his might to overturnthat visionary science. In thesame year he published, in London, asecond edition of his Poems, which experienceda tolerably good receptionfrom the public, and were privatelyapplauded by Gray, Blacklock, and Dr.Blair. In 1767, he married a MissDunn, daughter of the rector of thegrammar-school at Aberdeen ; but Mrs.Beattie having inherited, from her mother,a distempered mind, borderingupon insanity, the union proved asource of misery to our author, andfinally hastened his death.In 1770, appeared his Essay onTruth, intended chiefly as an answer toHume's Treatise on "Human Nature;and, though it produced no reply fromthe latter, according to his resolutionnever to enter into a controversy, it issaid to have excited much of his attention,and to have put him somewhatout of conceit with his own work. Inaletter to Beattie, Lord Littleton observesof the Essay, " never did I readany book in which truths of the greatestimportance to mankind are more skilfullyextricated from the mazes ofsophism, or where reason, wit, and eloquence,join their forces more happily,in opposition to errors of the most perniciousnature." The work was receivedwith great applause, and becameso popular, that it was translated intoseveral foreign languages, and, in thecourse of four years, went through fiveeditions.In 1771, he published, anonymously,the first part of The Minstrel, a poem,which, he tells us, was suggested byhis perusal of Dr. Percy's (the Bishopof Dromore) Essay on toe EnglishMinstrelsy, and of which the second partappeared in 1774. His own opinion oftl.e poem is expressed in a letter toLady Forbes, in which he says, " thatit has merit, every body would thinkme a hypocrite it I were to deny : Iam willing to believe that it has evenconsiderable merit." It is, undoubtedly,the best and most popular of his productions,notwithstanding its want ofincident, and the unfamiliarity of thesentiments to the generality of readers.Shortly after the publication of the firstcanto, he made a second journey toLondon, where he became acquaintedwith the most eminent literary men, andamong others, with Johnson, who, hesays, " pays such high compliments tomy writings, that 1 have not the faceto mention them." In 1773, he againvisited the metropolis, where he wasalmost immediately received into thefirst circles ; and the king having expresseda high opinion of his merits, itwas suggested, by the Archbishop ofYork, and other of his friends, that heshould address a memorial to his majesty,who would, in all probability,return a favourable answer to his de-literature,sires. At the same time he received anoffer of assistance, through Dr. Ma-genie,from the queen, and an intimationthat she would take the firstopportunity to speak of him to the king,with whom' she had frequently conversedconcerning his book, which she hadread and highly approved. He wassoon after presented at court, and afterhaving been granted a pension of 200per annum, and presented with thehonorary degree of LL.D. at Oxford,he had a private interview with theking and queen at Kew. " I was received,"says the doctor, in his Diary,in the most gracious manner possible,by both their majesties. I had the honourof a conversation with them forupwards of an hour, on a great varietyof topics, in which both the king andqueen joined, with a degree of cheerfulness,affability, and ease, that was tomesurprising, and soon dissipated theembarrassment which I felt at the beginningof the conference. They bothcomplimented me in the highest termson my Essay, which, they said, was abook they always kept by them; andthe king said he" had one copy of it atKew, and another in town, and immediatelywent and took it down from ashelf. I never stole a book but once,'said his majesty, ' and that was your's :I stole it from the queen, to give it toLord Hertford to read.' " Before heleft London, he, at the request of SirJoshua Reynolds, sale for his portrait, ofwhich the artist made him a present.On his return to Scotland, he wasearnestly solicited by his friends, to becomea candidate for the professorshipof moral philosophy at Edinburgh ;which he, however, declined, throughan aversion to an intercourse with theinfidel philosophers of that city. In hisletters upon this subject, he seems tohave betrayed some portion of weaknessand asperity; but his determinationwas founded in reason and good sense :though some writers have treated hisrefusal as a matter worthy of seriousreproach. "My health and quiet," hejustly observes, " may be of little consequenceto the public, but they areof very considerable consequence tome,and to those who depend uponme ; and I am certain that I shall havea much better chance of securing bothby staying where I am, than by removingto Edinburgh." In July, 1774,he received an offer, through Dr. Porters,from an eminent prelate, whoafterwards proved to be the Bishop ofWinchester, of a living of 500 perannum, if he would take orders in thechurch of England. This he also declined; giving, amongst other reasons,that as his enemies had represented hisonly motive, in the publication of hisEssay on Truth, to be his own aggrandizement,he should, by acceptingchurch preferment, be apprehensive ofgiving the world some ground to believethat his love of truth was not quite soardent, or so pure, as as he had pretended.In 1776, he published, by subscription,a new edition of his Essay, withothers on Poetry and Music ; on Laughterand Ludicrous Composition ; andon the Utility of Classical Learning ;all of which he treated in a very masterlymanner. In 1781, appeared anothervolume of his Essays ; in 1786, ATreatise on the Evidences of Christianity; and the Elements of MoralScience in 1790; in which year he alsoedited Addison's Papers, and wrote apreface. In 1793, he published a secondvolume of his Elements of MoralScience, to which was appended aDissertation on the Slave Trade. Hislast work was An Account of the Life,Character, and Writings, of his eldestson, James Hay Beattie, whose losshad deeply affected him. In 1796, hewas also deprived of his youngest andonly surviving son ; and this affliction,added to his own ill health, and theabsence of his wife in a mad-house,preyed upon his mind and spirits to adegree beyond endurance. For somedays after the latter privation, he wanderedabout the house in a state ofmental aberration, searching everyroom in the house, and demandingwhere his son was concealed. Whenrestored to reason, however, he wouldexpress his thankfulness that he hadno child ; saying, " How could I haveborne to see their elegant minds mangledwith madness !" and when helooked, for the last time, upon the deadbody of his son, he exclaimed, " I havenow done with the world !" He indicatedas if he had done so ; for, althoughhe continued to perform the duties ofhis professorship, until within a shortJAMES B A T T I E ,time of his death, he relinquished study,took litle pleasure in society, enjoyedno amusement, and had but little correspondencewith his friends. In 1799,he was struck by palsy, and after asuccession of similar attacks, he died atAberdeen, on the 18th of August, 1803.In person, Dr. Beattie was of themiddle size, of a broad, square make,which seemed to indicate a good constitution; his features were extremelyregular; his complexion somewhat dark,and his eyes remarkably expressive.His fame as a philosopher and metaphysiciancan scarcely be said tonave survived him. Though his Essayon Truth, the composition of whichoccupied him nearly six years, wasmore popular at the time than thewritings of Reid in answer to Hume,it is incomparably below the formerin sound argument, although superiorin clearness of style, and perspicuity.As a critic, he has been preferred toBlair, by Cowper, who calls him " themost agreeable and amiable writer heever met with ;" and " the only author,whose critical and philosophicalresearches are diversified and embellishedby a poetical imagination." Itis on his poem of the Minstrel, however,that his fame most rests: toomuch cannot be said of this trulybeautiful production ; which, for unaffectedelevation and sweetness ofsentiment, terse and comprehensivedescription of rural scenery, and a styleof pure and transparent simplicity, is,perhaps, unequalled. " The beauty ofexternal nature," says Beattie's biographer,in the Edinburgh Encyclopaedia,was never more finely worshippedthan in the conclusion of the ninthstanza, which Gray truly pronounced tobe inspired."As an essayist, he will ever be consideredas a pleasing, useful, and sensiblewriter ; and where he does not attemptthe controversialist, few authors appearto more advantage. His knowledgewas various and extensive; and therewere few branches of science, exceptmechanics, geometry, and mathematics,with which he was not, in some degree,acquainted. In h's character of professor,he was unwearied in his exertionsfor the benefit of his pupils, who regardedhim with affection and reverence,and made it their earnest ambition toobtain his regard. He never employedharsh epithets, and, when there wasoccasion, conveyed a reproof in such amanner, that not only the delinquent,but the whole class, were frequentlymelted into tears. His private characterwas, in every respect, amiable ; and noone died more generally esteemed andregretted. His principal amusementswere music and archery ; he detestedboth cards and chess, and used to saythat the latter was a total war of theapplication of thought.EDWARD GIBBON.THIS celebrated historian, the son ofa gentleman who for some time representedthe borough of Petrified inparliament, was born at Putney, on the27th of April, 1737. After having receivedthe elements of instruction at aday school, and under a private tutor,he was, in 1746, sent to an academyat Kingston-upon-Thames ; and fromthence, in 1748, to Westminster, wherehe entered the school, and resided in aboarding-house kept by his aunt. Hisdelicate health soon occasioned his removalfrom Westminster School, thoughhe subsequently attempted to renew hisattendance there, after having passedsome time at Bath and Winchester, bythe advice of his physicians. In hisfifteenth year, he was placed under thecare of the Rev. Mr. Philip Francis, thetranslator of Horace ; and, on the 3rdof April, 1752, he was matriculated as agentleman commoner of Magdalen College,Oxford. Here, according to hisown account, "he spent fourteen months,the most unprofitable of his whole life,"and appears to have been conspicuousonly for his dissipation and extravagance.Such a mode of passing histime he attributes less to his own inclination,than to the negligence of histutors, whom he charges with recoilunending no plan of study for his use,and prescribing no exercises for his inspection." I was not," he says, " devoidof capacity or application ;" and insinuatesthat he might have arrived atacademical distinction, "in the disciplineof a well-constituted university, underthe guidance of skilful and vigilant professors."His departure from Oxford was hastenedby his adoption of the catholicfaith, his complete conversion to which,he attributed to a perusal of Bossuet'sExposition of the Catholic Doctrine,and the History of the Protestant Variations.At a. future period he observes:"To my present feelings, it seems incrediblethat I should ever believe that Ibelieved in transubstantiation. But myconqueror oppressed me with the sacramentalwords, " this is my body ;" anddashed against each other the figurativehalf-meanings of the protestant sects.Every objection was resolved into omnipotence; and, after repeating, at St.Mary's, the Athanasian creed, I humblyacquiesced in the mystery of the realpresence." On his arrival in London,he introduced himself to a- priest, re-rtbunced the protestant, and was admitteda member of the Romish church,in June, 1753. His father was highly indignantat his religious conversion, andsent him. in consequence, to Lausanne,in Switzerland, where he resided in tirehouse of Mr. Pavillard, and " spentnearly five years with pleasure and profit."His tutor, who was a Calvinisticminister, spared no effort to convincehim that he had come to an erroneousconclusion concerning the catholic doctrine; and his exertions, aided by themature reflections of his pupil, were atlength successful. " The various articlesof the Romish creed," says our author,disappeared like a dream ; and, aftera full conviction, on Christmas day, 1754,I received the sacrament in the churchof Lausanne." During his stay in thiscity, he made a rapid and profitableprogress in his studies ; and, besidesopening a correspondence with the chiefliterati of the' continent, he acquired aknowledge of French and Italian, andperfected his acquaintance with theGreek and Latin languages.Previous to his leaving Lausanne, heformed an attachment to a MademoiselleLurched, the commencement ad terminationof which, in his own words, istoo interesting to be omitted. "I saw,"he says, "and loved. I found her learned,without pedantry ; lively in conversation; pure in sentiment ; elegant inmanners. She permitted me to makeher two or three visits in her father'shouse. I passed some happy days thereinthe mountains of Burgundy, and herparents honourably encouraged the connexion.In a calm retirement, the gayvanity of youth no longer fluttered inher bosom. She listened to the voiceof truth and passion, and I might presumeto hope I had made some impressionon a virtuous heart. At Grassyand Lausanne, I indulged my dream offelicity; but, on my return to England,I soon discovered that my father wouldnot hear of this strange alliance. Aftera painful struggle, 1 yielded to my fate.I sighed as a lover ; I obeyed as a son :my wound was insensibly healed bytime, absence, and the habits of a newlife. My cure was accelerated by afaithful report of the tranquillity andcheerfulness of the lady herself; andmy love subsided into friendship andesteem. A rich banker of Paris, a citizenof Geneva, had the good fortuneand good sense to discover and possessthis inestimable treasure; and, in thecapital of taste and luxury, she resistedthe temptation of wealth, as she hadsustained the hardships of indigence.The genius of her husband has exaltedhim to the most conspicuous station inEurope; and Mademoiselle Lurched isnow the wife of M. Necker."In 1758, he returned to England, andtook up his residence at his father'shouse, where he devoted himself tothe gradual collection of a library, andtota strict course of reading. In 1761,he acquired some reputation on thecontinent, but little at home, by thepublication of a small work, written inthe French language, entitled, Essaisur 1'Etude de la Literature. His literaryoccupation received an interruptionin the same year, by his enteringas captain in the Hampshire militia, inwhich he remained till the peace of1763. He then set out for Paris, wherethe reputation he had acquired by hisEssai, procured him an introduction tothe first literary and fashionable circles.After a stay of eleven months at Lausanne,he proceeded to Rome, whereEDWARD GIBBON.as " he sat musing amongst the ruins ofthe capitol, while the bare-footed friarswere singing vespers in the Temple ofJupiter, the idea of writing the declineand fall of the city first started to hismind." lie returned from Italy in 1765,and again entered the militia as commandant ; but resignedthe situation on the death of hisfather, in 1770. The interval betweenthese periods were passed by him in avariety of amusements and occupations,partly in the country, and partly inLondon, where, in conjunction withother travellers, he established a weeklyconvivial meeting, under the name ofthe Roman Club. Alluding to this periodof his life, he says, " I lamentedthat, at the proper age, I had not embracedthe lucrative pursuits of the lawor of trade, the chances of civil office orIndia adventure, or even the fat slum-hersof the church." His regret at thewant of a profession arose, in a greatmeasure, from an apprehension of being| left, in his old age, without a sufficientmaintenance ; a fear that acted as a stimulusto his subsequent exertions.He had already made some progressin a History of the Revolutions of Switzerland,and, in conjunction with hisfriend Mr. Deyverdun, had producedtwo volumes of a literary journal, entitledMemoires Literatures de la GrandeBretagne. The former, however, hecommitted to the flames, before it wasI finished, and the latter met with littleencouragement. His next performancewas more successful ; it was a masterlyrefutation of Warburton's hypothesisthat Virgil's description of Aeneas's descentinto the shades, was an allegoricalrepresentation of the hero's initiationinto the Eleusinian mysteries. Abouttwo years after the death of his fa t r,he sat down steadily to the compositionof the first volume of his celebratedhistory. "At the outset," he says, " allwas dark and doubtful ; even the titleof the work, the true era of the declineand fall of the empire, the limits of theintroduction, the division of the chapters,and the order of the narrative ; andI was often tempted to cast away thelabour of seven years ;" and, again,three times did I compose the firstchapter, and twice the second and third,before I was tolerably certain of theireffect." At length, in 1776, previously 'to which he had been returned to parliamentfor the borough of Liskeard,through the influence of his cousin, Mr.Eliot, appeared the first quarto volumeof his Decline and Fall of the RomanEmpire. It was received with a burstof applause, and almost immediatelyreached a third edition ; but the mostgratifying result to its author was thespontaneous approbation of Hume andRobertson. " My book," says Gibbon,was on every table, and almost onevery toilette." The two chapters, however,in which revealed religion wasimpugned, gave rise to various attacks ;but he only thought fit to reply to one,by Mr. Davis, who called in question"not the faith, but the fidelity of thehistorian."In parliament, our author was a silentsupporter of ministers, and was employedby them to compose, in theFrench language, a manifesto againstthat government, which was sent as astate paper to all the courts of Europe,under the title of Memoire Justificatif.For this service he was appointed oneof the lords commissioners of trade andthe plantations, but on the retirementof the North administration, his placebeing abolished, he meditated a retirementto Lausanne, for the purpose ofcompleting his History. Previously tohis departure from England, a secondand third volume had appeared in 1781,in which he tells us, " his EcclesiasticalHistory still breathed the same spirit offreedom ;" but, " that his obstinatesilence, with regard to former attacks,had damped the ardour of the polemics."In 1783, he sold every thing but hislibrary, and proceeded to Lausanne ;where, in conjunction with his friend,Mr. Deyverdun, he took an elegant andbeautifully situated house, and devotedhimself to the composition of his History,and the pleasures of the societywhich the place afforded. In four yearshe brought his Decline and Fall of theRoman Empire to a termination, andseems to have arrived at the close of hisliterary labours with mingled feelingsof regret and delight. " It was," hesays, " on the day, or rather night, ofthe 27th of June, 1787, between thehours of eleven and twelve, that I wrotethe last lines of the last page, in a summerhousein my garden. After layingdown my pen, I took several turns inLITERATURE.a berceau, or covered walk of acacias,which commands a prospect of thecountry, the lake, and the mountains.The air was temperate, the sky wasserene, the silver orb of the moon wasreflected from the waters, and all naturewas silent. I will not dissemble thefirst emotions of joy, on the recovery ofnay freedom and, "perhaps, the establishmentof my fame. But my pridewas soon humbled, and a sober melancholyspread over my mind, by the ideathat I had taken an everlasting leave ofan old and agreeable companion, andtiltat whatsoever might be the futuredate of my history, the life of the authormight be short and precarious. I willadd two faets^ which have seldom occurredin the composition of six, or atleast five, quartos : First My roughmanuscript, without any intermediatecopy, has been sent to press. SecondNot a sheet has been seen by anyhuman eyes excepting those of theauthor ad the printer. The faults andmerits are exclusively my own."In April, 1788, the publication ofthe concluding volumes took place,under his own superintendence, forwhich purpose he had come to London,where he passed most of his time withLords North and Sheffield,, and residedwith the family of the latter. la July,he returned to Lausanne, but the deathof his friend Dey verdun, which occurredshortly afterwards, and " the tide ofemigration and wretchedness," causedby the explosion of the French revolution,had broken the charm whichthat place once had for him. In 1791,he was visited by Lord Sheffield, and in1-793, on the death of that nobleman'swife, he, at the earnest desire of theformer, proceeded to England, andagain took up his residence at hisfriend's house. After some monthsspent in familiar intercourse with theprincipal political and literary charactersof the time, he sunk under theeffects of a hydrocele the result of a rupture,with which he had been afflictedfor nearly thirty years. He was tappedseveral times previously to his decease,which took place on the 16th of January,1794. On the preceding day he hadtalked as usual, and, so far from anticipatinghis death, said, " that he thoughthimself a good life for ten, twelve, or,perhaps, twenty years''The character of Gibbon, in manypoints, resembled that of Hume ; hedied a bachelor ; was a gentleman, asceptic, and an historian ; treated hisliterary antagonists with contempt, andhad a dignified sense of his own abilities.He was careful to retain hisplace in society, by a strict adherence toits established rules ; and as he livedfor the world, took care not to lose itsesteem by any conduct inconsistentwith the calmness of a philosopher, thedictates of honour, or the maxims ofmorality. He possessed a lofty mindand spirit, but acted rather from motivethan principle; and, as a politician, hecan be considered in no other characterthan that of a ministerial follower for thesake of convenience and emolument.His conduct in his domestic relationswas in the highest degree exemplary ;and in his friendships he was sincere,constant, and ardent. He possessedgreat natural powers of mind, which heassiduously studied to improve : in conversationhe is described, by LordSheffield, as ready, cheerful, entertaining,brilliant, illuminating, and interesting.As an author, he is among themost distinguished of the eighteenthcentury; but the lapse of forty yearshas somewhat impaired his reputationfor a style which is now generally admittedto be enigmatical, pompous, andelaborate, where it should have beenconcise, simple, and explicit. Dr. Beattiesays, " Such is the affectation of hisstyle, that I could never get throughthe half of one of his volumes ;" and acelebrated bishop observed of his "bulkyquartos," that they were " only fit forthe gloom and horror of wintry storms. 'None can deny to it, however, a pervadingsplendour, stateliness, and majesty; and, indeed, the writer seems tobe always on his guard 4 against a commonexpression, as if he were afraid ofdegrading his own powers, by descendingto the level of ordinary capacities.It is thus that lie has some passages ofsurprising and matchless beauty ; andwhere his language is in keeping withhis subject, the understanding is readilycaptivated, and the ear unconsciouslydelightedlyto the matter of his history, theprincipal charges against him are thegrave ones of a covert attempt to overthrowa belief in revealed religion, andTHOMAS PAINEa complacent indelicacy of description,especially in the lather volumes. To thishe answers, that " the Licentious passagesare confined to the notes, and tothe obscurity of a learned language;" anapology which few, perhaps, will considersufficient. His attack on Christianityhe himself seems to hare regretted,though he never retracted, " Had Ibelieved," he says, " that the majorityof English readers were so fondly attached,even to the name and shadowof Christianity; had I foreseen that thepious, the timid, and the prudent, wouldfeel, or affect to feel, with such exquisitesensibility ; I might, perhaps, havesoftened the two invidious chapters,which could create many enemies, andconciliate few friends." His patheticobservations at the dose of his memoirs,show that his own notions offered nosecurity for felicity here, if, as he insinuated,those of ethers would fail todoso hereafter. After quoting theopinion of Fonteneile, who, lie observes*fixes oar moral happiness to the matureseason in which our passions are supposedto be calmed, our duties fulfilled,our ambition satisfied, our fame andfortune established on a solid basis,he say-s, u 1 am far more inclined toembrace than to dispute this comfortabledoctrine. I will not suppose anypremature decay of mind or body; but Imust reluctantly observe, that two causes,the abbreviation of time, and the failureof hope, will always tinge with a brownershade the evening of life." In a. letterto Lord Sheffield, after the death of hiswife, he says, " the only consolation inthese melancholy trial* to which humanlife is exposed, time only one at least inwhich 1 have any confidence, is thepresence oi a reTHOMAS PAINE.THOMAS PAIN, or PAINE, as hej chose to call himself, the son of a stay-maker,who was a quaker by religiousprofession, was born at Thetford. inNorfolk, on the 29th of January, 173Z.He received his education at tie free-schoolof his native place, but madelittle proficiency in his studies, whichdid not go beyond reading, writing, andarithmetic. At the age of thirteen, hewas apprenticed to his father, withwhom he continued for about five years,though, in his Rights of Man, he tellsus " that when little more than sixteenyears of age, he entered on board theTerrible privateer;" but relinquished,at his father's request, after a short stayat sea, all further idea of a maritimelife. In 1756, he came to London, andworked some time with Mr. Morris, awell-known stay-maker, in HanoverStreet, Long Acre. In 1758, he followedthe same trade at Dover; and, in thesucceeding year, he commenced Businesson his own account, at Sandwich,where, on the 27th of September, 1759,he married Mary Lambert, the daughterof an exciseman. Pecuniary difficultiesdrove him, in a short time, to Margate,where his wife is supposed to have died.In July, 1761, ne removed to Ms father'shouse at Thetford, and, having re-noticed his trade of a stay-maker, de-weedabout fourteen months to study,to fist himself for an exciseman, whichsituation he obtained in December, ,1762, but lost it lor some trifling misdemeanour,in 1765, and was restoredon petition, in 1766. In the interval,and at this time also, he resided as anusher at an academy in Leman Street,Goodman's Fields; and shortly afterwards,he filled a similar situation atthe Rev. Mr. Gardner's school, in Kensington.Whilst jn these capacities, hesays, " I derived considerable information; indeed, I have seldom passed fiveminutes of my Kfe, however circumstanced,in which I did not acquire considerableknowledge."in April, 17tf7, he left Mr. Gardner's,and came to London, where he becameacquainted with Dr. Bevis, the astronomer;and, by attending the philosophicallectures of Martin and Ferguson,soon became a proficient in these studies,and the mathematics. According toone of his biographers (Mr. Chalmers,who writes under the name of Oldys),Paine was desirous of taking orders,LITERATURE.but being unable to obtain a certificateof qualification, he commenced itinerantpreacher, and lectured in Cornfields,and various places of England. Hiswanderings terminated in March, 176'S,when lie was employed in the Excise,at Lewes, in Sussex, where he also carriedon the trade of a grocer, on thedeath of one Olive, whose business hesucceeded to, and whose daughter hemarried, in March, 1771. In the sameyear, he wrote a song upon occasion ofthe election at Shoreham ; and, in thefollowing one, a pamphlet, recommendingthe advance of the salaries ofexcisemen; "though," says Mr. Oldys,he asserted, in his newspaper altercations,in 1779, that till the epoch of hisCommon Sense, he had never publisheda syllable." His traffic in tobacco, anda suspicion of unfair practices, causedhis final dismissal from the Excise, in1774 ; though, it should be observed,his conduct, in other respects, had calledforth expressions of approbation fromthe Excise office. In the same year, heseparated from his wife, by mutual agreement,and left Lewes for London, in astate of insolvency. His conduct withrespect to his second marriage, has beendifferently represented: our previousauthority asserts, that he treated Mrs.Paine with great cruelty; whilst Mr.Hickman, his biographer and admirer,says that, " he always spoke tenderlyand respectfully of his wife ; and senther several times pecuniary aid, withouther knowing whence it came."According to Mr. Oldys, he merelymarried her to pay his debts, and nevercohabited with her ; and the latter partof this statement is confirmed, in a lifeof Paine, by Carlisle.On his arrival in the metropolis, heobtained a recommendation from a commissionerof the Excise, to Dr. Franklin,then a colonial agent in London, bywhose advice he resolved on proceedingto America. He arrived at Philadelphiain the winter of 1774, and was first engagedas a showman, by Mr. Aitkin, abookseller, who, in 1775, appointed himeditor of The Pennsylvania Magazine,with a salary of 50 currency a-year.He had previously been employed in alaboratory, where he passed a fewmonths in trying experiments for thepurpose of discovering a cheap and expeditiousmethod of making saltpetre,and he had also proposed the plan of a jsaltpetre association, for the voluntarysupplying of the public magazines withgunpowder. In the conduct of theMagazine he had shewn sufficient talentto attract the notice of the most eminentliterati of Philadelphia, and Dr. Rushthought he could not fix upon a moreproper person to write some work, whichmight prepare the Americans for a separationfrom Great Britain. This ledto the composition of our author's famouspamphlet of Common Sense, atitle suggested by Dr. Rush, and whichappeared in January, 1776, under theauspices, it may be said, of the legislatureof Pennsylvania, who rewardedhim with a present of 500. Healso received the degree of MA. fromthe university of the same province,and was chosen a member of theAmerican Philosophical Society. Thework produced a wonderful effect ; wastranslated into various languages, and,notwithstanding its grammatical deficiencies,was respectively attributed toAdams, Franklin, and Washington.After hostilities had commenced betweenEngland and America, Painepublished a periodical paper, called TheCrisis, which he carried on till the terminationof the war between Britainand America, in April, 1783. In themeantime, he had been appointed clerkto a committee of the congress, whichhe lost through a breach of trust, butwas shortly afterwards chosen clerk tothe Assembly of Philadelphia. His dismissal,or resignation, as the majorityof his biographers term it, took place inconsequenceof some official disclosureswhich he had made, tending to alienatethe French court ; but it should, at thesame time, be stated, that he had doneso for the purpose of exposing the peculationof one Silas Deane, and with noview of committing a breach of trust.In 1782, he published a letter to theAbbe Raynal, in which he undertookto clear up the mistakes of the latterin his account of the American Revolution; and shortly afterwards, a letterto the Earl of Shelburne, on hisspeech in parliament, in which he hadprophesied that " when Great Britainshall acknowledge American independence,the sun of Britain's glory isset for ever." In 1785, he received, asareward for his sei vices, after a motionThem AS PAINE3,75for appointing him historiographer tothe United States had been rejected, thesum of three thousand dollars ; and thestate of New York granted him an estateof five hundred acres, at New Rochelle,on which was an elegant and extensivemansion. In 1787, he proceeded to Paris,where he presented to the Academy ofSciences, the model of an iron bridge,of his own invention, which was thefirst of the kind suggested in moderntimes. On his arrival in England, hehastened to Thetford, where he devotedhimself to study and writing; and beforethe end of the year, returned to London,and published a pamphlet on therecent transactions between Great Britainand Holland, entitled Prospects onthe Rubicon, in which he severely censuredthe measures of the Englishadministration. In 1788, he took uphis residence at Rotherham, in Yorkshire,for the purpose of superintendingthe erection of an iron bridge, accordingto his plan above-mentioned, and uponwhich, the various iron bridges in Europehave, in a great measure, been constructed.It gained him great reputationamong the mathematicians of theday ; but the expenditure which it hadrequired, brought him into pecuniaryembarrassments, and caused him tobe arrested in October, 1789, for jgf>20.Remittances from America freed himfrom the debt in about three weeks, andshortly afterwards he went to Paris,where he published, under the name ofDuchatelet, a tract, recommending theabolition of royalty. Upon his returnto London, he found every tongue loudin approbation of Mr. Burke's recentlypublished Reflections on the FrenchRevolution ; in answer to which, lieproduced, in March, 1791, the firstpart of his celebrated Rights of Man,dedicated to Washington. It is a singularfact, if Mr. Carlile has stated ittruly, that, previously to this publication,Paine should have been intimate withBurke, and a guest at the table of theDuke of Portland. He also insinuatesthat government offered, by way ofbribe, through Chapman, the printer,the price of 2,000 for the copyright ofthe second part of The Rights of Man,which was refused. The second partappeared in February, 1792, and, likethe first, had an unparalleled sale ; amillion and a half of copies, it is calculated,having, in a very short time,been circulated in England. The democraticsocieties used all their exertionsto distribute it among the lowerclasses, upon whom it produced aneffect that induced government issue,in the month of May, a proclamationagainst wicked and seditious publications; and, on the same day, to commencea. prosecution against die authorof The Rights of Man. The publicationhad already been translated into French,and was, for the time, the .universaltopic; it was applauded and execratedwith equal extravagance ; and, amongother productions, gave rise to MissWoolstonecraft's Rights of Women, anda burlesque treatise, entitled Sketch ofthe Rights of Little Boys and LittleGirls. In August, he published hisAddress to the Addressers; the object ofwhich was to procure a national convention,in contempt of the parliament,and which was called forth by the.numerous addresses presented at thistime, to the throne, in behalf of ourconstitution. His trial was to come onin the following December, but, in consequenceof his election as a member ofthe French National Convention, hegladly quitted England, and arrived inFrance in the middle of September.At Calais, says his biographer, Mr.Hickman, a public dinner was provided,a salute was fired from the battery, thetroops were drawn out, and there was ageneral rejoicing throughout the wholetown. Oil reaching Paris, he immediatelytook his seat in the Convention,where, in consequence of his being unacquaintedwith the national language, heis said to have spoken by an interpreter,although his French biographer, Dipping,says that he never delivered butone speech. Meantime, the result of his,,trial, which ended in his outlawry, hadgiven him no favourable bias towards hisnative country, and one of his earliestvotes was for a declaration of war withGreat Britain. At the latter end of 1 793,he was an advocate for the trial of Louis;but, to the astonishment and indignationof the Jacobins, voted against thesentence of death passed on the monarch,proposing only his imprisonmentduring the war, and his subsequentbanishment. Paine was. in consequence,sent by Robespierre to the prison of theLuxembourg, in 1794, where he re-LITERATURE.trained some months in captivity, andonly escaped the guillotine by an accident." One hundred and sixty-eightpersons," he says, " were taken out ofthe Luxembourg in one night, and onehundred and sixty of them guillotinedthe next day, of which I knew I was tohave been one ; and the manner Iescaped that fate is curious. Whenpersons were taken out for execution,it was always done in the night j andthose who performed that office hada private mark or signal, by whichthey knew what rooms to go to ; but ithappened, (if happening is a properword,) that the mark was put on thedoor of my prison when it was open,and flat against the wall, and therebycame inside when it was shut at night ;and the destroying angel passed it by.A few days after, Robespierre fell, andthe American ambassador arrived, andclaimed me, and invited me to hishouse."On his release from prison, wherehe is said to have composed the secondpart of his Age of Reason, he claimedto be restored to the Convention ; and,accordingly, took his seat on the 8th ofDecember," 1794. The first part of thecelebrated work above-mentioned hadappeared at London, in the previousMarch, and the second was publishedin 1795. In the same year, appearedhis Dissertation on the First Principles'ftf Government : to which is added thegenuine speech, translated and deliveredat the Tribune of the FrenchConvention, on July the 7th. His nextpublications were The Decline and Fallof the English System of Finance ; TheAmerican Crisis ; Letter to GeorgeWashington ; Agrarian Justice opposedto Agrarian Law and Agrarian Monopoly; and a Letter to Mr. Erskine, onthe prosecution of T. Williams, for publishingthe Age of Reason. During hisstay in France, he also employed himselfin mechanics, and made models ofcranes and bridges, according to plansof his own, for which, it is said, he refusedto accept an offer of 3,000. Heremained in Paris till 1802, " drunk,"j as his biographer, Mr. Cheetham, in-i forms us, "every day; mixing with thelowest company, and so filthy in hisperson, as to be avoided by all men of': decency."lie now determined on quitting Europe,with the intention of passing therest of his days in America ; and, inthe October of the last-mentioned year,he arrived at Baltimore, under the protectionof the president, Jefferson. Accordingto his own account, his returnto America produced a great agitationall over the country; " every newspaper,"he says, " was filled with applauseor abuse ;" adding, " my propertyhas been taken care of by myfriends, and is now worth 6,000."Whilst at the hotel at Baltimore, he wasprincipally visited by the lowest class ofEnglish, Scotch, and Irish emigrants;and, according to his last-named biographer," drank grog with them inthe. tap-room, morning, noon, andnight, admired and praised, struttingand staggering about, showing himselfto all, and shaking hands with all."He had brought with him, from Paris, awoman of the name of Bonne ville, whomhe had seduced from her husband,though by what means it is difficult toconceive, as his personal appearanceis said to have been, at this time, particularlyrepulsive, his body diseased,and his manners gross and disgusting.In 1804, he left this woman, and proceeded,with her two sons, to his estateat New Rochelle, where he lived in astate of intoxication, filthiness, and misery,an object fearful to himself, andhateful to others, until the 8th of June,1804, when death put a period to hisexistence.Such, at least, is the picture drawnof him by Mr. Cheetham ; and hismost partial biographers admit, thathis latter days were passed in muchmisery, and that inebriety was one ofhis vices. According to Mr. Carlile, itwas his only fault ; except, indeed, theweakness with which he charges Painefor feeling hurt at the refusal of theSociety of Friends to allow his intermentin their burial-ground. His deathbedscene, as described by Dr. Manley,in his life by Cheetham, is too extraordinaryto be omitted ; and we are inclinedto give the whole insertion credit,as part of it has been quoted by Mr.Carlile. A few days before his death,he called out, during his paroxysmsof pain, " Oh ! Lord, help me ! God,help me! Jesus Christ, help me ! Oh!Lord, help me !" &c. ; repeating thesame expression without the least va-thomasPAINE.nation, in a tone of voice that wouldalarm the house. In consequence ofthese exclamations, Dr. Manley, on theniglu of the 6th of June, thus addressedhim : " Mr. Paine, your opinions, bya large portion of the community, havebeen treated with deference : you havenever been in the habit rf mixing, inyour conversation, words of course: youhave never indulged in the practice ofprofane swearing : you must be sensiblethat we are acquainted with your religiousopinions, as they are gi-even to thej world. What must we think of your3 present conduct? Why do you callupon Jesus Christ to help you ? Doyou believe that he can help you ? Doyou believe in the divinity of JesusChrist? Come, now, answer me honestly; I want an answer as fromthe lips of a dying man, for I verily believethat you will not live four-and-twentyhours." I waited, continues Dr.Manley, some time at the end of everyquestion ; he did not anew er, but ceasedto exclaim in the above manner. Again1 addressed him : " Mr. Paine, youhave not answered my questions; willyou answer them ? Allow me to askagain, do you believe, or let jptxequalify the question, do you wish tobelieve that Jesus Christ is the son ofGod ? " After a pause of some minutes,he answered, " I have no wish to believeon that subject."The almost offensive pertinacity withwhich he was besieged by those-whowished to convert Paine to Christianity,and the odium with which he felt himselfregarded, might possibly have hadsome share in producing the mixtureof disgust, despair, and distraction,which are exhibited in the alcove scene.'I he following anecdotes, furnished byMr. Hickman, are more characteristicof the map : One afternoon, a veryold lady, dressed in a large scarlethooded cloak, knocked t his door, andinquired for hkn. He was asleep?thinking it a pity to make an oldwoman call twice, the servant took herinto Mr. Paine's bed-room, and awokehim : he rose upon one elbow ; then,with an .expression of eye that made theold woman stagger back a step or two,he-asked, " What do you want ?" Shesaid " I come from Almighty God totell you, that it you do not repent ofjour sins, and believe in our blessedSaviour, you will be damned ; and "Pol, pol ! it is not true** cried Paine 1 ;you were iMH&etu with any such message:Jarvis, make her go away; theAlinugfc-ty would riot send such anugly old woman about with his messages,go away ; go back. Shut thedoor." A Mr. Hargrave, a minister ofa sect called the New Jernsalemites,accosted him with, " Sir, my name isHargrave ; I am minister ot the NewJerusalem Church; we, sir, explain theScripture in its true meaning : the keyhas been lust these four thousand years,and we have found it." " Then," saidPaine, in his own neat way, " I thinkby this time it must be somewhatrusty." Anecdotes of a contrary nature'have been told, such as raine'ssaying 4i if ever the devil had an agenton earth, I have been one," &c.; butthey are involved in too much doubt tobe stated gravely as facts.The character of Paine .as a nan liasbeen much ti adduced, batt rather in .consequenceof hie writings, than of hie.actions. These have been so differentlyrepresented, and prejudice is so manifestin .all that has been said of him,both by friends and adversaries, thatjustice forbids us from joining in tlivinuien,t abuse that has .been heapedupon him. He certainly was not anamiable man, though there are someinstances which show him to have beena generous minded one. He used allhis exertions to save the life of an Englishofficer, who had been taken intocustody for striking him at a coffeehousein Paris j arid fee left to MadameBonneville and her two sons, the wholeof his property, though he is said tohave treated the lady, during his Life,with meanness and tyranny. Mr.,Oldys, however, tells us that Paine wasa cruel husband to both of his wivesthat he was an adulterer in more instancesthan one and that he onlyallowed his mother nine shillings perweek, and suffered her to want thatsum, after the failure of the agent whowas directed to pay it. But his accountmust be received with caution, as heevidently writes in a spirit of thevindictive prejudice. Painedied little respected, a:.d attended byfew friends ; for his deistical principleshad long alienated (ram him the politicalparty to which he-was attained,LITERATURE.independently of his attack upon Washington,in his letter to that celebratedgeneral, whom he designated as anapostate and impostor.As a writer, Paine must be awardedthe merit of sincerity, notwithstandingthe insinuations of Mr. Cheetham, thathe abused patronage only because hecould not himself reap the benefit of it.He has been accused of blasphemouslyemploying the supposed last hours ofhis life for completing his Age of Reason,during his confinement in Paris ;but this only proves the conviction ofhis mind, and the strength of his understanding,upon the subject. In a letterto Samuel Adams, who had taxed himwith defending irreligion in this work,he says, " Expecting to die every hour,1 had no time to lose, and determinedto publish my work : I saw the Frenchpeople debased in atheism, and resolvedto establish them in that first article ofall faiths a belief in one God." He goeson to say, that in endeavouring to save rthe life of Louis the Sixteenth, in theConvention, he ran the risk of losing hisown ; 'the truth of which we havealready seen. His Common Sense,Rights of Man, and Age of Reason,have been made rather the subject ofvituperation 'than controversy; and,,with the exception of a reply goethe last, ;by the Bishop of Llandaff, few writershave thought proper to answer Paineon his own ground. Gilbert Wakefieldcalls him an unprincipled, arrogant,contemptuous, self-opinionated, ill-informedwriter ; " for my own part," headds, " his unprecedented infatuationalmost strikes me dumb with amazement; I am not acquainted with sucha compound of vanity and ignorance asThomas Paine, in the records of literaryhistory." He certainly was both vainand ignorant ; but to complain of aman's deficiency of learning, is not toanswer his arguments. Paine, probably,held the scholastic philosophers in asmuch contempt as they did him, andwith more reason ; for the refinedsharpness of their logical arrows oftenfell short of the mark, which his moreblunt and weighty shafts did not fail toreach. In fine, without approving theprinciples of the one or the other, wesee no moral difference, as deisticalwriters, between the cowardly insinuationsof Gibbon, the polished sophisticalHume, and the bold, dogmatic, speculative,unlettered Paine. Each had thesame end in view ; and if the last beworthy of the epithets that have beenbestowed upon him, no accomplishmentsshould hinder the two formerfrom being handed down to posteritywith equal degradation. A fundamentalerror of Paine's, in his political writings,was his .consideration of men as theyought to be, instead of as they are ; andwhenever he starts upon this basis, hissuperstructure becomes untenable. Onhis deistical theories we have neitherspace nor wish to dilate ; if, however,we see no necessity for, we apprehendno danger in, discussing them;since the fallibility of human reason isnot denied, and divine faith is neitherestablished nor shaken by the processof logic.JOHN V.'OLCOT.T HIS talented writer, better knownby the appellation of Peter Pindar, wasthe son of a medical practitioner, andwas born at Dodbrooke, in Devonshire,on the 9ih of May, 1738. He receivedthe rudiments of his education atKingsbridge, and was afterwards sent,successively, to a seminary at Liskeard,and Bodui'in, whence he proceeded tothe continent, and studied there forabout a year. On his return, he wasapprenticed to his uncle, an apothecary,at Fowey, in Cornwall, where he madeno ordinary progress in his profession,though much of his time appears tohave been given to poetry. " As myuncle was always averse to my shining,"he says in one of his letters", " I usedto steal away to an old ruined tower,situate on a rock close by the sea,where many an early and late hourwas devoted to the muses." Havinggone to London to attend the hospitals,he made such good use of his time aJOHN Wolcott.fitted him to enter upon the practice ofhis profession, and, in 17<>7, lie was appointedthe medical attendant of sirWilliam Trelawney, who was just nominatedgovernor of Jamaica. Previouslyto his departure, he obtainedthe degree of M.D. from one of theScotch universities, and " on my arrivalin Jamaica," he says, " 1 acted onlyas physician." He, however, found solittle to do, that upon Sir William Treetelling hiin.it was a pity he hadnot been bred a parson, as he had aliving in the island just vacant, Dr.Wolcot requested his excellency to bestowit upon him. His wish beingcomplied with, he returned to England ;where "the Bishop of London," he observes,"ordained me; and I held aliving in Jamaica, but not of consequencesufficient to detain me in theisland; so that, on the death of hisexcellency Sir William Trelawney, Iaccompanied Lady Trelawney to England."This occurred in 1768; and,arriving in England the following year,he took up his residence at Truro,where he practised as a physician forabout four years. At the expiration ofthis time, his general satires upon hisneighbours, ; ; and an unsuccessful lawsuitwith the overseers of the parish,induced him to remove to Whetstone,and subsequently, in 1780, to Exeter,in company with the painter, Opie,:or he hadrecently become.whose friend and benei'actcHe had already made his satiricaltalents known by a poem, entitled ASupplicatory Epistle to the Reviewers ;and, on his removal to London, in 1782,he published Lyric Odes to the RoyalAcademicians. In this he attackedWest, and other. eminent artists ; and,whether justly or not, the public wereso pleased with the poem, that theauthor continued the subject, under thetitle of More Lyric Odes. The king'shaving discovered upon his plate a certaindisgust-ting insect, led to the compositionof our author's Lousiad, inwhich he ridiculed that event withinimitable drollery. It is said that therewas some intention of prosecuting himfor this effusion, but the fear of furthersatire prevented government from resortingto actual proceedings. " Thestory of the louse," says Wolcot, inhis humorous way, " is a fact it was alouse ; but whether a garden or a bodylouse was never ascertained. I had thisfrom the cooks themselves, with whomI dined several times at BuckinghamHouse and Windsor, immediately afterthe shave took place." It was agitatedin the privy-council, he observes inone. of his letters, " to attack me for mywritings, particularly the Lousiad ; butAre you sure of a verdict?' said a lordhigh in the law (Chancellor Thurlow) ;if not so, by , we shall look likea parcel of fools.' " The Lousiad wasfollowed by Bozzy and 1'iozzy, andseveral other satirical pieces, in rapidsuccession, of which the principal were,An Epistle to a falling Minister, andOdes to Mr. Paine, Author of TheRights of Man.In 1793, he sold the copyright of hisworks for an annuity of ^250, thebooksellers probably contemplating hisdecease at no distant date, and imaginingthat he had done with further composition.Our author, however, havingrecovered from an asthma, during hisresidence in Devonshire and Cornwall,returned to London, in the fullvigour of his mental and bodily powers,and resumed his pen, with his usualsuccess. The grantors of his annuityclaimed, in consequence, a right to theprofits of his subsequent publications,but the contrary was determined-by alaw-suit, which took place after muchfruitless negotiation. In 1797, he publisheda series of his own landscapes,entitled Picturesque Views;, and continuedto publish, at intervals, poems inhis peculiar style, which.no one venturedto oppose. At length, in 1800, hewas attacked by Gifford, in his Baviad,which so irritated our author, that heapplied his cane to the former, who retaliatedin, the same manner. In 4807,an action was brought against him forcrim.ccon., but he was acquitted. In1812, the whole of his works appearedin five volumes, octavo ; after this timehe wrote but little, having completelylost his eyesight, which the operationof couching, in 1814, failed to restore.His last work was An Epistle to theEmperor of China, occasioned by theunfavourable result of Lord : Amherst'sembassy, which appeared in 1817. He.died on the 14th of January, 1819,at his residence in Somers' Town,and was buried in a vault of St. Paul's,LITERATURE,Covent Garden; his coffin, at his ownrequest, being placed so near as to touchthat of the author of Hudibras.Dr. Wolcot was undoubtedly one ofthe most original poets this country hasproduced ; his productions displayingnot merely wit and smartness, but aprofound knowledge of the world, andof the human heart, combined with asound and cultivated understanding.His serious poems evince the same commandof language, and originality ofidea, as are displayed in his satires, andprove him to have been equally capableof the sublime and ludicrous, though jexcelling in the latter. It has beensaid that he was actually pensionedby government to purchase his silence,but it does not appear that any sumhad been ever paid to him. As tothe imputed pension, he himself says,the act is this : application was madeto me by the friends of the government,that if I would employ my penin their favour, they would remunerateme with a pension. My replywas, in a jocular way, that as forvarnishing knaves, I never could consentto it ; I had no whitewash fordevils ; but if they would give me 300or 400 per annum to be mute, I mightaccede. This I said without the mostdistant idea of the proposal being accepted; however, they did accept it ;a half year elapsed, when it was intimatedto me that something was expectedfrom me in favour of theadministration. My reply was, thatthey had infamously violated the agreement,and that sooner than write foraset of men I despised, it should bevoid from that moment ; and I pronouncedit void : adding, with someacrimony, that rascality might thinkitself happy in passing without notice.As I had taken up 10 of the annuity,I sent it back to them, and gave thepitiful scoundrels my halt-year's due.This is a fair picture of the matter."The person of Dr. Wolcot does notappear to have been prepossessing,either in his countenance or figure :he was,' 1 says his biographer, ' whatwas usually termed a thick, squat man ;his face was large, dark, and flat, andthere was no speculation in his eye."Notwithstanding the number of hisenemies, which he made by his satirical ipropensities, he had, in general, thecharacter of a humane and beneficentman ; and, by his particular friends,was much esteemed and respected. Hewas a great patron of the arts, andwherever he found merit, encouragedand supported it ; it is well known thathe was the first who discovered thegenius, and laid the foundation of thefame, of Opie ; and was at great painsto extend the reputation of Mr. Bone,the celebrated enamel painter, by recommendinghim to his principal acquaintances.His manners could not becalled elegant, nor did he shine particularlyin conversation, in mixed society ;but no man was a more agreeable tSte-a-tete companion, or a more desirableintimate. His abilities were by nomeans contemptible as a critic ; and in amemoir of him in The Annual Obituary,will be found an excellent criticism othis own composition, upon Dryden'sAlexander's Feast, which he used tocall " a downright drunken Bartholinscene." In addition to hispoetical effusions, he compiled a selectionof the Beauties of English Poetry,and superintended an edition of Wilmington'sDictionary of Painters. Heneither possessed ability, nor attainedto eminence, as a physician : it was hisown observation, " that he disliked thepractice of it as an art, and confessedhimself entirely ignorant whether thepatient was cured by the vis cicatrixnatures, or the administration of a pill."He considered the joints as blocks, thenerves as ropes, and the whole systemas a ship full-rigged: in fine weatherall was lax, loose, and agreeable, inwet, every thing being tight and uncomfortable,disease was superinduced.His fondness for music was excessive,and he had himself great taste in thatart : speaking, one evening, on the subject,a gentleman observed, " I think,sir, the Germans excel, at least in execution."'* Yes, sir," was the reply ;they execute every thing they stranglemelody." Alluding to his partialityfor the fair sex, he admitted that hehad been refused by more than one lady.The following anecdote, is recorded byhimself: " A lovely Anglo-American,wh 1st recounting her adventures to me,added, that she and her lover had beenshipwrecked close by the place shethen inhabited : upon which I arose,and with much animation, exclaimedANN L E T 1 T I A BAKE A U L D.38 i4 1 hope to God, madam, he lost his life !'but it turned out that the gentlemanin question had gone out to shoot dovesfor dinner," His treatment from thepublishers he did not fail to inveighagainst, both in his writings and conversation; and the following anecdoteis told of him when dining, one day, atthe house of a celebrated bookseller.The hot had left the room, when someoneproposed his health ; " No," saidDr. Wolcot, rising, and at the sametime brandishing a bottle of red port inhis hand ; " No ; let us drink a bumperto our own, for this is author's blood."No man, perhaps, ever enjoyed so muchtemporary popularity as Peter Pindar :he himself says, that when the Dukeof Kent was last in America, he took astroll into the country, and entering aneat little cottage, saw a pretty girl witha book in her hand: "What books doyon read, my dear ?" said his royalhighness. The girl, with the most artlessinnocence, replied, " Sir, the Bibleand Peter Pindar."ANNE LETITIA BARBAULD.THIS gifted authoress, the daughterof Dr. John Aikin, was born at KenilworthHarcourt, in Leicestershire, on the 20thof June, 1748. Her education was entirelydomestic, but the quickness ofapprehension, and desire for learning,which she manifested, induced herfather to lend her his assistance towardsenabling her to obtain a knowledge ofLatin and Greek. On the removal ofDr. Aikin to superintend the dissentingacademy at Warrington, in Lancashire,she accompanied him thither, in herfifteenth year, when she is said to havepossessed great beauty of person andvivacity of intellect. The associates shemet with at Warrington were in everyway congenial to her mind, and amongothers, were Drs. Priestley and En-field,with whom she formed an intimateacquaintance. In 1773, she wasinduced to publish a volume of herPoems, which, in the course of the sameyear, went through four editions. Theywere followed by Miscellaneous Piecesin Prose, by J. (her brother) and A. L.Aikin, which considerably added to herreputation.In 1774, she married the Rev. Roche-montBaibauld, with whom she removedto Palsgrave, near Dis, in Suffolk,where her husband had charge ofa dissenting congregation, and wasabout to open a boarding school. Mrs.Barbauld assisted him in the task ofinstruction ; and some of her pupils, whohave since risen to literary eminence,among whom were the present Mr.Penman and Sir William Cell, have acknowledgedthe value of her .lessons inEnglish composition, and declamation.In 1775, appeared a small volume fromher pen, entitled Devotional Pieces,compiled from the Psalms of David,&c. ; a collection which met with littlesuccess, and some animadversion. In1778, she published her Lessons forChildren from Two to Three YearsOld ; and, in 1781, Hymns in Prose,for Children ; both of which may besaid to have formed an era in the artof instruction, and the former has beentranslated into French, by M. Pasquin.In 178.5, Mrs. Barbauld and her husbandgave up their school and visitedthe continent, whence they returned toEngland, in June, 17&6, and in the followingyear took up their residence atHampstead. Our authoress now beganto use her pen on the popular side ofpolitics, and published, successively, AnAddress to the Opposers of the Repealof the Corporation and Test Acts ; APoetical Epistle to Mr. Wilberforce onthe Rejection of the Bill for Abolishingthe Slave Trade; Remarks on GilbertWakefield Inquiry into the Expediencyand Propriety of Public orSocial Worship ; and Sins of Government,Sins of the Nation, or a Discoursefor the Fast, which last appeared in1793. In 1892, she removed, with Mr.Barbauld, to Stoke Newington ; and,in 1804, published Selections from theSpectator, Tatler, Guardian, and Freeholder,with a preliminary essay, whichis regarded as her most successfuleffort in literary criticism. In the sameLITE RATURE.year, appeared her edition of The Correspondenceof Richardson, in sixvolumes, duodecimo ; but the mostvaluable p trt of this work is the veryelegant and interesting life of that novelist,and the able review of his works,from the pen of our authoress. In 1808,she became a widow; and in 1810, appearedher edition of The BritishNovelists, with an introductory essay,and biographical and critical noticesprefixed to the works of each author.In the following year she published acollection of prose and verse, under thetitle of The Female Spectator ; and inthe same year, appeared that originaloffspring of her genius, Eighteen Hundredand Eleven, a poem. This was theList separate publication of Mrs. Bar-build,who died on , the 9th of March,1825, in the eighty-second year of herage. An edition of her works appearedin the same year, in two octavo volumes,with a memoir, by Lucy Aikin.Mrs. Barbauld is one of the mosteminent female writers which this countryhas produced; and both in proseand poetry she is unequalled by anyof her sex, in the present age. Withrespect to the style, we shall, perhaps,best describe it, by calling it that of afemale Johnson ; and her Essay onRomances is a professed imitation ofthe manner of that great critic. Heis himself said to have allowed it to bethebest that was ever attempted: " becauseit reflected the colour of histhoughts, no less than the turn of hisexpressions." She is, however, notwithout a style of her own, which isgraceful, easy, and natural ; alike calculatedto engage the most common,and the most elevated understanding.Her poems are addressed more to thefeelings than to the imagination, moreto the reason than the senses ; but thelanguage never becomes prosaic, andhas sublimity and pathos, totally freefrom bombast and affectation. Thespirit of piety and benevolence thatbreathes through her worJts pervadedher life, and she is an amiable exampleto her sex that it is possible to combine,with out danger to its morals or religiousprinciples, a manly understandingwith a feminine and susceptible heart.gilbert STUART.GILBERT STUART, son of GeorgeStuart, professor of humanity, was bornat Edinburgh, some time about theyear 1743. After having completed hiseducation at the university, he studiedjurisprudence, but an early passion forgeneral literature, indolence, or. as oneof his biographers says, "a boundlessdissipation," soon led him to relinquishthe law as a profession. His youth,however, was not altogether wasted inidleness, for he published, before hehad completed his twenty-second year,An Historical Dissertation concerningthe Antiquity of the British Constitution; the merit of which obtained forhim the degree of L Led., from theUniversity of Edinburgh. Devotinghimself to study, he, in a few years,produced a work, entitled A View ofSociety in Europe, in its progress fromrudeness to refinement ; or Inquiriesconcerning the History of Laws, Government,find Manners. This valuablework, which quickly reached a secondedition, is highly creditable both to theindustry and talent of the author, andproves "that he had meditated profoundlyon ;the most important monuments" of the middle ages. Shortlyafter its publication, he applied for theprofessorship of public law in the Universityof Edinburgh, of which he wasdisappointed, according to his ownaccount, by the influence of the. principal,Dr. Robertson, whom the representedas under obligations to him.This was not probable; but it wasbelieved, by the Earl of Buchan andothers, that Stuart's rejection was influencedby illiberal jealousy ; and, inconsequence,he ceased to be on afriendly footing with Robertson.Our author now went to London,where he commenced writing for TheMonthly Review, in 1768, and continuedhis communications for the nextfive years. In 1772. he attacked Dr.GILBERT STUART.Adam, in a pamphlet, under the nameof Bushy, in consequence of the former'spublication of a Latin grammar,intended as a substitute for that ofRuddiman, to whom Stuart was related.In doing this, however, sayshis biographer, he was probably actuatedmore by some personal dislikeof Dr. Adam, than by regard for thememory of his learned relation : for, onother occasions, he sufficiently showedthat he had no regard to Ruddiman'shonour as a-grammarian, editor, orcritic. In 1776, he returned to Edinburgh,and began The Edinburgh Magazineand Review ; and about thesame time he revised and publishedSullivan's Lectures on the Constitutionof England. In the former work hewas assisted by William Smellie. Afterthe writers had displayed much virulenceand ability, it was discontinuedin 1776. The Magazine was for sometimepopular, but Stuart's continualattacks upon almost all the nationalliterati, at length disgusted his readers.He is himself said to have written in anarticle, with reference to Edinburgh, " Idetest, from my soul, that city, and everybreathing thing in it." In 1779, appearedhis Observations concerning thePublic Law and Constitutional Historyof Scotland ; and, in the following year,The History of the Establishment ofthe Reformation of Religion in Scotland.In the former he passed somesevere strictures upon Robertson, whomhe characterized as being "nowhereprofound." In the latter, he took aspirited and tolerably impartial reviewof the important events, which are itssubject. In 1782, he published TheHistory of Scotland, from the Establishmentof the Reformation till the Deathof Queen Mary, in which he attemptedto defend Mary Stuart against the calumniesof Buchanan, 'as repeated byRobertson. In this attempt he obtaineda triumph over his literary antagonist ;but, according to his biographer in TheLondon Encyclopaedia, he was furnishedwith his most formidable weaponsby Goodwill and Tatler. Againvisiting London, he engaged in ThePolitical Herald and English Review;but an attack of the jaundice and dropsycompelled him to return to his nativecountry, where he died, on the 13thof August, 1786.In person, Dr. Stuart was about themiddle size, with a modest and expressivecountenance, sometimes glowingwith sentiments of friendship, of whichhe was truly susceptible ; and at others,darting that satire and indignation atfolly and vice, which appear in some-ofhis "writings. Though a cheerful andhearty companion, he was dissipated,intemperate, and vindictive; and thereare some letters of his from Edinburghto a friend in London, respecting Dr.Henry and his History of England,which evince a detestable spirit of meannessand malice. " I hear, he says,that Hume intends to attack Henry,but I have reserved this task for myself;I will resign it to no one else, not" evento Moves, or the man after God's ownheart :" and afterwards, " Poor Henry,I hear, is dead ; and his friends say thatI have killed him. I received the newsas a compliment, and have answeredthem that they do me too much honour."His vanity ako seems to have beenon a par with his virulence : on findinghimself attacked by Hume, he writesIt is too much for me, to be at thesame time assailed by devotees andsceptics ; my pride can scarcely supportthat." Chalmers, in his Life of Ruddi-man, draws the following just summaryof his character : " Such," hesays, " was Gilbert Stuart's laxity ofprinciple as a man, that he consideredingratitude as one of the most venialsins ; such was his conceit as a writer,that he regarded no one's merits buthis own ; such were his disappointments,both as a writer and a man, thathe allowed his peevishness to sour intomalice, and indulged his malevolencetilsit settled Jn corruption." He possessedgreat talents, though more strongthan brilliant ; and his merits as ahistorian would have been considerablygreater, if he had not been wanting inthose essentials which Malherbe termsla science et la conscience." Hiswritings are useful, and rank high inthe literature of his country : his styleis forcible and concise , but a predilectionfor the use ot'obsole:e words, and aforeign mode of expression, give to italmost the a ; r of translation.a 8-1LITERATURE.Abram \M Ries.THIS eminent scholar, the son of adissenting minister, was born nearMontgomery, in South Wales, in 1743.lie received the rudiments of educationat a grammar-school at Carmarthen,and was afterwards placed at the H oxonAcademy, where his progress wasMich, that long before he had completedthe probationary term allotted to studdents, he was appointed mathematicalteacher to the institution, and dis-enlargedthe duties of that office in soexemplary a manner, that in a shorttime he was chosen to be resident tutorand acting director of the institution.Under his able superintendence, theschool flourished in an uncommon degree,for more than twenty-three years,during which time the talents of someo;' the brightest ornaments of the dissentingbody were brought to maturity.Though gifted in every respect forthe pulpit, he was for many years onlyan occasional preacher ; but, in 1768,lie became pastor of a presbyterian congregation,at St. Thomas's, South war,where he officiated until 1753, when hex^ as chosen minister of a congregation inthe Old Jewry. IM this situation, whichke held until his death, his labours were*Mihi neatly successful, the members ofhis church being almost quadrupled,and increased in respectability as wellas in number. Heal lectured for sometimeat Sailer's Hall; and, on theestablishment of that ephemeral institution,Hackney College, he was nominatedHebrew tutor. It is as an author,however, that we are chiefly to speak ofDr. Items, who was no less distinguishedin the literary than in the scientificworld.In 1781, he commenced publishingChambers's Cyclopaedia, in parts, withadditions, and completed the work, infour folio volumes, in 1786. More thanhalf the matter was new, and furnishedby himself; and the whole was arrangedwith such a masterly hand, that all thelearned men of the day concurred inbearing testimony to its merits. He wassoon after elected a fellow of the RoyalSociety ; and the University of Edinburgh,at the express desire of Dr. Robertson,the historian, created him aD. D. He was also elected a fellowof the Linnaean Society, and of theRoy.a.1 Society of Literature ; and manyforeign literary and scientific bodies paidhim the compliment of enrolling himamong their members. His love ofscience, however, by no means led himto neglect his sacred functions; a varietyof Sermons, published at die expressdesire of his congregation, shew his devotionalardour, and afford a favourablespecimen of his talents as a preacher.He now contemplated, and had thesatisfaction to see completed, a newCyclopaedia under his name ; a workof stupendous magnitude and variety,for which the longest life appears tooshort, and the most indefatigable diligenceinadequate. The first volumeappeared in 1802, and was continued, atintervals of six months, till the wholewas finished in forty-five volumes,quarto. In this gigantic undertakinghe had many able assistants ; but a largeproportion of the articles was writtenby himself, and the plan and arrangementof the whole were entirely his own.Of the learning and diligence displayedin this extensive work too much cannotbe said in praise, but the arrangementis by no means happy 4 and in thisrespect, encyclopaedias on a less extensivescale, in which all that relates to ascience appears under one head, willhave the advantage. His other worksare, Economy Illustrated and Recommended,Antidote to the Alarm ofInvasion, The Principles of ProtestantDissenters Stated and Vindicated, besidesa variety of occasional discourses.He died on the 9th of June, 1825, inth-e full possession of all his faculties,and was buried in Dunghill Fields.Dr. Rees was one of the most respectedand respectable of our dissentingdivines; his doctrine would seem tohave been Arian, as he believed the preexistenceof Christ, though he deniedthe doctrine of His essential divinity.He was, however, employed and trustedby the most opposite description ofTHOMAS HOLCROFT.persons, being principal manager ofthe presbyterian fund for the widowsof Scotch clergymen, for nearly sixtyyears : while the government selectedhim to distribute the king's annualbounty to indigent dissenting ministers.He was twice deputed by the protestantdissenters of three denominations topresent their addresses of congratulationto George the Third and George theFourth ; a remarkable circumstance,which, probably, never happened toany other individual. On the formeroccasion, Lord Halifax paid Dr. Reesmany high compliments, and regrettedthat he did not belong to the rightchurch, for then his loyalty might havebeen properly rewarded. His privatecharity was extensive and discriminating,and he was incapable of closinghis hand or his heart against distress, inwhatever form it solicited his regard.His conversational powers were unrivalled; and whilst he adhered strictlyto his religious principles, was a cheerfulcompanion, and of a temper singularlymild and forbearing.THOMAS HOLCROFT.THOMAS HOLCROFT, the son of ashoemaker, was born in Orange Court,Leicester Fields, London, Decemberthe 22nd, 1744; and when six years ofage, was removed, with his family, to aplace beyond Ascot Heath, where hisfather taught him to read. His earliesttask was the Bible, which, togetherwith the History of Parishes and Parisians,and the Seven Champions ofChristendom, were the first books fromwhich he gleaned the rudiments of education.After having been some time inBerkshire, he followed his mother, whohad turned pedlar, through the outskirtsand neighbourhood of London ;and, upon urgent occasions, he was sentto beg from house to house. At length,his father having managed to buy twoor three asses, which he loaded withapples and pears, our future dramatistj was intrusted with one of these animalsto drive about the country. Hissituation, however, was one of greathardships ; " the bad nourishment," hesays, in his autobiography, " I metwith, the cold and wretched manner inwhich I was clothed, and the excessiveweariness I endured in following theseanimals day after day, and beingobliged to drive creatures perhaps stillmore weary than myself, were miseriesmuch too great, and loaded my littleheart with sorrows far too pungent everto be forgotten." Under these circumstances,the progress of his reading wascompletely interrupted, but he did not,Le says, forget to peruse his Bible, andsay his prayers morning and evening ;and he also committed to memorythe ballad of Chevy Chase, for whichhis father rewarded him with a halfpenny,a sum that made Holcroft thinkhimself, at the time, quite a rich man.His next occupation was that of astable boy, at Newmarket, and his recordof what were his feelings upon jthis change of situation, is singularlyinteresting and affecting. " Happy,"he says, " had been the meal where Ihad enough; rich to me was the ragthat kept me warm ; and heavenly thepillow, no matter what or how hard, onwhich I could lay my head to sleep.Now I was warmly clothed, nay, gorgeously; for I was proud of my delivery,and never suspected that therewas disgrace in it ; I fed voluptuously ;not a prince on earth, perhaps, with halfthe appetite, and never-failing relish ;and, instead of being obliged to dragthrough the dirt after the most sluggish,obstinate, and despised amonganimals, I was mounted on the noblestthat the earth contains ; had him undermy care, and was borne by him overhill and dale, far outstripping the wingsof the wind. Was not this a changesuch as might excite reflection, even inthe mind of a boy ?" He remained atNewmarket about two years and a half,during which time he had read Tulliver'sTravels, The Spectator, TheWholeDuty of Man, and The Pilgrim's Progress; and out of his wages, 4 a-year,had given ten shillings a quarter toLiterature,learn singing and arithmetic. In the jformer he made such progress, that hewas called " the sweet singer of Israel;"and so intent was he in studying thelatter, that for want of better apparatus,he would often get an old nail, and castup sums on the paling of the stable-yard.At sixteen years of age he came toLondon, and assisted in his father'strade of speaking, laying out everyshilling he could spare in the purchaseof books, which he still continued toread with avidity. In 1765, he married,and opened a school for the instructionof children, at Liverpool, butgoon returned to London, and commencedshoemaker on his own account.:From this occupation, however, forwhich he was unfitted, by an asthmaticcomplaint, as well as his natural dislike.toe-it, he endeavoured to escape, by theaid of his pen, and became a writer forthe newspapers with partial success. Healso attempted to open a school in theneighbourhood of London ; but, as hisbiographer observes, after living forthree months on potatoes and buttermilk,and obtaining only one scholar,,he again returned to town. A debatingclub, which he had been in the habit ofattending, having given him some notionof elocution, he determined to trythe stage ; and after appearing at theDublin Theatre for a short time, hejoined a strolling company in the northof England, and, for seven years, wanderedabout as an itinerant actor, in astate of misery and comparative starvation.His love of books, however, wasstill predominant in the midst of hissufferings, which did not hinder himfrom making himself extensively conversantwith English literature.In 1777, he came to London, and obtainedan engagement at Drury Lane,and having written, as a desperate resource,a musical farce, called TheCrisis, 'it was acted in 1778, and so wellreceived, that Holcroft hailed it as anomen of future success. He left thestage in 1781, in which year he producedDuplicity, a comedy ; and afterwards,in succession, The Noble Peasant,an opera ; and The Follies of aDay, or The Marriage of Figaro ; whichwere succeeded by several other pieces :and, in 1792, by his most popular oneof The Road to Ruin. It was, however,some time before he could extricatehimself from his pecuniary difficulties;and he had scarcely been relievedfrom them, before his zeal in thecause of liberty, on the occurrence ofthe French revolution, caused him to beincluded in the famous prosecution forhigh treason against Home Tooke andothers, on whose acquittal he was dischargedwithout being brought to trial.Mr. Holcroft's last publication was entitledA Tour in Germany and France ;the languages of which' countries hemade himself master of during a residencethere of about two years. Hedied at his house in Clipstone Street,Marylebone, on the 23rd of March, 1809;having been twice married, and leavingsix children by his second wife, whowas a niece of the celebrated Mercier,author of the Tableau de Paris. Holeis said to have been a sceptic, withregard to religion, until his last moments,when, on his death-bed, heacknowledged his error.His chief plays, in addition to thosealready mentioned, are the comedies ofThe School for Arrogance, Love's Frailties,He is much to Blame, and Deafand Dumb ; The Choleric Fathers, anopera ; and The Tale of Mystery, amelo-drama, from the French, whichis said to have been the first of thatspecies of entertainment introduced onthe English stage. As a novelist and atranslator, Mr. Holcroft obtained somereputation, but inferior to that as adramatist ; in the former character hepublished Anna St. Ives, Hugh Trevor,Brian Perdue, The Private Life ofVoltaire, Memoirs of Baron Trench,Secret History of the Court of Berlin,Madame de Gentis's Tales. Tales of theCastle, The Posthumous Works of Frederickthe Second of Russia, and anAbridgment of Latter's Physiognomy.8 I K WILLIAM JONES.SIR WILLIAM JONES.WILLIAM JONES, the son of aneminent mathematician, wa$ born inLondon, in the year 1746. Losing hisfather, when only three years of age, hewas left to the entire care of his mother,a woman of strong mind and good sense,and from whom he imbibed an earlytaste for literature. In 1753, he wassent to Harrow School, where he soonattracted the attention of the masters,and the admiration of his associates, byhis extraordinary diligence and superiortalents. Among his schoolfellows wereDr. Parr, and Bennett, afterwards Bishopof Cheyne, who, in speaking ofyoung Jones, at the age of eight or nine,says, he was even then " an uncommonboy." Describing his subsequent progressat Harrow, he says, " great abilities,great particularity of thinking,fondness for writing verses and plays ofvarious kinds, and a degree of integrityand manly courage, distinguished himeven at that period. I loved him andrevered him, and, though one or twoyears older than he was, was alwaysinstructed by him from my earliest age."Such was his devotion to study, that heused to pass whole nights over his books,until his eyesight became affected ; andDr. Thackeray, the master of Harrow,said, " so active was the .mind of Jones,that if he were left, naked and friendless,on Salisbury Plain, he would, nevertheless,find the road to fame andriches."In 1764, he was entered at UniversityCollege, Oxford, in opposition to thewishes of his friends, who advised hismother to place him under the superintendenceof some special pleader, as atthat early age he had made such a voluntaryprogress in legal acquirements,as to be able to put cases from anabridgment of Coke's Institutes. Atthe university, instead of confining himselfto the usual discipline, he continuedthe course of classical reading which hehad commenced at Harrow, and devoteda considerable portion of his time to thestudy of the oriental languages. Duringhis vacations, which he generally spentin London, lie learnt riding and fencing ;and at home he occupied himself in theperusal of the best Italian, Spanish,French, and Portuguese authors. In1765, he became private tutor to LordThorpe, the son of Earl Spencer ;and shortly afterwards he was electedfellow on the foundation of Sir SimonBennett.In 1767, he accompanied the Spencerfamily to Germany ; and whilst at Spa,he learnt dancing, the broad-sword exercise,music, besides the art of playingon the Welsh harp; "thus," to transcribean observation of his own, " withthe fortune of a peasant, giving himselfthe education of a prince." On hisreturn, he resided with his pupil atHarrow, and, during his abode there,he translated into French the life ofNadir Shah from the Persian, at therequest of the King of Denmark. Aftermaking another tour, he gave up histutorship, and, in September, 1770, enteredhimself a student of the Temple,for the purpose of studying for the bar.He took this step in compliance withthe earnest solicitations of his friends.Their advice," he says, in a letter tohis friend Reviczki, was conformableto my own inclinations ; for the onlyroad to the highest stations in this country,is that of the law ; and I need notadd how ambitious and laborious I am."The mode in which he occupied himselfin chambers is best described by hisown pen, in a letter to his friend, Dr.Bennett: : " I have learned so much,"he says ; " seen so much, written somuch, said so much, and thought somuch, since I conversed with you, thatwere I to attempt to tell half what Ihave learned, seen, writ, said, andthought, my letter would have no end.I spend the whole winter in attendingthe public speeches of our greatest lawyersand senators, and in studying ourown admirable laws. I give up my leisurehours to a Political Treatise on theTurks, from which I expect some reputation; and I have several objects ofambition which I cannot trust to a letter,but will impart to you when we meet."In the midst of all these engagementsLITERATURE.he found time to attend Dr. WilliamHunter's lectures on anatomy, and toahead Newton's Principia; and in 1772,he published a collection of poems, consisting,principally, of translations fromthe Asiatic languages. In the sameyear he was elected a fellow of theRoyal Society ; and, in 1774, appearedhis celebrated commentaries De PoesyAsiatic*, which procured him great reputationboth at home and abroad.being now called to the bar, he suspendedall literary pursuits, and devotedhimself, with intense earnestness, to thestudy of his profession. In 1775, hebecame a regular attendant at WestminsterHall, and went the circuit andsessions at Oxford; and in the followingyear he was, without solicitation, madea commissioner of bankrupt, by Lord-chancellorBathurst. It would seem,from the correspondence of our author,that soon after his call to the bar, heacquired considerable practice, as hesays, in a letter to Mr. Schultens, datedJuly, 1777, " My law employments,attendance in the courts, incessant studies,the arrangement of pleadings, trialsof causes, and opinions to clients, scarcelyallow me a few moments for eating andsleeping." In 1778, he published hisTranslation of the Orations of Isaeus,with a Prefatory Discourse, Notes, andCommentary, which displayed profoundcritical and historical research, and excitedmuch admiration. In March,1780, he published a Latin Ode in favourof American Freedom; and, shortlyafterwards, on the resignation of SirRoger Newgate, he was induced tobecome a candidate for the representationof the University of Oxford ; butthe liberality of his political principlesrendering his success hopeless, he declineda poll. The tumults of this yearinduced him to write a pamphlet, entitledAn Inquiry into the Legal Modeof suppressing Riots, with a Constitutional1'ian of Future Defence ; and aboutthe same period he published his celebratedEssay on the Law of Bailments,in which he .treated his subject, say*Mr. Roscoe, with an accuracy of methodhitherto seldom exhibited by our legalwriters. In 1782, he spoke at a publicmeeting in favour of parliamentary reform,and also became a member of the'. Society for Constitutional Reformation.i In a letter to the Dean of St. Asaph, thisyear, he says it is " his wish to becomeas great a lawyer as Suspicious;" andhints at giving up politics, to the resignationof which he was the moreinclined in consequence of a bill of indictmentbeing preferred against thedivine above-mentioned, for publishinga tract, composed by Jones, entitled,A Dialogue between a Farmer and aCountry Gentlemen, on the Principlesof Government. Of this our author immediatelyavowed himself the writer,by a letter addressed to Lord Kenyon,in which he defended his positions, andcontended that they were conformableto the laws of England.Hie political principles had for sometimeprevented him obtaining the grandobject of hie ambition , an I indian judgeship; but he was at length, in March,17S3, appointed judge of the SupremeCourt of Judicature in Bengal, throughthe influence of Lord Ashburton. Previousto his departure he received thehonour of knighthood, and married MissShipley, daughter to the Bishop of St.Asaph, with whom he arrived in Calcutta,in September, and entered upon his judicialfunctions in the following December.Law, literature, and philosophy, nowengrossed his attention to such a degree,that his health, on which the climatealso had a prejudicial influence, wasquickly impaired. In a letter to Dr.Patrick Russell, dated March, 1784, hesays, " I do not expect, as long as Istay in India, to fce free from a baddigestion, the morbus literature, forwhich there is hardly any remedy butabstinence from too much food, literaryand culinary. I rise before the sun, andbathe after a gentle ride; my diet islight and sparing, and I go early to rest;yet the activity of my mind is too strong jfor my constitution, though naturallynot infirm, and I must be satisfied witha valetudinarian state of health." Soonafter his arrival he projected the schemeof the Asiatic Society, of which he became.the first president, and contributedmany papers to its memoirs. With aview to rendering himself a proficient inthe science of Sanscrit and Hindu laws,he studied the Sanscrit and Arabic languageswith great ardour; and whilston a tour through the district of Benares,for the recovery of his health, he composeda tale, in verse, called The EnchantedFruit, and A Treatise on theSAMUEL PARR.Gods of Greece,. Italy, and India. In1790, he appears to have received anoffer of some augmentation of his salary,as, in a letter of that year to Sir JamesMacpherson, he says, " really I wantno addition to my fortune, which isenough forme; and if the whole legislatureof Britain were to offer me astation different from that I now fill,I should most gratefully and respectfullydecline it." He continued, withindefatigable zeal, his compilation ofthe Hindoo and Mahometan Digest;on the completion of which he wasto have followed his wife to England,who had proceeded thither, for the recoveryof her health, in the Decemberof 175)3. This intention, however, hedid not live to carry into effect, beingshortly afterwards attacked with an inflammationof the liver, which terminatedhis existence on the 27th ofApril, 1794. His epitaph., written byhimself, is equally admirable for itstruth and its elegance:Here was depositedthe mortal part of a manwho feared God, but not death ;and maintained independence,but sought not riches ;who thought none below himbut the base and unjust :none above him but the wise and virtuous;who loved his parents, kindred, friends, and country;Mid having devoted his life to their service,and the improvement of his mi'.d,resigned it calmly, giving glory to his Creatorwishing peace on earth,and good-wilt to all his creatures.His character was, indeed, truly estimablein every respect. " To exquisite tasteand learning quite unparalleled," saysDr. Parr, " Sir William Jones is knownto have united the most benevolent temperand the purest morals." His wholelife was one unceasing struggle for theinterests of his fellow-creatures, and,unconnected with this object, he knewno ambition. He was a sincere andpious Christian ; and in one of his latestdiscourses to the Asiatic Society, he hasdone more to give validity to the Mosaicaccount of the creation, than theresearches of any contemporary writers.His acquirements as a linguist were absolutelywonderful : he understood, critically,English, Latin, Trench, Italian,Greek, Arabic, Persian, and Sanscrit;he could translate, with the aid of a dictionary,the Spanish, Portuguese, German,Runic, Hebrew, Bengal, Hindu,and Turkish ; and he had bestowedconsiderable attention on the Russian,Swedish, Coptic, Welsh, Chinese, Dutch,Syriac, and several other languages. Inaddition to his vast stock of literary information,he possessed extensive legalknowledge ; and, as far as we may judgefrom his translation*, had sufficient capacityad taste for a first-rate originalpoet. His indefatigable application, andindustry have, perhaps, never beenequalled ; even when in ill health herose at three in the morning, and whatwere called his hours of relaxation, weredevoted to studies, which would haveappalled the most vigorous minds. In1799, his widow published a splendidedition of his works, in six volumes,folio, and placed, at her own expense,a marble statue of him, executed by Flaxman,in the anti-chamber of UniversityCollege, Oxford; and, among other publictestimonies of respect to his memory, thedirectors of the East India Companyvoted him a monument in St. Paul'sCathedral, and a statue in Bengal.SAMUEL PARR.THIS eminent scholar, critic, and divine,the son of an apothecary at Harrow,in Middlesex, who advanced nearlyhis whole property in aid of the Pretender,was born on the 15th of January,1747. He was considered a boy of veryprecocious talents ; having, at four yearsof age, attained an extraordinary grammaticalknowledge of Latin. At thisearly period of his life he had also beentaught to dispense medicines, and somehumorous anecdotes are told of hisconduct on these occasions. In 1756,he was admitted on the foundation ofHarrow School, of which, at the earlyage of fourteen, he became the he; dboy; about which time he appears ohave written some sermons, and to ha' eLITERATURE.made his first literary attempt in adrama founded on the Book of Ruth.On leaving school, he attended, for twoor three years, to his father's business ;but more ambitious of literary than surgicaldistinction, he was, at his ownearnest desire, sent to Emanuel College,Cambridge. He entered the universityin 1765 ; but wanting the means to supporthis continuance there, he soonquitted it, and, in 1767, became firstassistant to Dr. Sumner, at HarrowSchool.In Christmas, 1769, he was ordainedto the curacies of Wilson and Kingsbury,Middlesex, which he resigned inthe following year; and, in 1771, hewas, through the interest of the Dukeof Grafton, created A. M. by royal mandate.The degree was conferred uponhim to qualify him for the head-mastershipof Harrow, vacant by the death ofDr. Sumner; but failing to obtain thesituation, he resigned his place of assistant,and opened a school at Stan-more,where he was followed by nearlyfifty of the Harrow scholars. Finding,however, after five years' experiment,that his establishment did not answer,he, in 1776, accepted the mastership ofColchester grammar-school, whither hewas also followed by several of hisscholars. Being ordained priest in thesucceeding year, he was presented to thecures of Trinity and Hythe, in Colchester,where he generally preached extempore.In 1778, he obtained themastership of the Norwich grammar-school ; and, in 1780, he was presented,by Lady Strafford, the mother of one ofhis pupils, to the rectory of Masterly, inLincolnshire. About the same time, hemade his first essay as an author, by thepublication of two celebrated sermonson Education ; and, in 1781, he tookthe degree of L.L.D. at Cambridge.In the summer of the same year, heprinted A Discourse on the late Fast,by Phileleutherus Norfolciensi?, whichexcited great attention, in consequenceof its advertence to the contest withAmerica, and is considered among thebest of his productions. In the springof 1783, Lady Strafford presented himto the perpetual curacy of Hatton, towhich he retired ; and he was shortlyafterwards presented, by Bishop Loath,to a prebend in St. Paul's Cathedral.In 1785, he published a quarto volume,containing A Discourse on Education; arid, in 1787, he assisted theRev. Henry Homer in a new edition ofthe third Book of Bellendenus, dedicatedto Mr. Burke, Lord North, andMr. Fox ; of whose characters, and styleof oratory, he drew a masterly sketch,in an elegant Latin preface, said to bethemost successful modern imitation ofthe style of Cicero. A translation ofthe preface being published without hisconcurrence, in 1788, excited a greatsensation in the literary world ; and, bygiving greater publicity to Parr's sentimentsin favour of the popular party,put an end to his hopes of prefermentfrom government. On this account,the leading Whigs made a subscriptionin his favour, and purchased him a lifeannuity of j300 per annum. In 1789,he printed Tracts by Warburton and aWarburtonian, not admitted into thecollection of their respective works ;which, though it is said to have beenproduced by hostile feelings towardsBishop Hurd, contained some admirablecritical remarks. In 1790, he exchangedHatton for Waddenhoe, in Northamptonshire,but continued to officiate at theformer as deputy-curate; and duringthe same year, he became acquaintedwith Dr. Priestley. About the sametime, he took part in the controversyrespecting White's Bampton Lectures,of which, it appeared, he had writtennearly one-fifth.In July, 1791, his intimacy withPriestley, whose house had been recentlydestroyed by the Birminghamrioters, exposed him to similar danger,and was the occasion of his famousLetter from Irenopolis to the Inhabitantsof Eleutheropolis ;. or, a SeriousAddress to the Dissenters of Birmingham.In 1793, he became engaged inacontroversy with Dr. Combe, the survivingeditor of Mr. Homer's edition ofHorace, in consequence of his stricturesupon the former in The British Critic,to which, as well as The Monthly, andGentleman's Magazines, Parr appears tohave contributed. In 1800, he preached,at Christchurch, Newgate Street, hiscelebrated spital sermon, the publicationof which, with notes, gave rise to apamphlet by Mr. Godwin, in answer toParr's attack upon his Political Justice.A writer in The Quarterly Review concurswith his biographer, Dr. Johnstonee,SAMUEL PARR,j in thinking it " the best, the calmest,i and the finest of all Parr's literary productions.It is," continues the samei authority, " liberal without being latinunitarian ; it conciliates without compromise;it advises without dictation."In 1802, he was presented, by SirI Francis Burnett, to the rectory ofGraham, in Huntingdonshire ; and heappears to have been on the point ofobtaining a bishopric, in 1807: for "hadmy friends," he once said to a gentleman," continued in power one fortnightlonger, Dr. Hungered was to havebeen translated to Hei-ford, and I wasto have had Gloucester. My familyarrangements were made ; and I haddetermined that no clergyman in mydiocese, who had occasion to call uponme, should depart without partaking ofmy dinner;" adding, after a pause of amoment, "in the house of peers I shouldseldom have opened my mouth, unlessunless (said he, with some warmth)any one had presumed to attack thecharacter of my friend Charles Fox,and then I would have knocked himdown with the full torrent of my impetuosity."In 1808, he, a second time,declined leaving Hatton, though offeredthe valuable rectory of Buckingham,by Mr. Coke, of Oldham ; and, on thedecease of Fox, he announced his intentionof publishing a life of that greatman ; but the work, which appeared in1809, under the title of Character ofthe late Charles James Fox, selected,and in part written, by PhilopatrisVarvicensis, in two volumes, octavo, didnot realize the expectations of the public.From this period, he appears to havebeen vacillating from one literary projectto another; and, in 1818, he wrote aI refutation, which was not published untilj after his death, of the assertion of Milne,j the catholic prelate, that Bishop Halifaxi had died in the Romish persuasion.In 1819, he reprinted Speeches byRoger Long, and John Taylor, of Camebridge, with a Critical Essay and Metmoors of the Authors; and, in 1820, heibegan to take an active part in the desfence of Queen Caroline. When herj name was ordered to be struck out ofi the liturgy, he recorded his sentimentsj in the pray r-book of Hatton church ;i observing, " It is my duty as a subjectand ecclesiastic, to read what is prescribedby my sovereign as head of thechurch of England; but it is not myduty to express my approbation as wellas yield obedience, when my feelings asaman, and my principles as a Christian,compel me to disapprove and to deplore."He was afterwards appointedher head chaplain, and was one of hermost trusted advisers and zealous advocates,from the moment of her arrivalin England to the period of her death.The venerable subject of our memoirdied at the age of seventy-eight, on the6th of March, 1825, and was buried atHatton, his remains being followed bymany eminent characters, both churchmenand dissenters.Parr undoubtedly stands at the headof the classical scholars of his t'rhie, beingalike unequalled for profundity, variety,and extent of knowledge. He wasdeeply versed in history, metaphysics,philosophy, and theology ; and, asArchdeacon Butler observes, " he hasleft a chasm in English literature, whichnone of us shall ever see filled up."Few have thought more deeply, or readmore extensively; and none, perhaps,could boast so complete an acquaintancewith what are called the constitutionalwriters. " His pretensions as a man ofletters," says a writer in Blackwood'sMagazine, " were splendid ; and fitted,under a suitable guidance, to have produceda more brilliant impression onhis own age than they really did, and amore lasting one in the next age thanthey ever will. In his lifetime, it istrue, that the applause of his manypupils, and his great political friends,to a certain extent, made up for all deficiencieson his own part; but now,when these vicarious props are withdrawn,the disproportion is enormous,and hereafter will appear to be moreso, between the talents that he possessed,and the effects that he accomplished."In addition to the worksalready mentioned, Parr wrote severalreviews, memoirs, epitaphs, prefaces,&c., and left a variety of manuscriptsrelating to ethics, philosophy, and mathematics.In 1828, appeared Memoirsof his Life and Writings, by John John-stone,M.D. ; and in the same yearwas published Parian.In his private character he was moral,humane, and charitable ; and, bothas a pastor and a man, enjoyed theesteem and affection of his neighboursLITERATURE.and parishioners. He visited the clubsand cottages of Hatton with the mostcondescending familiarity ; comfortedthe distressed, laughed with the merry,and administered to the wants of thepoor. " I rarely," said he, " sent abeggar from my door unrelieved ;" andfor the same purpose, says his biographer.Dr. Johnstonee, " money wasplaced in the hands of his servants."In conversation he was unequalled;though it will be seen, from some ofthe anecdotes towards the close of thismemoir, that it was accompanied by acoarseness, not consistent with thegeneral urbanity of his character. Heis said to have been an epicure ; andcertainly he had some peculiarities attable, for which a better excuse waswanting than vigour of appetite, whichthe doctor possessed in no ordinarydegree. A shoulder of mutton was hisfavourite dish, with the choice bits ofwhich he would fill four plates, andthen, pushing the joint away, observehe had had enough.In his political principles, he preservedthe strictest and most honourableconsistency, and acted upon themwith an utter disregard to personalemoluments, and professional honours.He was often branded as a Jacobite ; butthe observations he made at a publicdinner, on the toast of " Church andKing" being proposed, sufficiently refutethe supposition. " I will not drinkthat toast," cried Parr, " nor will Isuffer it to be given in my presence. Itwas the toast of Jacobites, and it is theyell of incendiaries : it means a churchwithout the Gospel, and a king abovethe laws !" In his youth he had manysingularities : he always looked forwardto becoming a clergyman, and used topractise preaching in discourses to hisschoolfellows, and in funeral orationsover dead birds, cats, &c. When foundsitting, one day, on the church-yardgate at Harrow, and asked, by Dr.Allen, why he did not join in play wkhhis schoolfellows, he replied, with seriousness," Do you not know, sir, thatI am to be a parson ?" Another of hisjuvenile peculiarities was, his fondnessfor putting forth his strength in ringingchurch bells, and knocking downoxen at the slaughter-house, and to thelast he retained his predilection for abull-bait He was, however, extremelykind in his treatment of animals ; andthe only battle he fought at school, wasin defence of a worried cat. Like Dr.Johnson, Parr sometimes carried hisrudeness towards the fair sex to a mostungallant excess. To one, who venturedto oppose him with more warmthof temper than cogency of reasoning,and afterwards apologized for it by saying," it was the privilege of womento talk nonsense," he answered, " No,madam, it is not their privilege, buttheir infirmity: ducks would walk ifthey could, but Nature only permitsthem to waddle"' Whenever the ladieswere about to retire, he claimed theprivilege of smoking, of which he dispassionatelyfond, and used to observe,no pipe, no Parr." Being invited, oneday, to dine with a gentleman, whosewife had a great aversion for smoking,it was in vain that he gave several hintsfor the production of a pipe. " I neverwill allow," at length said the lady,my drawing-room to be defiled wii'hthe odious smoke of tobacco. I have,therefore, ordered a room below to beprepared for those gentlemen who wishto indulge in such a disagreeable habit."Madam !" exclaimed the doctor, withemphasis. " Sir !" said the lady, halfrising. " Madam, you are " continuedthe doctor. " I beg, sir, youwill not express any rudeness here,"exclaimed the lady. Raising his voice,Madam," added the doctor, " youare the greatest tobacco-stopper inEngland!" His passion for book-collectingfrequently, it is said, causedbickering between himself and wife ;everything else being neglected. Onthe subject of the decayed state of hislibrary chairs, she, one morning, said tohim, " Mr Parr, we ought, indeed, tohave new chairs for the library ; theyare in a very sad way." " I can't affordit," was the reply. " Not afford it !"exclaimed the lady, " when you giveten guineas for a musty book you neveropen." " I tell you I can't afford it !"vociferated the doctor. " Not afford,"said the-lady again, pointing to. his owngarments, threadbare and falling totatters, " when your rents safe comingin so fast." He is said to have had anaversion for tea ; having been once invitedto partake of some by a lady, he utteredthe following delicate compliment :Non possum *e-ciim vivere, ntc sine U \JOHN Akin.And being once asked for a theme on atea-chest, he is said to have exclaimed,with admirable wit, " Judices !" [thouteaches (tea-chest)'}. He, one day,called a clergyman a fool, who, takingoffence thereat, said he would complainto the bishop of the usage. " Do so,"was the reply, "and my lord bishopwill confirm you !"The doctor was twice married : firstin 1771, to Jane, daughter of ZachariahArsenals, Esq., of Carleton, in Yorkshire; a union into which he entered,it is said, because he wanted a housekeeper,and the lady because shewanted a house. There seems, indeed,to have been too much reason for thesaying of Person, " that Parr would havebeen a great man, but for three thingshis trade, his wife, and his politics!"She is said to have put him in such apassion, one day, that he rose from thetable, and drawing his penknife fromhis pocket, opened it, and drew it acrossthe throat of her portrait. She died in1810; and in 18 16, he married Mary, thesister of Mr. Eyre, of Coventry, whosurvived him. By his first wife he hadthree sons and three daughters, all ofwhom he survived, except two daughters.JOHN Akin.JOHN Akin, the son of a dissentingminister, was born at Kil worth, in"Leicestershire, on the 15th of January,1747. In 1758, he went to a dissenters'academy, at which his father was tutor,and, about three years afterwards, havingchosen medicine as a profession,was apprenticed to Mr. Hartshorn, atBingham, where he remained threeyears, and prosecuted his professionalstudies " with more than usual success."In November, 1764, he went as a studentto the University of Edinburgh, whence,after passing there two winters andthe intervening summer, he returned toEngland in 1766, and became a pupil ofMr. C. White, a celebrated operatingsurgeon, at Manchester. Here he addedmuch to his professional knowledge,and wrote an Essay on the Ligatures ofArteries, which received great commendationfrom Mr. White, and was publishedby him in his work, entitledCases in Surgery.In 1769, he went to London, andafter passing the winter in attendingthe lectures of Dr. Hunter, proceededto Chester, where he practised as a surgeontill November, 1771, when heremoved to Warrington, the residenceof his parents, and " where his prospectsof success were less obstructed by competition."While at Chester, he publishedhis first work, entitled Observationson the External Use of Preparationsof Lead ; which was succeeded, duringthe period he remained at Warrington,by several others, particularly thoseentitled Thoughts on Hospitals, BiographicalMemoirs of Medicine, to the timeof Harvey, and an enlarged edition ofLewis's Materia Medica. At the academyof this place, he was electedlecturer on chemistry and physiology, anappointment which brought him infrequentconnexion with Dr. Priestley,Dr. Enfield, and other eminent literaryand scientific men, with whom heformed some of his most valued andlasting friendships. While pursuing hisprofessional occupations, he also devotedmuch of his time to natural historyand polite literature ; in the latterbranches of which, he evinced muchtaste and genius, by his Essays on SongWriting, The Calendar of Nature, andother similar productions ; his MiscellaneousPieces in Prose, however,being the joint composition of himselfand Mrs. Barbauld, of which celebratedauthoress he was the brother.On the dissolution of the academy atWarrington, and in consequence ofthe inadequate encouragement offeredto the practice of surgery as distinctfrom pharmacy," he determined ontaking a physician's degree, which heobtained at Leyden, a short while afterhis arrival there, in the summer of1784. From the continent he proceededto Yarmouth, and thence, after a twelvemonths'practice, to London, where hehad not long remained, when he receivedan unanimous invitation fromLITERATURE.the inhabitants of the former place toreturn there, and resume his business,which he accordingly did. At Yarmouthhe established a literary society,and continued to derive respect, reputation,and emolument, from the mannerin which he behaved, till the earlypart of 1792, when the publication oftwo pamphlets, which he had writtenin favour of the dissenters, obliged himto quit the town. One of these compositionswas entitled, The Spirit of theChurch and of the Constitution Compared:the other, An Address to theDissidents of England on their lateDefeat ; and both advocating the repealof the test and corporation acts. Beforeleaving Yarmouth, he had also publishedA View of the Character andPublic Services of J. Howard, Esq., anda system of English geography, calledEngland Delineated, an useful and excellentwork, which has passed throughseveral editions. In March, 1792, hesettled in London, but his habits andtemper being unsuited to the bustle andactivity necessary .to a residence in themetropolis, he devoted himself chieflyto literary pursuits : and, shortly afterwards,produced the two first volumes ofEvenings at Home, of which the sixthand last appeared in 1795. This work,chiefly intended for the young, still continuesto support the popularity it acquiredat first, and is the most interestingone, with respect to the author, as<( being highly characteristic of him,exhibiting, not only his various acquisitions,but representing his opinions ona variety of topics."In 1796, he published the concludingvolume of his Letters from a Father tohis Son, &c. ; a work in which are discussedsome of the most importantquestions of morals and of generalpolitics, and is considered the mostvaluable and important of his productions.Three years previous to this, hehad undertaken the editorship of a thennew periodical, The Monthly Magazine,to the establishment and successof which he greatly contributed by hiswritings and management. About thesame period he also engaged himself,with Dr. Enfield and others, in* compilingThe General Biographical Dictionary,published in 1815, which nowbears his name, and is often consultedas a standard authority. In 1797, heremoved, for the benefit of his health,to Dorking, and subsequently to StokeNewington, where he wrote his Letterson English Poetry, published in 1803;and also his Annals of the Reign ofGeorge the Third, published in 1815.The former was intended to directyoung persons, particularly of the femalesex, in the choice and study ofEnglish poetry ; the latter has beenpronounced as " the freest from partycolouring of any of the histories as yetpublished of the important and eventfulreign of George the Third." Dr.Aikin died on the 7th of December,1822, in consequence of a paralyticattack, which had previously broughton a decay of his mind, very frying andpainful to those who witnessed it Thewritings of Dr. Aikin were like thequalities of his mind, more calculatedto divert, inform, and amuse, than toinstruct, impress, or elevate. He wasaverse to mathematical minuteness andmetaphysical speculations, and derivedmore pleasure from the social conversationsof domestic life, than in listeningto the discourses of the most profoundand able philosophers. His marriagetook place at Warrington, about 1772,and produced him a family, in which,latterly, consisted his only comfort, andto which he had much endeared himselfby his uniform affection and solicitude.WILLIAM Cone,WILLIAM Cone, eldest son of Dr.William Coxe, physician to the king'shousehold, was born in London, on the7th of March, 1747; and received therudiments of education at the grammar-school of Marylebone. In 1753, he wassent to Eton, and remained there till1765, when he was elected to King'sCollege, Cambridge ; and soon aftergained a Battle's university scholar-williamCone,ship. In 1768, he was elected a fellowof his college ; and, in 1770 and 1771,he was, successively, first member'sprizeman, as author of the best Latinprize essay. Being destined for thechurch, he, in the latter year, tookholy orders, and was appointed to thecuracy of Denham, near Uxbridge.During the next two years he acted inthe capacity of tutor to the presentDuke of Marlborough (then Marquess ofBlandford), In 1775, he accompaniedthe late Earl of Pembroke (then LordHerbert), in a tour through France,Germany, Italy, and Switzerland. Histravels in the last-named countryformed the subject of his first publication,under the title of Sketches on theNatural, Civil, and Political State ofSwitzerland ; followed by a second edition,in three volumes, octavo, underthe title of Travels in Switzerland, andthe Country of the Grisons ; and to thefourth and last edition of the samework, after the subjugation of Switzerlandby the French republic, he prefixeda spirited and accurate account ofthat memorable revolution. Havingextended his tour to Russia, he published,in 1780, a History of RussianDiscoveries, which he afterwards broughtdown to the time of Vancouver, andpublished in a new form, which wentthrough four editions. This work wasfollowed, in 1784, by the publication ofhis Travels in Poland, Russia, Sweden,and Denmark, the result of further observationsmade during his tour throughthe northern parts of Europe. Shortlyafter its appearance, he was appointed,successively, travelling tutor to the lateSamuel Whhbread, Esq., and to Mr.Portman, with whom he travelled, respectively,for about a twelvemonth.In 1786, he was presented to the vicaragesof Kingston-upon-thames, andRichmond, by the Society of King'sCollege, Cambridge ; which, however,he resigned in 1788, for the rectory ofBennington. In 1794, he again visitedthe continent ; and travelled in companywith the son of the MarquessCornwallis, whose father rewarded him,on his return, with the chaplaincy of thegarrison of Portsmouth, which he subsequentlyexchanged for that of the Tower.In 1798, appeared his Memoirs ofSir Robert Walpole, Earl of Orford,illustrated with original correspondence,authentic papers, &c. ; whichwere finally published in four volumes,octavo; with a selection of the mostcurious documents: and, in 1802, inone volume, quarto, as a continuationof those of his brother, he printed Memoirsof Horatio, Lord Walpole. Shortlyafter the former year, he was presented,successively, to the rectory of Stourtpn,and of Fovant, in Wiltshire, of whichcounty he had been previously appointedarchdeacon, and a canon residentiaryof Salisbury Cathedral. In1807, he published his History of theHouse of Austria, from the foundationof the Monarchy, by Rudolph of Hapsburg,in the thirteenth century, to thedeath of the late Emperor, Leopold theSecond, with maps and geological tables,in three volumes, quarto. This workgained him considerable credit, andprocured him the honour of a visit fromthe Austrian princes, the ArchdukesJohn and Leopold, then travellingthrough the western parts of England ;who expressed their surprise at his publicationof facts which they had supposedto be known only to members ofthe imperial family. In 1813, appeared,in three volumes, quarto, his HistoricalMemoirs of the Kings of Spain, ofthe House of Bourbon ; a work drawnfrom an extensive collection of rare andoriginal documents, which opened tothe world a mine of history, that up tothat time had remained unexplored.He shortly after undertook the Memoirsof John, Duke of Marlborough, principallydrawn from the collection ofpapers preserved at Blenheim, of whichthe three volumes appeared, successively,in 1817, 1818, and 1819. Beforethe whole was completed, he lost hiseyesight, a privation which did notprevent him from preparing for pressThe Private and Original Correspondenceof the Duke of Shrewsbury,illustrated with narratives, historicaland biographical, which appeared, inone volume, quarto, in 1821. After abrief interval of time, he began theMemoirs of the Administration of theRight Honourable Henry Pelham, intendedas a sequel to the Memoirs ofSir Robert and Lord Walpole, in thecomposition of which he had so farpersevered, as to leave it nearly readyfor the press at the time of his decease,which happened in June, 1828.LITERATURE.He was of middle stature, corpulent,and erect ; and preserved, to the last,his strength, both of body and mind.No man, perhaps, was ever more universallyesteemed. As a divine he wasexemplary ; but is said to have regretted,in his latter days, that he hadnot written more largely in connexionwith his sacred duties ; his publishedreligious compositions being few andunimportant, though he was indefatigablein his search after religious knowledgeand truth. As a traveller, hiswritings are still valuable, and at theperiod that they appeared, were deservedlypopular ; but it is as a biographerand a historian that his namewill descend to posterity, as one of themost indefatigable, extensive, and usefulwriters that this or any other countrycan boast of having produced. For hismerits in this branch of literature, hewas presented with one of the threegold medals, placed at the disposal ofthe Royal Society of Literature byGeorge the Fourth.Few writers of the present age,"observes his biographer, in the AnnualObituary, citing other authorities, "haveconferred more important and lastingobligations on English literature thanthe venerable person who is the subjectof this memoir. His biographicalworks, on which his reputation principallyrests, are, in effect, contributionsto the modern history, not only of thiscountry, but of Europe, derived fromsources not accessible to the ordinaryhistorian." Besides the works already-named,he published The Literary Lifeand Select Works of Benjamin Stilling-fleet,Esq., in three volumes, octavo ;The Lives of Handel and Smith, in onevolume, quarto ; two pamphlets on theNature of Tithes, addressed to J. Bennett,Esq., member of parliament forWilts ; A Vindication of the Celts : anedition of Gay's Fables, with notes ; avolume of Miscellaneous Tracts, comprisingan Account of the Prisons andHospitals in Russia, Sweden, and Denmark; A Letter on the Secret Tribunalof Westphalia; and Sketches of theLives of Corregio and Armenian.He married, in 1803, Eleanoraa, daughterof Walter Sharp, Esq., consul-generalof Russia, and relict of ThomasYieldham, Esq., of the British Factoryat St. Petersburghh ; but it does not appearthat he left any issue.WILLIAM HAZLITT.WILLIAM HAZLITT, the son ofa dissenting minister, who, after holdinga situation in the University ofGlasgow, passed nine years in America,was born at New Shropshire, about theyear 1750. He was educated at theUnitarian College, at Hackney, andcommenced life as an artist, but not withsufficient success to induce him to practiseit as a profession ; though he is saidto have executed some copies fromTitian and Raphael, in the very firststyle, and otherwise to have shewn veryhigh powers as a painter. He, however,thought fit to throw down thepencil for the pen, and instead of paintingpictures, it became his delight tocriticise them ; and it must be allowed,that in his critical strictures, when hisstrong and violent prejudices stood notin the way of justice, he was one of themost judicious, able, and powerfulwriters of his time. After having madevarious contributions to the periodicaljournals, he published An Essay on thePrinciples of Human Action, which wassucceeded by two octavo volumes, entitledThe Eloquence of the BritishSenate ; being a selection of the bestspeeches of the most distinguished parliamentaryspeakers, from the beginningof the reign of Charles the First,to the present time; with notes, biographical,critical and explanatory.He appears at this time to have beenengaged as parliamentary reporter forsome of the daily newspapers ; and fromthis laborious but useful drudgery, saysa writer of his life in The LiteraryChronicle for 1826, " he was promotedto purveyor of literary critiques, andother occasional paragraphs." In 1810,he published A New and ImprovedEnglish Grammar, for the use ofWILLIAM II A Z L I T T.schools ; in which the discoveries ofMr. Home Tooke, and other modernwriters, on the formation of language,are for the first time incorporated. Towhich was added, A New Guide to theEnglish Tongue, by Edward Baldwin,who published a smaller abridgment ofMr. Hazlitt's book in 1812. His nextperformances appeared in a series ofweekly essays, which he wrote in TheExaminer, in conjunction with Mr.Leigh Hunt, and afterwards publishedthem under the title of The RoundTable, &c. They were succeeded byhis Characters of Shakspeare's Plays, AView of the English Stage, and someLectures on English Poetry, which hehad delivered at the Surrey Institutionin 1818. The result of his collectionsfrom various periodical works, appearedunder the titles of Table Talk, TheSpirits the Age, and The Plain Speaker,which are still popular. He wrote severalother works of minor importance,and was one of the writers in The EdinburghReview, and in the Supplementto The Encyclopaedia Britannica. Hislargest and most famous work appearedin 1828, The Life of Napoleon, in fourvolumes ; a production which has raisedhim to a very high rank among thephilosophers and historians of the presentage.Mr. Hazlitt, in his peculiar walk ofliterature, unrivalled ; no man has producedso many miscellaneous works,with so little of common-place matter,or exhibiting such frequent marks ofacute and profound thought. He hasnot much imagination or humour,though he can appreciate them inothers; but he has the art of probinga subject to its depths, and of dealingwith it in a manner that places him inthe very first rank of philosophicalcritics. His Essays are full of wisdom,and it is almost impossible to rise froma perusal of them without the acquisitionof some new and striking ideas.His style is, upon the whole, clear, firm,and eloquent ; but he is sometimes tooredundant of ornament.Mr. Hazlitt, who married a sister ofDr. Stoddart, has never been able torealize, by his pen, sufficient to placehim out of the reach of pecuniary difficulties,and he is, at this time, sufferingboth from ill health and poverty. Heis said, by his friends, to be of a generous,warm-hearted, but impetuous disposition; and, with all his violent prejudices,to be candid and impartial. The attacksmade upon him in Blackwood's Magazinehe has sometimes mentioned withmost bitter resentment; but how hecould still admire an enemy, the followinganecdote will show: A friendhaving read to him a passage in favourof Napoleon from Blackwood, he exclaimed," That's good, by Heaven !that's fine! I forgive 'em all they've saidof me." Mr. Hazlitt's favourite amusementused to be rackets, and he wouldoften spend more time at the TennisCourt than was consistent with his necessities." The racket," it has been said,was the only instrument with whichhe ever desired to conquer ;" and it wasonly for his wants that he resorted tothe pen. Many of his productions werecomposed at a small public house onthe edge of Salisbury Plain, whither hewould retire, and shut himself up in solitudetill he had got through a volume.He is remarkably temperate, and, for thelast fifteen years of his life, has dranknothing but water. In conversationno man is more sensible or entertaining; and among a variety of anecdote,he occasionally tells one of himself. Thefollowing is one of the most characteristic: Miscalculating his expenses, he,one day, found himself, at Stamford,reduced almost to his last shilling. Heset off to walk to Cambridge, but havinga pair of new boots on, they gave himacute pain. In this predicament, hetried at twenty different places to exchangethem for a pair of shoes, or slippers,of any sort, but no one wouldaccommodate him. He made this acharge against the English " thoughthey would have got treble the value byexchanging," said he, " they would notdo it, because it would have been usefulto me." Perhaps," said some one, jestingly,"they did not know that youcame honestly by them." " Ah ! true,"said Hazlitt ; " that shakes my theoryin this respect, if it be true ; but then itcorroborates another part of it ; so thefact is valuable either way, there isalways a want of liberality, either intheir thoughts or actions."LITERATURE.THOMAS CHATTERTON.THOMAS CHATTERTON, theposthumous son of a schoolmaster inBristol, was born there on the 20thof November, 1752. At the age of fiveyears, he was placed at the school whichhis father had superintended ; but heshowed such little capacity for learning,that he was sent back to his mother asadull boy, incapable of improvement.Mrs. Chatterton, says Dr. Gregory, inhis life of the subject of our memoir,was rendered extremely unhappy bythe apparently tardy understanding ofher son, till he " fell in love," as sheexpressed herself, with the illuminatedcapitals of an old musical manuscript,in French, which enabled her, by takingadvantage of the momentary passion,to initiate him in the alphabet. Sheafterwards taught him to read out of ablack-letter Bible ; and this circumstance,in conjunction with the former,is supposed to have inspired him withthat fondness for antiquities which hesubsequently displayed. At eight yearsof age, he was removed to Cotton'scharity-school, where he remained forsome time undistinguished, except by apensive gravity of demeanour, and athirst for pre-eminence over his playmates.This he exhibited, says hissister, even before he was five yearsold ; and not long afterwards, her brotherbeing asked what device he wouldhave painted on a small present ofearthenware about to be made to him,Paint me," he is said to have replied,an angel, with wings, and a trumpet,to trumpet my name over the world."It was not, however, until his tenthyear, that he acquired a taste for reading; for which he suddenly imbibedsuch a relish, that he devoted his littlepocket-money to the hire of books froma library, and borrowed others as hehad opportunity. Before he was twelvehe had gone through about seventy volumesin this manner, consisting chieflyof history and divinity ; and, about thesame time, he appears to have filledwith poetry a pocket-book, which hadbeen presented to him by his sister as anew-year's gift. Among these verses,were probably those entitled ApostateWill, a satire upon his instructors andschoolfellows. In 1765, he was confirmedby the bishop; and his sisterrelates, that he made very sensible andserious remarks on the awfulness of theceremony, and on his own feelings preparatoryto it. In July, 17G7, at whichtime he possessed a knowledge of drawingand music, in addition to his otheracquirements, he was articled to Mr.Lambert, an attorney at Bristol, wherethe only fault his master had to findwith him, for the first year, was thesending an abusive anonymous letter tohis late schoolmaster, of which he wasdiscovered to be the author, from his inabilityto disguise his own hand-writingso successfully as he did afterwards.As a preface to the history of Chatterton'sliterary impostures, which commencedabout this time, a short sketchwill be necessary of the circumstanceswhich gave rise to them. It was wellknown at Bristol, that in the church ofSt. Mary, Redcliffe, an old chest had beenopened, about 1727, for the purposeof searching for some title deeds, andthat, since that time, a number of othermanuscripts, being left exposed to casualdepredation, had, at various times,been taken away. The uncle of Chatterton'sfather being sexton to thechurch, enabled his nephew to enter itfreely ; and, upon these occasions, heremoved baskets full of parchments, ofwhich, however, he made no other usethan to cover books. A thread-paperbelonging to his mother, which natibeen formed out of one of these parchments,attracted the notice of youngChatterton, soon after the commencementof his clerkship ; and his curiositywas so excited, that he obtained a remaininghoard of them yet unused, andultimately acquired possession of all thatremained in the old chest, and in hismother's house. His answer to inquirieson the subject was, " that he had a treasure,and was so glad nothing could belikeit." The parchments, he said, consistedof poetical and other compositions,by Mr. Canine and ThomasTHOMAS CHATTERTON,Rowley, whom our author, at first,called a monk, and afterwards a secularpriest of the fifteenth century.Thus prepared for carrying on hissystem of literary imposture, he, on theopening of the new bridge at Bristol, inOctober, 176cS, drew up a paper, entitledA. Description of the Fryars first passingover the Old Bridge, "taken from anancient Manuscript. It was inserted inFarley's Bristol Journal, and the authorshipwas traced to Chatterton ; who,being questioned in an authoritative tone,haughtily refused to give any account.Milder usage at length induced him toenter into an explanation ; and, aftersome prevarication, he asserted that hehad received the paper in question fromhis father, who had found it, with severalothers, in Redcliffe Church. Thereport that he was in possession of thepoetry of Canine and Rowley wasnow spread about ; and coming to theears of Mr. Alcott, an inhabitant ofBristol, of an inquiring turn, he procuredan introduction to Chatterton,who furnished him, gratuitously, withvarious poetical pieces under the nameof Rowley. These were communicatedto Mr. Barrett, a surgeon, then employedin writing a History of Bristol,into which he introduced several of theabove fragments, by the permission ofour author, who was, in return, occasionallysupplied with money, and introducedinto company. He also studiedsurgery, for a short time, under Mr.Barrett, and would talk, says Mr. ,"of Galen, Hippocrates, andParacelsus, with all the confidence andfamiliarity of a modern empiric." Hisfavourite studies, however, were heraldryand English antiquities; and oneof his chief occupations was in making acollection of old English words from theglossaries of Chaucer and others. Duringthese pursuits, he employed his pen inwriting satirical essays, in prose andverse ; and, about the same period, gaveway to fits of poetical enthusiasm, bywandering about Redcliffe meadows,talking of the productions of Rowley,and setting up at night to composepoems at the full of the moon. " Hewas always," says Mr. Smith, " extremelyfond of walking in the fields;and would sometimes say to me, " come,you and I will take a walk in the meadow.I have got the cleverest thingfor you imaginable. It is worth half-a-crownmerely to have a sight of it,and to hear me" read it to you." Thishe would generally do in one particularspot, within view of the church, beforewhich he would sometimes lie down,keeping his eyes fixed upon it in a kindof trance.In 1769, he contributed several papersto The Town and Country Magazine,among which were some extractsfrom the pretended Rowley, entitledSaxon Poems, written in the style ofOssian, and subscribed with Chatterton'susual signature of DunhelmusBristoliensis. But his most celebratedattempt at imposture, in this year, wasan offer to furnish Horace Walpole withsome accounts of a series of eminentpainters who had flourished at Bristol,at the same time enclosing two smallspecimens of the Rowley poems. Mr.Walpole returned a very polite reply,requesting further information ; and,in answer, was informed of the circumstancesof Chatterton, who hinted a wishthat the former would free him from anirksome profession, and place him in asituation where he might pursue thenatural bias of his genius. In the meantime,however, Gray and Mason havingpronounced the poems sent to Walpoleto be forgeries, the latter, who, nevertheless,could not, as he himself confesses,help admiring the spirit of poetrydisplayed in them, wrote a cold monitoryletter to our author, advising himto apply himself to his profession. Incensedat this, he demanded the immediatereturn of his manuscripts, whichWalpole enclosed in a blank cover, afterhis return from a visit to Paris, when Ihe found another letter from Chatterton,peremptorily requiring the papers, andtelling Walpole "that he would not havedared to use him so, had he not beenacquainted with the narrowness of hiscircumstances." Here their correspondenceended, and on these circumstancesalone is the charge founded against Mr.Walpole of barbarously neglecting, andfinally causing the death of, Chatterton.Mr. Walpole, observes Dr. Gregory, afterwardsregretted that he had not seenthis extraordinary youth, and that hedid not pay A more favourable attentionto his correspondence; but to ascribeto Mr. Walpole's neglect the dreadfulcatastrophe which happened at the dis-literature.tance of nearly two years after, wouldbe the highest degree of injustice andabsurdity.Our author now entered into politics;and, in March, 1770, composed a satiricalpoem of one thousand three hundredlines, entitled Kew Gardens, in whichhe abused the Princess-dowager ofWales and Lord Bute, together withthe partisans of ministry at Bristol, notexcepting Mr. Alcott, and other of hisfriends and patrons. His character,also, in other respects, began to developeditself in an unfavourable light;but the assertion that he plunged intoprofligacy at this period, is contradictedby unexceptionable testimony. Themost prominent feature in his conductwas his continued and open avowal ofinfidelity, and of his intention to commitsuicide as soon as, life should becomeburthensome to him. He had alsogrown thoroughly disgusted vrith hisprofession ; and purposely, it is supposed,leaving upon his desk a paper,entitled his Last Will, in which heavowed his determination to destroyhimself on Easter Sunday, he gladlyreceived his dismissal from Mr. Lambert,into whose hands the documenthad fallen. He now determined to repairto London ; and on being questionedby Mr. Thistlethwaite concerninghis plan of life, returned this remarkableanswer : " My first attempt,"said he, " shall be in the literary way ;the promises I have received are sufficientto dispel doubt ; but should I,contrary to expectation, find myself deceived,I will, in that case, turn methodistpreacher. Credulity is as potenta deity as ever, and a new sect mayeasily be devised. But if that, too, shouldfail me, my last and final resource is apistol." Such was the language of onenot much beyond seventeen years ofage; certainly, as Dr. Aikin observes,not that of a simple, ingenious youth,smit with the love of sacred song,"a Beattie's minstrel, as some of chatterton'sadmirers have chosen to painthim.At the end of April, he arrived inthe metropolis; and, on (he 6th of May,writes to his mother that he is in sucha settlement as he could desire. " I get,"he adds, " four guineas a month byone magazine ; shall engage to write ahistory of England, and other pieces,which will more than double that sum.Occasional essays for the daily paperswould more than support me. "What aglorious prospect !" His engagements,in fact, appear to have been numerousand profitable ; but we are cautioned,by Dr. Gregory, against giving implicitcredence to every part of Chatterton'sletters, written at this time, relative tohis literary and political friends in themetropolis. It seems, however, that hehad been introduced to Mr. Beckford,then lord mayor, and had formed highexpectations of patronage from theopposition party, which he at firstespoused; but the death of Beckford,at which he is said to have gone almostfrantic, and the scarcity of money whichhe found on the opposition side, alteredhis intentions. He observed to a friend,that " he was a poor author, who couldwrite on both sides;" and it appearsthat he actually did so, as two essayswere found after his death, one eulogizing,and the other abusing, the administration,for rejecting the city remonstrance.On the latter, addressedto Mr. Beckford, is this indorsement :Accepted by Single net for, and thrown outof The North Britain, 21st of June, cmaccount of the lord mayor's deathLost by his death on this essay 1 11 6Gained in elegies 2 2in essays 3 3Am glad he is dead by 313 6His hopes of obtaining eminence asapolitical writer now became extravagantlysanguine, and he alreadyseems to have considered himself a manof considerable public importance. " Mycompany," he says, in a letter to hissister, " is courted every where ; andcould I humble myself to go into acompter, could have had twenty placesbefore now ; but I must be among thegreat ; state matters suit me better thancommercial." These bright prospects,about July, appear to have been suddenlyclouded ; and, after a short careerof dissipation, which kept pace with hishopes, he found that he had nothingto expect from the patronage of thegreat ; and, to escape the scene of hismortification, made an unsuccessful attemptto obtain the post of surgeon's-mateto the coast of Africa. It is lessTHOMAS CHATTERTON,certain to what extent he was now employedby the booksellers, than that hefelt the idea of dependence upon theminsupportable, and soon fell into sucha state of indigence, as to be reduced tothe want of necessary food. Such washis pride, however, that when, after afast of three days, his landlady invitedhim to dinner, he refused the invitationas an insult, assuring her he was nothungry. This is the last act recorded ofhis life ; a few hours afterwards, he swalloweda dose of arsenic, and was founddead the next morning, August the 25th,1770, surrounded by fragments of numerousmanuscripts, which he appearedto have destroyed. His suicide tookplace in Brook Street, Holborn, and hewas interred in a shell, in the burying-groundof Shoe Lane workhouse. Tinsmelancholy catastrophe js heightened bythe fact, that Dr. Fry, head of St. John'sCollege, Oxford, had just gone to Bristol,for the purpose of assisting Chatterton,when he was there informed ofhis death.The controversy respecting the authenticityof the poems attributed toRowley, is now at an end ; though thereare still a few, perhaps, who may sidewith Dean Milles and others, againstthe host of writers, including Gibbon,Johnson, and the two Wantons, whoascribe the entire authorship to Chatterton.The hitter have, perhaps, cometo a conclusion, which is not likely tobe again disputed, viz. that howeverextraordinary it was for Chatterton toproduce them in the eighteenth century,it was impossible that Rowley couldhave written them in the fifteenth. But,whether Chatterton was or was not theauthor of the poems ascribed to Rowley,his transcendent genius must ever bethesubject of wonder and admiration.The eulogy of his friends, and the opinionsof the controversialists respectinghim, are certainly too extravagant.Dean Milles prefers Rowley to Homer,Virgil, Spenser, and Shakspeare ; Mr.Malone " believes Chatterton to havebeen the greatest genius that Englandhas produced since the days of Shakspeare;" and Mr. Croft, the author ofLove and Madness, asserts, that ". nosuch human being, at any period of life,has ever been known, or possibly everwill be known." This enthusiasticpraise is not confined to the criticalwriters ; the British muse has paidsome of her most beautiful tributes tothe genius and memory of Chatterton.The poems of Rowley, as published byDean Milles, consist of pieces of all theprincipal classes of poetical composition:tragedies, lyric, and heroic poems, pastorals,epistles, ballads, &c. Sublimityand beauty pervade many of them ;and they display wonderful powers ofimagination and facility of composition ;yet, says Dr. Aikin, there is also muchof the common-place flatness and extravagance,that might be expected froma juvenile writer, whose fertility wasgreater than his judgment, and whohad fed his mind upon stores collectedwith more avidity than choice. Thehaste and ardour, with which he pursuedhis various literary designs, was inaccordance with his favourite maxim,that God had sent His creatures intothe world with arms long enough toreach any thing, if they would be atthe trouble of extending them."In 1778, a miscellaneous volume ofthe avowed writings of Chatterton waspublished ; and, in 1803, an edition ofhis works appeared, in three volumes,octavo, with an account of his life, byDr. Gregory, from whom we have beforequoted. The general character ofhis productions has been well appreciatedby Lord Orford, who, after expatiatingupon his quick intuition, hishumour, his vein of satire, the rapiditywith which he seized all the topics ofconversation, whether of politics, literature,or fashion, remarks, " Nothing inChatterton can be separated from Chatterton.His noblest flight, his sweeteststrain, his grossest ribaldry, and hismost common-place imitations of theproductions of magazines, were all theeffervescences of the same ungovernableimpulse, which, cameleon-like, imbibedthe colours of all it looked on. It wasOssian, or a Saxon monk, or Gray, orSmollett, or Junius ; and if it failedmost in what it most affected to be, apoet of the fifteenth century, it was becauseit could not imitate what had notexisted." In person, Chatterton is saidto have been, like his genius, premature;he had, says his biographer, amanliness and dignity beyond his years,and there was a something about himuncommonly prepossessing. His mostremarkable feature was his eyesLITERATURE.which, though grey, were uncommonlypiercing ; when he was warmed inargument, or otherwise, they sparkledwith fire ; and one eye, it is said, wasstill more remarkable than the other.The character of Chatterton has beensufficiently developed in the course ofthe preceding memoir ; his ruling passion,we have seen, was literary fame ;and it is doubtful whether his deathwas not rather occasioned through fearof losing the reputation he had alreadyacquired, than despair of being able toobtain a future subsistence. This isrendered at least plausible, by the factof his having received pecuniary assistancefrom Mr. Hamilton, senior, theproprietor of The Critical Review, notlong before his death, with a promiseof more ; that he was employed by hisliterary friends, almost to the last hourof his existence ; and that he was awareof the suspicions existing that himselfand Rowley were the same. Thoughhe neither confessed nor denied this, itwas evident that his conduct was influencedby some mystery, known onlyto himself; he grew wild, abstracted,and incoherent, and a settled gloominessat length took possession of his countenance,which was a presage of hisfatal resolution. He has been accusedof libertinism, but there are no proofsof this during his residence either atLondon or Bristol ; though many of hisproductions show a laxity of principle,which might justify the supposition.The best qualities in his character werethe negative ones of temperance andaffection for his family, to whom hesent small presents out of his first gains,and always spoke of their welfare asone of the principal ends of his exertions.But what deeper afflictioncould he have brought upon them thanthat caused by the last act of his life ?His sister says, that " he was a lover oftruth from the earliest dawn of reason ;"yet his life was one continued career ofdeception. He is to be pitied for hismisfortunes, and admired for his genius ;but, with Kirkee White in our remembrance,we could wish to forget all elsethat belonged to Chatterton.WILLIAM ROSCOE.WILLIAM ROSCOE, the son of atavern-keeper, was born at Liverpool,on the 18th of March, 1752, and afterhaving studied little more than reading,writing, and arithmetic, was, at the ageof sixteen, articled to Mr. Eyes, an attorney,in his native town. A passion forthe classics now took possession of him ;and, without neglecting his professionalduties, he, in a short space of time,made himself master of the French,Latin, and Italian languages, besidesdeveloping no mean talent for poeticalcomposition. At the expiration of hisarticles, he was taken into partnershipwith Mr. Spinal ; but his attention tohis clients did not hinder him frompaying his respects to the muses. In1773, he recited, before the societyformed at Liverpool for the encouragementof drawing, painting, &c., an ode,which was afterwards published withMount Pleasant, his first poetical production,which was written in his sixteenthyear. He subsequently contributedto Dr. Enfield's Speaker anElegy to Pity, and an Ode to Education,containing some strong remarksagainst the slave trade, on which subjecthe wrote several tracts; and, in1788, a poem in two parts, entitledThe Wrongs of Africa. On the occasionof the French revolution, he composedthe songs of Millions, be Free !The Vine-covered Hills, &c., whichbecame popular both at home andabroad.In 1790, he joined Dr. Currie in aseries of essays, in the Weekly LiverpoolHerald, under the title of TheRecluse ; and, in the same year, hebegan to compose his Lorenzo deMedici, which was published, in 1796,in two volumes, quarto. It soon wentthrough three editions, and has beentranslated into Italian by the ChevalierMecherini, and into German by ProfessorSprenyel. In 1805, appeared hisLife of Leo the Tenth, which was alsotranslated into French and German,WILLIAM ROSCOE,and added considerably to the alreadyestablished reputation of the author.Mr. Roscoe had, some years ago,ceased to practise as an attorney, andentered himself a member of Gray'sInn, with a view of studying for thebar; but it does not appear that he wasever called, and he finally chose thebusiness of a banker in his native town,in partnership with Messrs. Clarke.While in this capacity, the generalelection of 1806 took place ; and asmany of the Liverpool inhabitants wereanxious for an anti-slavery member,they put in nomination our author, withan understanding that he should bereturned free of expense; for whichpurpose, a subscription of 5,000 wascollected in one day. The attempt wassuccessful ; but, in consequence of theoutrages which had occurred during theprogress of the last election, he declineda contest, after the dissolution of parliamentin 1807.In 1808, he published his Considerationson the Causes, Objects, and Consequencesof the Present War, which,says the reviewer in The MonthlyRepository of Literature, &c., " is avaluable offering to the shrine of peaceand justice." In 1809, he procured theliberation of nine black slaves, who hadbeen thrown into prison by a Portuguesecaptain for a false debt, for the purposeof preventing them from obtaining theirfreedom ; and, in the same year, he waselected a corresponding member of theAmsterdam Royal Institution, thoughwe were then at war with the Dutch.About this period, appeared his Reviewof the Speeches of the late Mr. Canning ;and, in 1811, was published his Letterto Henry Brougham, Esq., on a Reformof the Representation of the People inParliament.In 1817, he published a discoursedelivered on the opening of the RoyalInstitution of Liverpool, on the Originand Vicissitudes of Literature, Science,and Arts; and, in 1824, he edited anew edition of the works of Pope, towhich he prefixed a life of that poetWhile Mr. Roscoe's mind was chieflyoccupied with his literary and politicalstudies," observes one of his biographers," a series of unforeseen circumstances,particularly several otherfailures, obliged the banking-house, inwhich he was engaged, to suspend payment.The creditors, however, had somuch confidence in his integrity, thattime was given for the firm to recoverfrom its embarrassments ; and he, onfirst entering the bank after accommodation,was loudly greeted by thepopulace." His difficulties, however,were so great, that he was under thenecessity of parting with the whole ofhis property, a circumstance whichgave him great pain, as may be seenfrom his sonnet on parting with hislibrary. It was, probably, after thesepecuniary misfortunes, that the councilof the Royal Society of Literatureelected him one of the ten individualsfrom the honorary associates to receivethe allowance of jelOO per annum.Mr. Roscoe's declining years aresolaced by the affectionate attentions ofjustly and sincerely attached relations ;and he is no less respected by the inhabitantsof his native town, whichowes many of its public institutions tohis exertions. He is described as aman of the most benevolent heart, independentspirit, and generous disposition; and his conversation is said tobe characteristic of his chaste andclassic turn of thought. To name hisfriends and admirers, would be to recapitulatethe elite of the noble, scientific,patriotic, and literary world.During his days of prosperity, his housewas the resort of all the distinguishedcharacters of the day, both foreign andnative. Among his visitors were theDukes of Sussex and Gloucester, manynoblemen eminent for their talents aswell as stations, and several of thehighest literary characters of the age.His faculties are still in their vigour;and the same may be said of his generouslove of liberty, and his ardent,unceasing benevolence.In addition to the works alreadymentioned, Mr. Roscoe was the authorof The Nurse, a poem from the Italian;Occasional Tracts relative to the Warbetween Great Britain and France; AnAddress delivered before the Proprietorsof the Botanic Garden atLiverpool ; and three communicationsto the Transactions of the LinnseanSociety. It appears, from a memoir ofMr. Roscoe's life, in the National PortraitGallery, that he was strongly attachedto botanical and agriculturalstudies ; and that he, some years since,LITERATURE.undertook the improvement of a largetract of waste moss land in the vicinityof Manchester. To this, Mrs. Barbauldrefers in her poem, entitled One ThousandEight Hundred and Eleven :When Roscoe, to whose patriot breast belongThe Roman virtue and the Tuscan soup,Led Ceres to the black and barren moor,Where Ceres never gained a wreath before.As an author, Mr. Roscoe takes hisplace among the most eminent writersof the present age ; and his Life ofLorenzo de Medici and of Leo the Tenthhave raised him to the very first rankof English classical historians. Bothof these performances are distinguishedby a style at once energetic and elegant,by profound thought, and a trulyphilosophical spirit.GEORGE CRABBE.GEORGE CRABBE was born atMarlborough, in Suffolk, on the 24th ofDecember, 1754, where his father andgrandfather were officers of the customs.He received his education at aneighbouring school, where he gaineda prize for one of his poems, and left itwith sufficient knowledge to qualifyhim for an apprentice to a surgeon andapothecary in his native town. His poeticaltaste is said to have been assistedin developing itself by a perusal of allthe scraps of verses which his father usedto tear off from different newspapers,arid which young Crabbe collected together,and got most of them by heart.The attractions of the muse had probablyovercome those of aesculapius,for, on the completion of his apprenticeship,giving up all hope of succeedingin his profession, he determined at onceto quit it, and to depend for supportupon his literary abilities. Accordingly,in 1778, he came to London with littlemore in his pocket than a bundle of hisbest poems, and took a lodging in thecity, where he read and composed, butcould prevail upon no bookseller topublish. At length, in 1780, he venturedto print, at his own expense, apoem, entitled The Candidate, whichwas favourably noticed in The MonthlyReview, to the editor of which it wasaddressed. Finding, however, that hestood no chance of success or popularitywhilst he remained personallyunknown, he is said to have introducedhimself to Edmund Burke, who receivedhim with great kindness, andread his productions with approbation.Our author fortunately found in thisgentleman both a friend and a patron ;he took Crabbe into his house, and introducedhim to Fox ; and, under theirunited auspices, appeared his poem ofThe Library, in 1781. In the sameyear, he was ordained deacon, and, inthe following one, priest, and, for ashort time, acted as curate at Aid-borough.About the same period, heentered his name at Trinity Hall, Cambridge,but withdrew it without graduating,although he was subsequentlypresented with the degree of B. C. L.After residing for some time at RevoirCastle, as chaplain to the Duke ofRutland, by the recommendation ofMr. Burke, our author was introducedto Lord chancellor Thurlow, who bestowedupon him, successively, theliving of Frome St. Gtuintin, in Dorset-shire,and the rectories of Mutton andWest Arlington, in the diocese of Lincoln.In the meantime, in 1785, hepublished The Newspaper, a poem ;followed by a complete edition of hisworks, in 1807, which were receivedwith marked and universal approbation.In 1810, appeared his admirablepoem of The Borough; in 1812, hepublished his Tales in Verse ; and, in1819, his celebrated Tales of the Hall,with which he concluded his knownpoetical labours. He had, in the interim,been presented to the rectory ofTrowbridge, with the smaller beneficeof Croton Kernel, in Leicestershire,where he still resides. His only prosepublications are a funeral sermon onone of his early noble patrons, Charles,Duke of Rutland, preached in the chapelof Revoir Castle, in 1789 ; and AnEssay on the Natural History of theWILLIAM Gifford.Vale of Revoir, written for Mr. Nichols'sHistory of Leicestershire.The works of Crabbe have gonethrough several editions, and deservedlybecome popular ; yet such is the presentstate of the public taste, that, it is said,Mr. Murray declines publishing avolume of verse, which he has for sometimehad in his possession, of our poet'scomposition. Mr. Wilson Croker hasjustly observed of Crabbe, that hisliavirig taken a view of life too minute,too humiliating, and too painfully just,may have rendered his popularity lessbrilliant than that of some of hiscontemporaries ; though for accuratedescription, and deep knowledge ofhuman nature, no poet of the presentage is equal to him. The great charmof his poetry lies in his masterly treatmentof the most ordinary subjects, andin his heart-rending but true descriptionsof the scenes which his muse delightsto visit, those of poverty anddistress. He depicts nature living andcircumstantially ; and, in this respect,his poetry may justly be compared tothe painting of Teniers and State.In private life, Mr. Crabbe is universallyesteemed ; and, in his ownparish, his kindness to the poor, anduniform benevolence to all round him,have rendered him the idol of T row-bridgeand its neighbourhood.WILLIAM GIFFORD.WILLIAM GIFFORD, the son of aplumber and glazier, who dissipated hisproperty by intemperance and extravagance,was born at Ashburton, inDevonshire, in April, 1755. He losthis father, when only twelve years ofage, and in about a year afterwards hismother died, leaving himself and aninfant brother, " without a relation orfriend in the world." The latter wassent to the workhouse, and the subjectof our memoir was received into thehouse of his godfather, who put him toschool for about three months, but atthe end of that period, took him home,with the view of employing him as aploughboy. Being unfitted, however,for this occupation, by an injury on hisbreast, he was sent to sea in a coastingvessel, in which he remained for nearlya year. " It will be easily conceived,"he says in his autobiography, " that mylife was a life of hardship. I was notonly ' a ship-boy on the high andgiddy mast,' but also in the cabin,where every menial office fell to mylot; yet, if I was restless and discontented,I can safely say it was not somuch on account of this, as of my beingprecluded from all possibility of reading;as my master did not possess, nordo I recollect seeing, during the wholetime of my abode with him, a singlebook of any description, except TheCoasting Pilot."He was at length recalled by his godfather,and again put to school, wherehe made such rapid progress, that in afew months he was qualified to assisthis master in any extraordinary emergency; and, although only in hisfifteenth year, began to think of turninginstructor himself. His plans were,however, treated with contempt by hisguardian, who apprenticed him to ashoemaker, at Ashburton, to whom ourauthor went " in sullenness and silence,"and with a perfect hatred of his newoccupation. His favourite pursuit atthis time was arithmetic, and the mannerin which he continued to extendhis knowledge of that science, is thusrelated by himself: " I possessed," heobserves, " but one book in the world ;it was a treatise on algebra, given tomeby a young woman, who had foundit in a lodging-house. I considered itas a treasure, but it was a treasurelocked up ; for it supposed the reader tobe well acquainted with simple equations,and I knew nothing of the matter.My master's son had purchased penning'sIntroduction : this was preciselywhat I wanted ; but he carefully concealedit from me, and I was indebtedto chance alone for stumbling on hishiding-place. I sat up for the greatestpart of several nights successively ; and,before he suspected his treatise was discovered,had completely mastered it.LITERATURE.I could now enter upon my own : andthat carried me pretty far into thescience. This was not done withoutdifficulty. I had not a farthing on earth,nor a friend to give me one : pen, ink,and paper, therefore, (in despite of theflippant remark of Lord Orford) were,for the most part, as completely out ofmy reach as a crown and sceptre.There was. indeed, a resource ; but theutmost caution and secresy were necessaryin applying to it. I beat out piecesof leather as smooth as possible, andwrought my problems on them witha blunted awl; for the rest, my memorywas tenacious, and I could multiply anddivide by it to a great extent."Under the same unfavourable circumstances,he composed and recited to hisassociates small pieces of poetry, and,being at last invited to repeat them toother circles, little collections weremade for him, which, he says, sometimesproduced him " as much as sixpencein an evening." The sums whichhe thus obtained, he devoted to thepurchase of pens, paper, &c. ; books ofgeometry, and of the higher branches ofalgebra ; but his master, finding that hehad, in some of the verses before-mentioned,satirized both himself and hiscustomers, seized upon his books andpapers, and prohibited him from againrepeating a line of his compositions. Atlength, in the sixth year of his apprenticeship,his lamentable doggerel, as heterms it, having reached the ears ofMr. Cookesley, a surgeon, that gentlemanset on foot " a subscription forpurchasing the remainder of the time ofWilliam Gifford, and for enabling himto improve himself in writing and Englishgrammar."He now quitted speaking, and enteredthe school of the Rev. ThomasMerton ; and in two years and twomonths from what he calls the day ofhis emancipation, he had made suchprogress, that his master declared himto be fit for the university. He was accordinglysent by Mr. Cookesley, toOxford, where he obtained, by theexertions of the same gentleman, theoffice of Bible reader at Exeter College,of which he was entered a member.Here he pursued his studies with unremittingdiligence, and had already commencedhis poetical translation of the ISatires of Juvenal, when the death of jMr. Cookesley interrupted the progressof the work. A fortunate accident procuredhim a new patron in Earl Grosvenor,in whose family he for sometimeresided, and afterwards accompaniedto the continent his son, Lord Bel-grave.On his return to England, hesettled in London, and, devoting himselfto literary pursuits, published, in1791, and 1794, successively, his poeticalsatires, The Baviad, and The Mseviad ;the one containing an attack on thedrama, and the other an invectiveagainst the favourite poets of the day.In 1800, he published his Epistle toPeter Pindar, in which he charged thesatirist with blasphemy; and Wolcotaccused him of obscenity. This led tothe assault mentioned in our memoir ofDr. Wolcot, who, it seems, would haveinflicted severe chastisement on Gifford,but for the interference of a powerfulFrenchman, who happened to be present,and who turned Wolcot out of thereading-room, where the scene occurred,into the street, throwing his wig andcane after him. In 1802, appeared hislong-promised version of Juvenal, whichwas attacked by The Critical Review, inan erudite but somewhat personal article,that called forth a reply from ourauthor, entitled Examination of theStrictures of The Critical Review uponJuvenal.In 1805 and 1816, he published, successively,his editions of Massinger, andBen Jonson ; and, in 1821, appearedhis translation of Persius. He nextedited the works of Ford, in two volumes; and he had proceeded withfive volumes of those of Shirley, whenhis labours were terminated, by hisdeath. He died at'Pimlico, on the 31stof December, 1826, and was interredin Westminster Abbey. Being a singleman, he died in opulent circumstances ;having enjoyed, for some years, anannuity from Lord Grosvenor, besidesholding the office of paymaster of theband of gentleman-pensioners, with asalary of 300 a-year ; and, for a time,that of comptroller of the lottery, with asalary of (500 a-year.The fame of Gifford rests principallyupon his Juvenal, which occupied thegreater part of his life, and was sentinto the world with every advantagethat could be derived from the mostcareful attention on the part of theGILBERT WAKEFIELD.author, and the correction of his mostable friends. It still falls short, however,of Mr. Gifford's attempt to giveJuvenal entire, except in his grossness,and to make him speak as he wouldhave spoken among us. In this he hasso far failed, that whilst he omits to furnishthe glowing imagery, luxuriantdiction, and impetuous fluency of theRoman satirist, he has retained manyof his worst and most objectionable passages.It has been well observed, by awriter in The New Monthly Magazine,that his translation presents us ratherwith the flail of an infatuated rustic, thanwith the exterminating falchion of Juvenal.His Baviad and Maevius evincefirst-rate satirical powers ; but in these,as in most of his writings, a degree ofcoarseness and virulence displays itself,which shows that literary associationshad not refined his mind. Of late years,he was principally known as the editorof The Quarterly "Review, a work establishedby himself, in 1809, and of whichhe continued to be the conductor till1824. He also for some time edited theAnti-jacobin newspaper, in which hedisplayed his usual acuteness, asperity,and subservience to the party by whichhe thrived; his politics being invariablythose of his interest.GILBERT WAKEFIELD.THIS distinguished scholar and critic,the son of the Rev. George Wakefield,was born on the 22nd of February,1756, in the parsonage-house of St.Nicholas, Nottingham, of which churchhis father was then rector. He receivedthe rudiments of education atthe free-school of his native town, andwas afterwards sent to three other academies,the last being at ,in the vicinity of which hisfather then resided.In 1772, he was entered of Jesus' College,Cambridge, where he pursued allhis studies with delight, excepting algebraand logic, which, he says, " wereodious to me beyond conception." Withallhis zeal for learning, however, hisdevotion to his books appears to havebeen occasionally interrupted by whathe calls a " strange fastidiousness." Thisimpediment, he observes, "commonlyrecurred in the spring of the year, whenI was so enamoured of rambling in theopen air, through solitary fields, or bya river's side ; of cricket, and of fishing,that no self-expostulations, no prospectof future vexation, nor even emulationitself, could chain me to my books."Having previously obtained a scholarship,he graduated B.A. in 1776; and,in the same year, he gained the secondchancellor's gold medal ; and was immediatelyafter, elected to a fellowship.About the same time, he made his debutas an author, by the publication of asmall collection of Latin Poems, with afew Notes on Horace. In 1777 and1778, he gained prizes for two Latinprose essays ; and in the latter year hewas ordained a deacon, when " he wasso little satisfied," he says, " with therequisition of subscription, and the subjectsof that subscription themselves,that he afterwards regarded this. acquiescenceas the most disingenuousaction of his whole life." He, however,accepted a curacy at Stockport, inCheshire, and afterwards in a church atLiverpool, where his inveteracy againstthe established church became so rancorous,that he attributed a clergyman'stheft of the sacrament money, to thefact of his having left the dissenters forthe church of England.In 1779, he vacated his fellowship bymarriage, and shortly afterwards relinquishedhis curacy at Liverpool, forthe situation of classical tutor at thedissenting academy, at Warrington, tothe downfal of which he is accused ofcontributing, though he is allowed tohave been exemplary in the dischargeof his duty. During his residence atthis seminary, he began his career asatheological controversialist, and gaveto the public, in succession, a tract,entitled A Plain and Short Account ofthe Nature of Baptism ; An Essay onInspiration ; A New Translation of theFirst Epistle of St. Paul to the Thessalonians; and, in 1782, a New Trans-literature.nation of St. Matthew's Gospel, withNotes, critical, philological, and explanatory.On the dissolution of theacademy at Warrington, he took up hisresidence at Bramcote, in Nottinghamshire;and, subsequently, at Nottingham,where he published, in 1784, the firstvolume of An Inquiry into the Opinionsof the Christian Writers of the ThreeFirst Centuries, concerning the personof Jesus Christ ; a work which did notmeet with sufficient encouragement toinduce him to proceed further. In1789, he commenced a work under thetitle of Silva Critica, which appeared inthree parts, from the Cambridge Universitypress, the whole being intended toexhibit An Union of Theological andClassical Learning, illustrating theScriptures, by light borrowed from thePhilology of Greece and Rome. Heafterwards printed two other parts.In 1790, he accepted the situation ofclassical professor, at the New DissentingCollege, at Hackney, but his connexionwith it ceased in the following year, inconsequence,chiefly, of his preferenceof classical to theological knowledge,and of private to public worship. Insupport of his opinions on the lattersubject, he published a pamphlet, andin 1792, still continuing to reside atHackney, he printed, in three volumes,octavo, his Translation of theNew Testament, with Notes ; in thelanguage of which, though he has retainedas much as possible of the oldversion, he is said to have introducedsome bold innovations. In 1795, appearedMemoirs of his Own Life, whichwas succeeded by his Evidences of theChristian Religion, in reply to Paine'sAge of Reason. He next published afirst volume of his intended edition ofPope's Works, but being anticipated byWarburton, he proceeded no further inhis undertaking than the publication ofa volume of Notes on Pope, and a newedition of his Iliad and Odyssey, inwhich he attacked Cowper's version.He then appeared as a classical editor inselections from the Greek tragedians ;and in editions of Horace, Virgil, Sion,and Roscius ; and finally, by the productionof his Lucretius, in three volumes,a most erudite and masterlyperformance. " This," says Dyer, in anote in his History of Cambridge, " isone of the most splendid editions of aclassic author that ever issued from anEnglish press ; and very scarce ; manycopies having been burnt at a fire whichhappened at the printing-office. A copy,bound in Russia," he adds, writing in1814, "usually sells for at least eightyguineas." The work was also highlypraised by Charles James Fox, to whomit was dedicated: and, in particular, byMr. Steevens, the editor of Shakspeare,who pronounced it to be the most magnificentand correct work of its kind thathad yet appeared.Politics now occupying his attention,he published Remarks on the GeneralOrders of the Duke of York, in which,as well as in his reply to some parts ofthe Bishop of Llandaff's Address to thePeople of England, he condemned thewar against France, in terms that inducedgovernment to institute a prosecutionagainst him, which ended in hisconviction, and condemnation to twoyears' imprisonment in Dorchester gaol,commencing from February, 1799. Hissufferings whilst in confinement, however,were alleviated as much as possible,by the munificent zeal of his friends,who raised for him a subscription of5,000, which relieved his mind in respectto a future provision for his family,exceeding, as it probably did, what hecould hope to have bequeathed themas the fruits of his own exertions.During his imprisonment, he composedseveral pamphlets; a small volume,entitled Notes Carcerariae ; besidesplanning some works of a larger magnitude,particularly an edition of anEnglish and Greek lexicon, which, itis to be regretted, failed for want ofsufficient encouragement. Shortly afterhis liberation he commenced a course ofclassical lectures, in London, and hadcompleted his Observations upon theSecond Book of the Mne'id of Virgil,when he was attacked with a typhusfever, which carried him off on the 9thof September, 1801, in the forty-sixthyear of his age.The great classical and critical abilitiesof Gilbert Wakefield have beenallowed by all parties, though no literarycharacter had fewer partisans, in consequenceof his bigotted opposition toall sects and systems whatever. Anauthority, cited in Charmer's BiographicalDictionary, says, he was as violentagainst the Greek accents, as he wasWILLIAM GODWIN.against the Trinity. " In all things,"observes the same' writer, " it was thesame with Gilbert Wakefield ; whatevercoincided not with his ideas of rectitude,justice, elegance, or whatever else itmight be, was to give way at once ; andbe rescinded at his pleasure, on painof the most violent reprehension to allopponents : whether it was an articleof faith, a principle of policy, a doctrineof morality, or a reading in an ancientauthor, still it was equally cut and slash,away it must go to the dogs and vultures."He was, however, though mistaken,no less conscientious than zealousand industrious in his pursuit oftruth ; and, perhaps, the greatest proofof his sincerity is, that in his literaryand polemical controversies he offendedmany, and made proselytes of none. Inconjectural criticism he was as great anadept as Bentley, to whom he assimilatedin the boldness of his style, andwas scarcely inferior in learning. Theprivate character of Mr. Wakefieldis said to have been estimable andamiable in a very eminent degree, andto have been totally free from theasperities which so frequently occur inhis writings.WILLIAM GODWIN.WILLIAM GODWIN, the son ofa dissenting minister, was born at Wis-beach,in Cambridgeshire, on the 3rdof March, 1756. He received the chiefpart of his education at the Dissenters'College, at Horton, and in 1778, beingadmitted a member of the non conformingchurch, commenced preacherto a congregation at Newmarket, inSuffolk. His opinions, whilst at theabove-named college, had been thoseof Arminius, but he now became aCalvinist ; and his investigating turnof mind inducing a subsequent changeof doctrine, which was not acceptableto his sect, he, in 1783, resigned thepulpit. In the same year, he came toLondon, and published Sketches ofHistory, in Six Sermons, which wassucceeded, in ten years afterwards, byhis Political Justice ; a work, wherein helays it down as his chief proposition thatvirtue consists in producing the happinessof society. This eminently philosophicalidea he argued with greatlogical force, and in a manner thatprocured him high reputation, thoughthe new doctrines it involved gave greatoffence to the orthodox. In a secondedition, however, of the Political Justice,he recanted many of his first principles ;it was printed a third time in 1797,having previously become so popular,that the poorest mechanics had beenknown to join in subscriptions to purchasecopies.In 1794, he published his celebratednovel of Caleb Williams, which produceda sensation scarcely less remarkablethan his former work, and was,shortly afterwards, twice translated intothe French language. In this much-read,much-praised, and much-blamedproduction, the author passes somejust strictures upon our system of criminaljudicature, and portrays, with harrowingforce, the effects of crime andculpable curiosity. About the sametime when Home Tooke and otherswere tried for high treason, he publisheda pamphlet in their defence, entitledCursory Strictures on the Charge deliveredby Lord Chief-justice Eyre tothe Grand Jury, the circulation of which,government tried, in vain, to prevent.In 1797, he published a series of essays,called The Inquirer; and, in 1798,Memoirs of Mary Woolstonecraft, whomhe had married in the April of the previousyear. His sentiments upon thesubject of marriage had been madeknown to the public in his PoliticalJustice ; and his aversion to it had not,probably, declined, when he enteredinto its bonds. He says, in the worklast-mentioned, "the principal motivefor complying with this ceremony, wasthe circumstance of Mary's being in astate of pregnancy." His opinions,however, would seem to have undergonestill further change, after the deathof Mrs. Godwin ; for, in 1801, he againmarried, and opened a bookseller's shopin Skinner Street, having previouslyLITERATURE.produced his St. Leon. He next wroteFleetwood and Mandeville, and broughtupon the stage two tragedies, entitled,respectively, Antonio, and Falkner,both of which failed. His other worksare, Thoughts on Dr. Parr's Spital Sermon,being a reply to the attacks of Dr.Parr, Mr. Mackintosh, and others ; TheHistory of the Life and Age of GeoffreyChaucer ; History of the Commonwealthof England ; An Essay on Sepulchres; The Lives of Edward andJohn Phillips; Letter of Verae, on theWar of 1815; an Exposition of Mr.Malthus's Theory of Population ; andhis novel of Cloudesley.As an original novelist Mr. Godwinis unrivalled, and he has the merit ofnever writing without a good end inview. No one has depicted, with morepowerful effect, the evils resulting fromhatred, pride, and revenge; or strivenwith more benevolent zeal to inculcatethe advantages of social happiness, andto expose the errors that stand in theway of its attainment. In private life,he is said to be deservedly esteemedand beloved by a large circle of friends.Mr. Godwin has a daughter by his firstwife, and a son by his second. Theformer is the widow of Shelley, thepoet.ELIZABETH INCHBALD.THIS lady, the daughter of a farmer,named Simpson, was born at Springfield,in Suffolk, in the year 1756. InFebruary, 1772, when scarcely sixteenyears old, she, in consequence of thedeath of her father, left her home, and,coming to London, where she arrivedat night, was inveigled into the houseof a procuress. On escaping from this,she wandered about the metropolis tillday-break, when she, with difficulty,obtained a lodging at an inn. Intendingto resort to the stage as a means oflivelihood, she applied to Mr. Inchbald,of Drury Lane Theatre, through whoseintroduction she was engaged at acountry theatre, the manager of whichtreated her with great courteousness,and gave her instructions in her profession.On one occasion, however,having intimated that he expected otherreturn for his kindness than her servicesin the theatre, the indignant subjectof our memoir threw a basin ofboiling water in his face, and rushedfrom the house to Mr. Inchbald. Thisgentleman offered to secure her fromfuture insult, by becoming her husband,and they were accordingly married.After playing at Edinburgh for fouryears, Mrs. Inchbald visited the continent,and shortly after her return becamea widow, and again appearedon the London stage. This was inOctober, 1780, when she made herdebut at Covent Garden Theatre, asBellario, in Pilaster. Her personalcharms, aided by her natural talents,procured her a flattering reception, andshe continued to be a popular actress tillher retirement from the stage in 1789.She had, in the mean time, writtenseveral dramatic pieces; but it is to theproduction of her celebrated novels ofThe Simple Story, and Nature andArt, that she owes her chief fame as anauthoress. In genuine pathos and domesticinterest these performances havenever been surpassed, to say nothing ofthe merit attached to them, for themoral which they inculcate, and theclear and impressive style in whichthey are composed. Mrs. Inchbald, whowas of the Roman catholic persuasion,died at Kensington, on the 1st ofAugust, 1821 ; and it is said that a shorttime previous to her decease, she repurchasedher autobiography, which shehad formerly sold for a large sum, andhad the manuscript consumed in herpresence. She was highly respected byall who knew her, and had the creditof having passed through a life oftemptation with unblemished reputation.Besides editing a collection ofdramas, entitled The British Theatre,and of farces, called The Modern Theatre,Mrs. Inchbald wrote the followingdramatic pieces: A Mogul Tale, Appearanceis Against Them, I'll TellYou What, The Widow's Vow, All ona Summer's Day, Animal Magnetism,The Child of Nature, Midnight Hour,Such Things Are, Married Man, TheROBERT BURNS.Hue and Cry, Next Door Neighbours,Young Men and Old Women, EveryOne Has His Fault, The WeddingDay, Wives as they Were and Maidsas they Are, Lovers' Vows, Wise Manof the East, and To Marry or Not toMarry.Her remarks in The British Theatreon Colman's Inkle and Yarico, drewfrom the author an indignant reply,wherein he styled Mrs. Inchbald "asecond Madame Dacier." In her rejoinder,she expressed the honour shefelt by the comparison which he drewin her favour, but at the same time,called on him to remember that, by sodoing, he placed himself on the samefooting with Homer, whose works hadbeen the subject of Madame Dacier'scriticism.ROBERT BURNS.ROBERT BURNS, the son of wn-lias Burnes, or Barnes, was born onthe 25th of January, 1759, in a clay-builtcottage, about two miles to thesouth of the town of Ayr, in Scotland.His father, who was a gardener andsmall farmer, appears to have been aman highly and deservedly respected,and Burns' description of him as " thesaint, the father, and the husband," ofthe Cotta's Saturday Night, attests theaffectionate reverence with which heregarded him. At the age of sixyears, Robert was sent to a small schoolat Galloway Mile, then superintendedby a teacher named Campbell ; butwho, retiring shortly after, was succeededby a Mr. John Murdoch. Underthe tuition of this gentleman, the subjectof our memoir made rapid progressin reading, spelling, and writing; and,though, to use his own words, " it costthe schoolmaster some thrashing," hesoon became an excellent Englishscholar. A love of reading, and athirst for general knowledge were observableat an early age ; and before hehad attained his seventeenth year, hehad read Salmon's and Guthrie's GeographicalGrammars, the Lives of Hannibaland Wallace, The Spectator,Pope's Works, some of Shakspeare'sPlays, Tull and Dickson on Agriculture,Tooke's Pantheon, Locke's Essay onthe Understanding, Backhouse's Historyof the Bible, The British Gardener'sDirectory, Boyle's Lectures,Allan Ramsay's Works, Taylor's ScriptureDoctrine of Original Sin, Hervey'sMeditations, and a Collection of Songs.These works formed the whole of his icollection, as mentioned by himself inaletter to Dr. Moore ; but his brotherGilbert adds to this list Durham'sPhysic and Astro-Theology, and a fewother works. Of this varied assortment,the Collection of Songs," says thepoet himself, " was my vade-mecum.I pored over them, driving my cart, orwalking to labour, song by song, verseby verse; carefully noticing the truetender and sublime, from affectation orfustian ; and I am convinced I owe tothis practice much of my critic-craft,such as it is."With Mr. Murdoch, Burns remainedfor about two years, during the last fewweeks of which the preceptor himselftook lessons in the French language,and communicated the instructions hereceived to his pupil, who, in a shorttime, obtained a sufficient knowledgeof French to enable him to read andunderstand any prose author in thatlanguage. The facility with which heacquired the French, induced him tocommence the rudiments of Latin, butwhether from want of diligence, or oftime, or that he found the task moreirksome than he anticipated, he soonabandoned his design of acquiring aknowledge of the language of theRomans.Mr. Murdoch having been compelledto leave Ayr, in consequence of someinadvertent expressions directed againstDr. Dalrymple, the elder Burns himselfundertook, for a time, the tuition of hisfamily. When Robert, however, wasabout fourteen years of age, his fathersent him and Gilbert, " week about,during the summer quarter," to a parishschool, by which means they alternatelyimproved themselves in writing, andLITERATUREassisted their parents in the labours ofa small farm. According to our poet'sown account, he, as he says, first committedthe sin of rhyme a little beforehe had attained his sixteenth year.The inspirer of his muse was love, theobject of which he describes as abonnie, sweet, sonsie lass," whosecharms he was anxious to celebrate inverse." I was not so presumptuous,"he says, " as to imagine that I couldmake verses like printed ones, composedby men who had Greek andLatin; but my girl sung a song, whichwas said to be composed by a smallcountry laird's son, on one of his father'smaids, with whom he was in love ; andI saw no reason why I might not rhymeas well as he : for, excepting that hecould shear sheep, and cast seats, hisfather living in the moorlands, he hadno more scholar-craft than myself. Thuswith me began love and poetry."The production alluded to is the littleballad commencingOh ! once 1 loved a bonnie lass.which Burns himself characterized asavery puerile and .silly performance ;"'yet, adds Mr. Lockhart, it contains,here and there, lines of which he needhardly have been ashamed at any periodof his life. "In my seventeenth year,"says Burns, " to give my manners abrush, I went to a country dancing-school.My father had an unaccountableantipathy against these meetings,and my going was, what to this moment1 repent, in opposition to hiswishes." Then, referring to his viewsin life, he continues " The great misfortuneof my life was to want an aim.I had felt early some stirrings of ambition,but they were the blind gropingof Homer's Cyclops round the wallsof his cave. The only two openings,by which I could enter the temple ofFortune, were the gate of niggardlyeconomy, or the path of little chicaningbargain-making. The first is so contractedan aperture, I never couldsqueeze myself into it : the last I alwayshated there was contamination in thevery entrance. Thus abandoned to noview or aim in life, with a strong appetitefor sociability, as well from nativehilarity as from a pride of observationand remark ; a constitutional melancholy,or hypochondriacal, that mademe fly from solitude ; add to theseincentives to social life, my reputationfor bookish knowledge, a certain wildlogical talent, and a strength of thoughtsomething like the rudiments of goodsense ; and it will not seem surprisingthat I was generally a welcome guestwhere I visited, or any great wonderthat always, where two or three mettogether, there was I among them." Inthis state of mind he entered recklesslyupon a dissipated career, giving looseto his passions, and indulging his tastefor literature, with as much irregularityand skill as he applied himself to theplough, the scythe, and the reaping-hook.To use his own expression,Vive Amour, et vive la bagatelle,"were his sole principles of action. Ihhis nineteenth year, he passed sometimeat a school," when he learnt mensuration,surveying, &c., and also improvedhimself "in other respects, particularlyin composition ; which heattributes chiefly to a perusal of a collectionof letters, by the wits of QueenAnne's reign.In his twenty-third year, partly, ashesays, through whim, and partly thathe wished to set about doing somethingin life, he entered the service of a flax-dresser,at Irvine, for the purpose oflearning his trade ; but an accidentalfire, which burnt down the shop, putan end to his speculations. After hisfather's death, which occurred in February,1784, he took the farm of Moss-girl,in conjunction with his brotherGilbert. " I entered on it," saysBurns, " with a firm resolution, ' Come,go to, I will be wise !' I read farmingbooks ; I calculated crops ; I attendedmarkets ; and, in short, in spite of ' thedevil, the world and the flesh,' I believeI should have been a wise man ;but, the first year, from unfortunatelybuying bad seed, the second, from alate harvest, we lost half our crops.This overset all my wisdom, and I returned,' like the dog to his vomit, andthe sow that was washed to her wallowingin the mire.' " In other words, heresigned the share of the farm to hisbrother, and returned to habits of intemperanceand irregularity. It wasduring his occupation of the farm ofMossgiel, that Burns first became acquaintedwith Jane Armour, his futurewife. This lady, who still survives asROBERT BURNS.the widow of the poet, was the daughterof a respectable mason, in the villageof Touching, where she was at thetime the reigning toast. The consequenceof this acquaintance, whichquickly ripened into mutual love, wassoon such that the connexion could nolonger be concealed; and, though thedetails of this story are, perhaps, as yetbut imperfectly known, it seems, atleast, certain, that Burns was anxiousto shield the partner of his imprudenceto the utmost in his power. It was,therefore, agreed between them, that heshould give her a written acknowledgmentof marriage, and then immediatelysail for Jamaica, and push hisfortune there, and that she should remainwith her father until her plightedhusband had the means of supporting afamily. This arrangement, however, didnot satisfy the lady's father; who, havingbut a very indifferent opinion of Burns'sgeneral character, was not to be appeased,and prevailed on his daughterto destroy the document, which wasthe only evidence of her marriage.Under these circumstances, Jane Armourbecame the mother of twins, andthe poet was summoned by the parish-officersto find security for the maintenanceof children which he had thusbeen prevented from legitimatizing accordingto the Scottish law.In a state of mind bordering closelyon insanity, Burns now resolved to flythe country ; and, after some trouble,he agreed with Dr. Douglas, who hadan estate in Jamaica, to go thither asoverseer. Before sailing, however, hewas advised, by his friends, to publishhis poems by subscription, in order toprovide him with necessaries for thevoyage, and he consented to this expedient,as an experiment which couldnot injure, and might essentially benefithim. Subscribers' names were obtainedfor about three hundred andfifty copies, and six hundred wereprinted. The collection was veryfavourably received by the public, andthe author realized, all expenses deducted,a profit of about twenty pounds.This sum," says he, ' came veryseasonably ; as I was thinking of indentingmyself, for want of money to procuremy passage. As soon as I wasmaster of nine guineas, the price thatwas to waft me to the torrid zone, Itook a steerage-passage in the first shipthat was to sail from the Clyde ; forHungry ruin bad me in the wind.I had been some days skulking fromcovert to covert, under all the terrorsof a gaol ; as some ill-advised peoplehad uncoupled the merciless packof the law at my heels. I had takenthe last farewell of my few friends ; mychest was on the road to Greenock ; Ihad composed the last song I should evermeasure in Caledonia The GloomyNight is Gathering Fast ; when a letterfrom Dr. Blacklock to a friend of mine,overthrew all my schemes, by openingnew prospects to my poetic ambition."This was a recommendation to him toproceed to Edinburgh, to superintendthe publication of a second edition ofhis poems ; and he accordingly turnedhis course to the Scotch metropolis,which he reached in September, 1786.He had already been noticed with muchkindness by the Earl of Glencairn, thecelebrated Professor Stewart and hislady, Dr. Hugh Blair, and others ; andhis personal appearance and demeanourexceeding the expectation that had beenformed of them, he soon became anobject of general curiosity and interest,and was an acceptable guest in thegayest and highest circles. He alsoreceived, from the literati of the dayevery tribute of praise which the mostsanguine author could desire.Edinburgh, says Dr. Currie, contained,at this period, many men ofconsiderable talents, who were notthe most conspicuous for temperanceand regularity. Burns entered intoseveral parties of this description withthe usual vehemence of his character.His generous affection, and brilliantimagination, fitted him to be the idol ofsuch associations ; and, by indulginghimself in these festive recreations, hegradually lost a great portion of his relishfor the purer pleasures to be foundin the circles of taste, elegance, andliterature. He saw his danger, and,at times, formed resolutions to guardagainst it ; but he had embarked onthe tide of dissipation, and was bornealong its stream.After having sojourned for nearly ayear in the Scottish metropolis, andacquired a sum of money more thansufficient for his present demands, heLITERATUREdetermined to gratify a desire he hadlong entertained of visiting some of themost interesting districts of his nativecountry. For this purpose he leftEdinburgh on the 6th of May, 1787;and after visiting various places celebratedin the rural songs of Scotland,he returned to his family in Mossgiel,where he arrived about the 8th of July.The reception he met with at homewas enthusiastic ; and among thosewho were now willing to renew hisacquaintance, was the family of JaneArmour, with whom Burns was speedilyreconciled. After remaining for a fewdays only at Mossgiel, he made a shorttour to Inverary, and afterwards tothe highlands, whence he returned toEdinburgh, and remained there duringthe greater part of the winterof 1787-8, again entering freely intosociety and dissipation. Having settledwith his publisher, in February, 1788,he was delighted to find there was abalance due to him, as the actual profitof his poems, of nearly 500. At thisjuncture, he was confined to the housewith a bruised limb, extended on acushion ;" but as soon as he was able tobear the journey, he rode to Mossgiel,advanced his brother Gilbert (who wasstruggling with many difficulties) thesum of 200 ; married Jane Armour ;and, with the remainder of his capital,took the farm of Friesland, on the banksof the With, six miles above Dumfries.A short time previously to this, itshould be mentioned, that Burns hadobtained, through a friend, an appointmentin the Excise ; but with no intentionof making use of his commissionexcept on some reverse of fortune. Henow took possession of his farm ; but asthe house required rebuilding, Mrs.Burns could not, for some time, removethither, a circumstance peculiarly unfortunate,as it caused him to lead avery irregular and unsettled life. Thedetermination, which he had formed, ofabandoning his dissipated pursuits wasbroken in upon, and his industry wasfrequently interrupted by visiting hisfamily in Ayrshire. As the distance wastoo great for a single day's journey, hegenerally spent a night at an inn onthe road, and on such occasions, fallinginto company, all his resolutions wereforgotten. Temptation also awaitedhim, nearer home : he was received atthe tables of the neighbouring gentrywith kindness and respect, and thesesocial parties too often seduced himfrom the labours of his farm, and hisdomestic duties, in which the happinessand welfare of his family were now involved.Mrs. Burns joined her husbandat Friesland, in November, 1788 ; and,as she had, during the autumn, lain-inof twins, they had now five childrenfour boys and a girl. On this occasion,Burns resumed, at times, the occupationof a labourer, and found neither hisstrength nor hisskill impaired. Sentimentsof independence cheered hismind, pictures of domestic contentand peace rose on his imagination, anda few "golden days" passed away, thehappiest, perhaps, which he had everexperienced. But these were not longto last: the farming speculation wassoon looked on with despondence, andneglected ; and the Excise became theonly resource. In this capacity, in referenceto which beggarly provision fortheir bard, Mr. Coleridge indignantlycalls upon his friend Lamb, to gather awreath of " henbane-nettles and nightshade,"To twineThe illustrious brow of Scotch nobility,poor Burns was necessarily broughtinto contact with low associates, and intemperancesoon became his tyrant.Unable to reconcile the two occupations,his farm was in a great measure abandonedto his servants, and agriculturebut seldom occupied his thoughts.Meantime, there were seldom wantingpersons to lead him to a tavern; toapplaud the sallies of his wit ; and towitness at once the strength and degradationof his genius. The consequencesmay be easily imagined : at the expirationof about three years, he was compelledto relinquish his lease, and torely upon his income of 70 per annum,as an exciseman, till he should obtainpromotion. With this intention, he removedto a small house in Dumfries,about the end of the year 1791. In1792, he contributed to Thomson's collectionof Scottish songs; and, aboutthe same time, formed a sort of booksociety in his neighbourhood. In themeantime, he appears to have givenoffence to the board of Excise, bysome intemperate conduct and expressionsrelative to the French revolution,ROBERT BURNS,particularly in attempting to send acaptured smuggler as a present to theFrench convention ; and an inquirywas in consequence instituted into hisconduct. The result was, upon thewhole, favourable; but an impression,injurious to Burns, was still left uponthe minds of the commissioners, and hewas told that his promotion, which wasdeferred, must depend on his futurebehaviour. This seems to have mortifiedhim keenly, and to have madehim feel his dependent situation as adegradation to his future fame. " Often,"he says, in a letter to a gentleman, givingan account of the above circumstances,"in blasting anticipation, have I listenedto some future hackney scribbler,with heavy malice of savage stupidity,exultingly asserting that Burns, notwithstandingthe fanfaronade of independenceto be found in his works, andafter having been held up to public viewand to public estimation, as a man ofsome genius, yet quite destitute of resourceswithin himself to support hisborrowed dignity, dwindled into a paltryexciseman ; and slunk out the rest ofhis insignificant existence in the meanestof pursuits, and among the lowestof mankind."It seems, however, that the board ofExcise did not altogether neglect Burns,who was, the year previous to his death,permitted to act as a supervisor. FromOctober, 1795, to the January following,illness confined him to his house ;but, going out a few days after, heimprudently dined at a tavern, and returnedhome about three o'clock in avery cold morning, benumbed andintoxicated. This occasioned a severerelapse, and he soon himself becamesensible that his constitution was sinking,and his death approaching. He,however, repaired to Brow, in Annalsto try the effects of sea-bathing;which, though it relieved his rheumaticpains, was succeeded by a fresh accessionof fever, and he was brought backto his own house in Dumfries, on the18th of July, 1796. He remained forthree days in a state of feebleness, accompaniedby occasional delirium, andexpired on the 21st of July, in thethirty-eighth year of his age. He wasinterred, with military honours, by theDumfries volunteers, to which bodyhe belonged, and his remains werefollowed to the grave by nearly tenthousand spectators. He* left a widowand four sons, for whom the inhabitantsof Dumfries opened a subscription,which, in itself considerable, was augmentedby the profits of the edition ofhis works, in four volumes, octavo, publishedin 1800, by Dr. Currie, with alife of the poet.Burns was within two inches of sixfeet in height, with a robust, yet agileframe ; a finely formed face, and anuncommonly interesting countenance.His well-raised forehead indicated greatintellect, and his eyes are described ashaving been large, dark, and full ofardour and animation. His conversationwas rich in wit and humour, andoccasionally displayed profound thoughtand reflections equally serious and sensible; for no one possessed a finer discriminationbetween right and wrong.Though his moral aberrations, for whichhe felt the keenest remorse, have beenexaggerated, the latter years of his lifewere undoubtedly disgraceful, both tothe man and to the poet ; yet, amid hiscareer of intemperance, he preserved awarmth and generosity of heart, and anindependence of mind, not less surprisingor peculiar than his genius.Mr. Lockhart, in his life of Burns,gives several instances, which showthat "he shrunk with horror andloathing from all sense of pecuniaryobligation, no matter to whom." Inanswer to a letter from Mr. Thomson,enclosing him j5 for some of his songs,he says, " I assure you, my dear sir,that you truly hurt me with yourpecuniary parcel. It degrades me in myown eyes. However, to return it wouldsavour of affectation ; but, as to anymoretraffic of that debtor and creditorkind, I swear, by that honour whichcrowns the upright statue of RobertBurns's integrity on the least motionof it, I will indignantly spurn the bypasttransaction, and from that momentcommence entire stranger to you."The following anecdote is told of him inhis character of exciseman, by a writerin The Edinburgh Literary Journal,who saw him at Thornhill fair. " An information,"he says, " had been lodgedagainst a poor widow woman, of thename of Kate Wilson, who had venturedto serve a few of her old countryfriends with a draught of unlicensedLITERATURE.ale, and a lacing of whisky, on thisvillage jubilee. I saw him enter herdoor, and anticipated nothing short ofan immediate seizure of a certain greybeardand barrel, which, to my personalknowledge, contained the contrabandcommodities our bard was in quest of.A nod, accompanied by a significantmovement of the forefinger, broughtKate to the doorway or trance, and Iwas hear enough to hear the followingwords distinctly uttered : ' Kate, areye mad ? D'ye no ken that the supervisorand me will be in upon you in thecourse of forty minutes ? Guid-b'yetoye at present. Burns was in the street,and in the midst of the crowd in aninstant ; and I had reason to know thathis friendly hint was not neglected. Itsaved a poor widow woman from a fineof several pounds." Though totallyfree from presumption, in the presenceof the superior circles of society towhich he was admitted, he did nothesitate to express his opinions strongly,and boldly. A certain well-knownprovincial bore, as Mr. Lockhart describeshim, having left a tavern-party,of which Burns was one, he, the bard,immediately demanded a bumper, andaddressing himself to the chair, said,I give you the health, gentlemen all,of the waiter that called my Lordout of the room." He was no meanextemporizer ; and the following verseis said to have been introduced by him,in a song, in allusion to one of thecompany who had been boasting, somewhatpreposterously, of his aristocraticacquaintances :Of lordly acquaintance you boast,And the dukes that you dined wi' yestreen ;Yet an insect 's an insect at most,T ho' it crawl on the curl of a queen.The poetry of Burns, who has acquiredalmost equal fame by his prose, is nowtoo universally acknowledged and appreciated,to require further analysis orcriticism. " Fight, who will, about wordsand forms," says Byron, " Burns'srank is in the first class of his art;" but,as Mr. Lockhart observes, " to accumulateall that has been said of Burns,even by men like himself, of the firstorder, would fill a volume." We shallconclude, therefore, with an observationof Mr. Campbell, that " viewinghim merely as a poet, there is scarcelyanother regret connected with his. name,than that his productions, with all theirmerit, fall short of the talents which heBurns's character is, upon the whole,honestly drawn by his own pen, in theserio-comic epitaph, written on himself,concluding with the followingverse :Reader, attend whether thy soulSoars fancy's flights beyond the pole,Or darkling grubs this earthy hole,In low pursuit ;Know, prudent, cautious self-control,Is Wisdom's root.MARY WOOLSTONECRAFT GODWIN.THIS lady, one of the daughters ofMr. Edward John Woolstonecraft, whodoes not appear to have followed anyprofession, was born on the 27th ofApril, 1759. At a very early period ofher life, she was distinguished by thatexquisite sensibility, and decision ofcharacter, which marked the wholecourse of her existence. She was by nomeans a favourite with her parents ;and her father, a man of impetuousdisposition, would often strike her aswell as his wife. This, instead ofhumbling her, roused her indignation,no less on her own account than that ofher mother, whom she would endeavourto defend against her paternaldespot. " She has even laid wholenights," says her biographer, Mr. Godwin," upon the landing-place, neartheir chamber-door, when she apprehendedthat her father might break outinto paroxysms of violence."She removed with her family, successively,to Epping, Barking; and, in1768, to Beverley, in Yorkshire, whereshe received the principal part of herschool education, during a residence ofsix years. After various changes ofdwelling with her family, she, in 1778,became companion to a Mrs. Davison,of Bath, but left it, in 1780, to attendMARY Wollaston Craft GODWIN.the death-bed of her mother; afterwhich, she took 'up her abode atWaltham Green, with a Miss Blood, towhom she had formed a romantic butsincere attachment, whilst living atHorton, in 1774. In conjunction withthis lady, she, in 1783, opened a day-school,at Newington Green, where sheformed many acquaintances which influencedthe future events of her life ;and, among others, she was introducedto Dr. Johnson and Dr. Richard Price,whose discourses induced her to abandonthe church of England in favour ofthe dissenters. The illness of MissBlood rendering it necessary for her tomake a voyage to Lisbon, Miss subsequently followed her tothat city, and remained till her death,in November, 1785. Upon her returnto England, she published, for the benefitof Miss Blood's family, a pamphlet,entitled Thoughts on the Education ofDaughters ; and, resigning her school,accepted the situation of governess tothe daughters of Lord Gainsborough,but quitted it, in 1787, with a view ofobtaining an independence by literarypursuits. She accordingly consultedMr. Johnson, the publisher, as to thebest mode of realizing her wishes : and,by his advice, she acquired the Italianand German languages for the purposesof translation. In 1788, she assistedhim in the editing of The AnalyticalReview ; and, among other translations,she rendered into English Salzmann'sElements of Morality ; the author ofwhich afterwards repaid the complimentby publishing a German edition of ourauthoress's Rights of Woman. Thefruits of her industry she generouslydevoted to the assistance of her family ;and besides providing situations forseveral brothers and sisters, she supportedher father, who had long beenreduced to insolvency by the failure offanning and other speculations.On the appearance of Mr. Burke'swork on the French revolution, inNovember, 1790, she seized her pen,says her biographer, in a burst of indignation,and wrote an answer, which,being the first of the numerous onesthat appeared, obtained extraordinarynotice. This was followed by her mostcelebrated production, The Rights ofWoman, a bold and eloquent performance;in which, amid much masculinethought and Amazonian temperaluxuriance of imagination and tremblingdelicacy of sentiment, is often tobe met with. The whole of this workwas completed in six weeks, and maybesaid to have constituted an era inliterature, from the extraordinary impressionit produced. " When tried,"says Mr. Godwin, " by the hoary andlong established laws of literary composition,it can scarcely maintain itsclaim to be placed in the first class ofhuman productions ; but when we considerthe importance of its doctrines,and the eminence of genius it displays,it seems not very improbable that it willbe read as long as the English languageendures."It was not long after the publicationof this work that she became acquaintedwith Mr. Fuseli, the artist, her admirationof whose talents being transferredto that of his person, she, to avoid thepangs of an attachment, rendered hopelessby the matrimonial connexions ofits object, resolved to pass some timeabroad. She, accordingly, in December,1792, proceeded to Paris, whereshe listened to the addresses of Mr.Imlay, a native of America; but objectedto a marriage with him, throughfear of involving him in certain familyembarrassments, to which she conceivedherself exposed. She, however, in consequenceof a decree having passed forthe committal to prison of all the Englishin France, consented to adopt his name,and to reside with him as his wife ; andtheir engagement being considered asof the most solemn nature, they hadformed a plan of emigrating together toAmerica, as soon as circumstanceswould permit. After giving birth to achild at Havre, in May, 1794, she beganto suspect the sincerity of Mr. Imlay'saffection ; and, with this impressionupon her mind, followed him from hersubsequent residence at Paris to London,where, in June, 1795, she made anattempt to destroy herself. Preventedin this by her seducer, for in no otherlight can he be now considered, she, inthe hope of regaining his affections,offered to undertake a journey to Norway,for the purpose of settling somemercantile transactions which he hadentered into with some persons in thatcountry. On her return, she foundthat he was keeping a mistress; andLITERATURE.this information, coupled with thebrutal indifference he manifested towardsher, threw her into such a stateof agony, that she precipitated herself,one night in October, from PutneyBridge into the Thames* After herpreservation and recovery, she, to somecommunication of Mr. Imlay, sent thefollowing reply : " It is unworthy ofmy courage and character to wait theissue of the connexion you haveformed. I am determined to come to adecision. I consent, then, for the present,to live with you, and the womanto whom you have associated yourself,in order that you may learn to feel foryour child, the affection of a father. Ifyou reject this proposal, we will correspondno more ; I will be to you as aperson that is dead."This proposal was first accepted, andthen declined ; and the subject of ourmemoir, in consequence, retired intoBerkshire, and afterwards removed toPentonville, where Mr. Godwin renewedhis former intimacy with her,and a connexion took place betweenthem, which ended in their marriage, in1797. She survived the ceremony butafew months, dying of child-birth, onthe 10th of September in the sameyear, after the most acute sufferings.The character of this extraordinarywoman will have sufficiently developeditself in the preceding memoir: uponthe whole, perhaps, it merits our admiration,though not affording a safemodel for general imitation. Her misfortunesdeserve our strongest pity ;and not the less so for having been, insome measure, the result of her ownsystem of conduct, which, however repugnantto the received notions of propriety,did not certainly originate inindelicacy of mind. She suffered inthe estimation of some of her friends,who ceased to visit her after her connexionwith Mr. Imlay ; upon whichMr. Godwin remarks with excusableindignation, " Who was the personthus proscribed ? the firmest champion,and, I suspect, the greatest ornament,her sex had to boast. A woman,with sentiments as pure, as refined, anddelicate, as ever inhabited a humanheart. It is fit that such persons shouldstand by that we may have room enoughfor the dull and insolent dictators, thegamblers and desires of polished society."In addition to the works before mentioned,she was the author of Mary, afiction ; Original Letters from RealLife; The Female Reader; Letters fromNorway ; besides some miscellaneousletters, and an unfinished novel, publishedafter her death by Mr. Godwin,with a life of the authoress.RICHARD PORSON.RICHARD PORSON was born onthe 25th of December, 1759, at EastRuston, in Norfolk, where his fatherwas the parish clerk. He displayed,whilst yet an infant, a surprising fondnessand aptitude for learning ; and,after having been taught the rudimentsof education by his father, was sent, in1768, to the village school of Ruston,the rector of which place, attracted byhis abilities, took him under his owntutorage, in 1771. In 1773, he wasfurther patronised by Mr. Morris, andseveral gentlemen in the neighbourhood,who entered into a subscriptionto send him to Eton, where he soongave proofs of superior talents and understanding.It was here that he gavehis celebrated answer to the followingquestion, which was proposed for thesubject of a Latin theme :Cesare occiso, an Brutus benefit aut male fecit tA game being immediately proposed,he joined the scholars in their youthfulsports ; and was so engrossed by them,that he entirely forgot the theme. Whenthe time, however, arrived for handingup his production, he snatched up apen, and hastily scrawlingNee bene-fecit, nee male-fecit, sed inter-fecit,presented it to the master. Whilst atEton, he wrote a play, and is said tohave exercised his critical skill upon amanuscript fragment of the Anabasis ofRICHARD PORSON.Xenophon. In 1777, he entered TrinityCollege, Cambridge, where hisclassical reputation had already precededhim. He now ardently studiedmathematics, and acquired such a fondnessfor algebra, that he used occasionallyto compose equations in Greek,of which some specimens are still extant.In due time, he was elected ascholar; and, in 1781, he was electedto the Craven university fellowship.It was at this period, and during theintervals of the examination, that hecomposed his celebrated Epitaph ofAlexis, a copy of which, with someother of his fugitive compositions, maybeseen in Valpy's Classical Journal.In 1782, he graduated B. A., when heobtained the rank of third senior optimein the mathematical tripos ; and, in thesame year, he obtained the rank of firstchancellor's medallist, and was shortlyafterwards elected to a fellowship. Atthis time, Porson had already distinguishedhimself by his classical criticisms;and was engaged, as an occasionalwriter, in May's Review, in which hePublished a Critique on Shuts's ./Eschy-is, and Brunck's Aristophanes. He,some time afterwards, visited Germany ;and, on his return, being much teazed,by a loquacious personage, to give someaccount of his travels, he sarcasticallyreplied,I went to Frankfort, and got drunk,With that most learn 'il professor, Brunck:I went toWortz, med got more drunken.With that more learn'd professor, Khuuken.In 1785, he proceeded to the degree ofM. A. ; but not choosing to take holyorders, he afterwards lost his fellowship.His non-entrance into the church arosefrom his objection to the Thirty-nineArticles; and being subsequently pressedto add his signature to the certificate,declaring a belief in the authenticity ofthe Ireland Shakspeare forgeries, hedeclined ; observing, " I subscribe to noarticles of faith." His name first appearedin print, erroneously spelt Paw-son,in The Monthly Review, for January,1785. In 1787, he wrote anironical defence of Sir John Hawkins'sLife of Dr. Johnson, in three admirableletters, inserted in The Gentleman'sMagazine; and the celebrated Lettersto Archdeacon Travis, on the contestedtext, on the three celestial witnesses,1 John, v. 7. These last greatly extendedthe fame of Porson for verbalcriticism ; and gained him the applauseof Gibbon, the historian, and others ofsimilar opinions. " It is now generallyallowed," says Dr. Aikin, " among thelearned, that by his unrivalled combinationof wit, argument, and profounderudition, he has finally decided thequestion of the authenticity of their contestedtext, in the negative." He nextcommunicated to the delegates of theClarendon Press, who after wards printedthem, his Notes on Top's Emendationsof Suits, which have been describedas in themselves sufficient to establishhis claim to the highest rank of criticalskill."In 1793, he was, by the unanimousvote of the seven electors, chosen regiusprofessor of Greek, at Cambridge. Thisnew office not obliging him to reside atthe university, he settled in literaryretirement in London. Here he is saidto have passed much of his time in dissipation,amid the different convivialcircles, to which his wit and agreeableconversation made him welcome. In1795, he married the sister of Mr. Perry,of The Morning Chronicle ; to which hecontributed several papers, under thesignature of S. England, continuing, atthe same time, to write criticisms forthe magazines before-mentioned. Hewas, however, principally busied in preparinghis proposed edition of all thedramas of Euripides, the object ofwhich was to restore the text by :means of ancient copies and manuscripts,aided by conjectural emenda- 'tons and explanatory notes. In 1797,appeared The Hecuba (followed by TheOrestes and Phcenissse, in 1798-9),which at once procured him the reputationof being one of the first Greekscholars of the age. Not long afterwards,his fortitude was put to the test by theloss of some of his most valuable manuscriptsand papers, which were de jstrayed by a fire that burnt down hisbrother-in-law's house at Merton. On jhearing of his misfortune, he first in- jquire, " If any lives were lost ?" Andthen, with an air bordering on despair, [he exclaimed, " 1 have lost twenty jyears of my life !" The transcript of !Potius alone had cost him ten months' iincessant application : he lost no time,however, in unavailing regrets ; butinstantly set about a fresh one, whichLITERATURE.he soon completed in that peculiar styleof beauty, which characterized histranscription of the Greek character.In 1800, he was profitably engaged, bythe Bishop of St. Asaph, to examinethe Harleian manuscripts at the BritishMuseum, for the purpose of collatingthem with the Ernestine manuscriptof the Odyssey, previously to the publicationof Lord Granville's edition ofHomer.In 1801, he published the Medea,at Cambridge ; and, in the followingyear, a second edition of his Hecuba.He continued to write various literarycompositions, chiefly of a critical nature,until within a short period of hisdeath ; in the year previous to which,he was elected principal librarian tothe London Institution, Cornfields,with a salary of ^200 per annum. Hesurvived the appointment but a fewmonths, being carried off by an epilepticattack, on the 25th of September, 1808.He was buried in the ante-chapel ofTrinity College, Cambridge, after hisbody had undergone dissection, whenhis skull was discovered to be of anextraordinary thickness. A marbletablet has since been erected to his memory,in Trinity Chapel, with a medallionportrait, by Chantry ; and a fundhas been established for the annualaward of the Porson university prize,for the best Greek verses.The intellectual qualities of Porsonhave raised him to the first rank ofverbal critics, and in that character hepossibly exceeds all others. Honestyand truth were no less his distinguishingcharacteristics, than acuteness ofdiscernment and solidity of judgment,which were aided by a most tenaciousmemory, and the most persevering diligence." In him were conspicuous,"says an intelligent panegyrist, " boundlesstalent of reading ; a most exact andwell ordered memory ; unwearied patiencein unravelling the sense of anauthor, and explaining the perplexitiesof a manuscript; perspicuity in discoveringthe corruptions of a text; andacuteness, almost intuitive, in restoringthe true reading."Person's classical puns exceeded thoseof any other scholar: Ringing forwater, one day, and the servant inquiringwhat he should bring, Porson replied,"A-liquid !" (aliquid anything). Beingasked to pun on the Latin gerunds,he made the following couplet :When Dido found aeneas would not come,She mourned in silence, and was Di-do-ttum 'Though not insensible to praise, hedespised adulation ; and Dr. Jackson,one day, having said to him, " Porson,you are the only man that ever left theUniversity of Cambridge with any Greeklearning;" "And you, Dr. Jackson,"he sarcastically replied, " are the onlyman that ever left Oxford with anylearning at all !" Paying but little attentionto the pragmatical discourse ofa certain divine, the latter observed, " Ibelieve you don't understand metaphysics,Mr. Porson," " You mean, sir, Isuppose," replied Porson, " your metaphysics."ROBERT BLOOMFIELD.ROBERT BLOOMFIELD, the sonsofa tailor at Huntington, in Suffolk, wasborn on the 3rd of December, 1766.His mother, who was the village schoolmistress,gave him the only educationhe ever received, and placed him, first,with a farmer, of Piston, as his assistant,and afterwards with George, thebrother of our poet, who was a shoemakerin London. His principal occupationwas to wait upon the journeymen,in fetching their dinners, &c. ; and, inhis intervals of leisure, he read thenewspaper, and, with the help of adictionary, was soon able to comprehendand admire the speeches of Burke,Fox, and other statesmen of the day.His next step towards improvement wasin his attendance at a dissenting meetinghouse,where, he says, he soonlearned to accent " hard words;" besideswhich, he also visited a debatingsociety, went sometimes to the theatre,and read the History of England, theBritish Traveller, and a book of geography.A perusal of some poetry inROBERT BLOOMFIELD.The London Magazine, led to his earliestattempts in verse, which he sent toa newspaper, under the title of TheMilk-maid, or the First of May, andThe Sailor's Return. Indeed, says hisbiographer, in The Annual Obituary, hehad so generally and diligently improvedhimself, that, although only sixteenor seventeen years of age, hisbrother George and his fellow-workmenbegan to be instructed by his conversation.In 1784, anxious to avoid a part insome disputes which had arisen betweenthe journeymen and mastershoemakers, by whom himself and hisbrother were employed, Robert returnedto his relation atSapiston, and,for two months, worked at farming. Atthe expiration of that time he was putapprentice to Mr. Tunbridge, a ladies'shoemaker, and soon became expertat his trade. In 1790, he married thedaughter of a boat-builder, and aftersome years of conjugal poverty, hired aroom up one pair of stairs, at No. 14,Bell Alley, Coleman Street. The masterof the house, it is said, giving him leaveto work in the light garret, two pair ofstairs higher, he not only there carriedon his occupation, but, in the midst ofsix or seven other workmen, actuallycompleted his Farmer's Boy : the partsof Autumn midwinter having been composedin his head before a line of themwas committed to paper. When themanuscript was fit for publication, heoffered it, but in vain, to various booksellers,and to the editor of The MonthlyMagazine, who, in his number for September,1823, gives the following interestingaccount of the affair: " Hebrought his poem to our office ; and,though his unpolished appearance, hiscoarse hand writing, and wretched orthography,afforded no prospect that hisproduction could be printed, yet hefound attention by-his repeated calls,and by the humility of his expectations,which were limited to half-a-dozencopies of the magazine. At length, onhis name being announced when a literarygentleman, particularly conversantin rural economy, happened to be present,the poem was finally re-examined,and its general aspect excited the risibilityof that gentleman in so pointed amanner, that Bloomfield was calledinto the room, and exhorted not to wastehis time, and neglect his employment,in making vain attempts, and particularlyin treading on the ground whichThomson had sanctified. His earnestnessand confidence, however, led theeditor to advise him to consult his countryman,Mr. Capell Lofft, of Trenton,to whom he gave him a letter of introduction.On his departure, the gentlemanpresent warmly complimented theeditor on the sound advice which hehad given " the poor fellow ;" and itwas mutually conceived that an industriousman was thereby likely to besaved from a ruinous infatuation."The poem at length reached the handsof Mr. Capell Lofft, who sent it, withthe strongest recommendations, to Mr.Hill, the proprietor of The MonthlyMirror, who negotiated the sale of thepoem with the publishers, Messrs. Vernonand Hood. These gentlemen acted withgreat liberality towards Bloomfield, byvoluntarily giving him 200 in additionto the 50 originally stipulated for, andby securing to him a moiety of thecopyright of his poem, which, on itsappearance, was received with a burstof wonder and applause from all quarters.The most eminent critics andliterati of the day were profuse in theirpraise of both the author and his poem ;and the most polished circles of societywere smitten with the charms of rurallife, as depicted by The Farmer's Boy.He also received some substantial proofsof the estimation in which he was held,by presents from the Duke of York andother persons of distinction ; and theDuke of Grafton, after having had himdown to Whittlebury Forest, of whichhis grace was ranger, settled upon hima gratuity of a shilling a-day, and subsequentlyappointed him under-sealerin the Seal office. Subscriptions werealso entered into for his benefit at variousplaces ; in addition to which, hederived considerable emolument fromthe sale of his work, of which, in a shortspace of time, near forty thousand copieswere sold.His good fortune, which, he said, appearedto him as a dream, enabled himto remove to a comfortable and commodioushabitation in the City Road,where, having given up his situation atthe Seal office, in consequence of illhealth, he worked at his trade as a shoemaker,and also sold aeolian harps ofLITERATURE.his own construction. He continued *oemploy his poetical powers, and, besidescontributing several pieces to TheMonthly Mirror, published three volumesof poems, in 1802, 1804, and 1806,passively. In 1811, appeared hisBanks of the Wye, the result of a tourmade by him into New South Wales,the mountain scenery of which countrymade a novel and pleasing impressionupon his mind. Not long afterwards,owing, as some say, to his engaging inthe book trade, he became a bankrupt;and about the same time, sufferingmuch from the dropsy, he left London,and took up his abode at Stafford, inBucks, for the benefit of his health.It seems, that the decreasing sale of hisworks, and an indiscriminate liberalitytowards his friends and relations, whowere poor and numerous, had materiallydiminished his finances; and this,together with the illness before-mentioned,preying upon his mind, threwhim into a state which threatened toterminate in mental aberration. Thisevent was, however, prevented by hisdeath, which took place at Stafford,on the 19th of August, 1823, in thefifty-seventh year of his age. He lefta widow and four children ; and had published,shortly before his death, MayDay with the Muses, and CastlewoodHall, a Village Drama, in three acts.The characteristics of the poem ofThe Farmer's Boy are too well knownto need a repetition of them here ; it issufficient to say, that the popularity ofthe work is justified by the unqualifiedeulogy of Parr, Southey, Aikin, Watson(Bishop of Llandaff ), and all our mosteminent critics and poets of a later date.Dr. Drake, in his Literary Hours, hastaken a very masterly view of the meritsof this poem, which he considers notinferior to The Seasons of Thomson,from which Bloomfield probably tookthe idea of The Farmer's Boy ; thoughthere is no other affinity between thetwo, than, as Mr. Lofft observes, "flowingnumbers, feeling piety, poetic imageryand animation, a taste for the picturesque,force of thought, and a truesense of the natural and pathetic." Thegreat difference between the compositionof Thomson and Bloomfield consistsin that of the latter being exclusivelypastoral throughout; and, indeed, saysDr. Drake, " such are its merits, that,in true pastoral imagery and simplicity,I do not think any production can beput in competition with it since thedays of Theocritus." A Latin versionof The Farmer's Boy, by Mr. Clubbed,was published in 1805, and it has beentranslated, by M. Guienne Ballard, intoFrench, under the title of Le Valet duFermier. We conclude our memoir ofBloomfield, who appears to have blendedwith great genius, an innate modestyand amiableness of character, with thefollowing verse, from a very eloquenttribute to his memory, by BernardBarton :It ii not quaint and local termsBesprinkled o'er thy rustic lay,Though well such dialect confirmsIts power unlettered minds to sway ;But 'tis not tlitsr that most displayThy twee-tent charms, thy gentlest thrall,Words, phrases, fashions, pass away,But Truth and Nature live through all .WILLIAM WORDSWORTH.WILLIAM WORDSWORTH, thefounder of what is called the Lake schoolof poetry, was born in 1770, of a respectablefamily, at Cockermouth, inCumberland. He received his earlyeducation at the grammar-school ofHawkshead, where he greatly excelledin his classical studies, and was remark -able for his thoughtful disposition, andtaste for poetry, in which he made hisfirst attempt, when at the age ofthirteen. In 1787, he was removed toSt. John's College, Cambridge, wherehe graduated B. A. and M. A. ; and,in 1793, he published a poetical accountof a pedestrian tour on the continent,entitled Descriptive Sketches in Verse,&c., followed by The Evening Walk,an epistle, in verse, addressed to ayoung lady. In alluding to the DescriptiveSketches, says Coleridge, " seldom,if ever, was the emergence of anWILLIAM WORDSWORTH.original poetic genius above the literaryhorizon more evidently announced."After wandering about in various partsof England, pur author took a cottageat Alforton, in Somersetshire, near thethen residence of Coleridge, his associationwith whom, and the ludicrous surmisesof the neighbourhood respectingtheir conduct, has been detailed in ourmemoir of the latter. Our benevolentauthor, however, appears to have beenconsidered the more dangerous characterof the two. " As to Coleridge," oneof the parish authorities is said to haveremarked, " there is not so much harmin him, for he is a wild brain that talkswhatever comes uppermost; but that(Wordsworth) he is the darktraitor. You never hear him say asyllable on the subject." In 1798, hepublished a volume of his Lyrical Ballads,which met with much "abuse andfew admirers, but those who applauded,applauded enthusiastically.In 1803, he married a Miss MaryHutchinson, of Penrith, and settled atGrasmere, in Westmorland, for whichcounty, as well as that of Cumberland,he was subsequently appointed distributorof stamps. In 1807, he gave to thepublic a second volume of his Ballads ;and, in 1809, with an intention to recommenda vigorous prosecution of the warwith Spain, he published his only proseproduction, concerning the relations ofGreat Britain, Spain, and Portugal toeach other. In 1814, appeared, in quarto,his Excursion, a poem, which has beenhighly extolled, and is undoubtedly oneof his most original and best compositions.It was followed, in 1815, by TheWhite Doe of Rylstone ; and, in 1819,by his Peter Bell, to the merits of whichwe must confess ourselves strangers.During the same year, he published his"Wagoner, a tale; followed, in 1820,by The River Dutton, a series ofsonnets ; and Vaudracour and Julia,with other pieces; and EcclesiasticalSketches. In 1822, he printed Memorialsof a Tour on the Continent ; alsoA Description of the Scenery of theLakes in the North of England, withillustrative remarks on the scenery ofthe Alps.The genius of JMr. Wordsworth hasbeen a matter of critical dispute eversince he first made pretension to any,and it is yet a question with some,whether his productions are not those ofan inspired idiot." It would be, however,useless to deny him the reputationof a poet, though between the equallyextravagant adoration and censure, ofwhich he has been the object, it is difficultto define the exact position whichwill be ultimately assigned him in therank of literature. Coleridge, who, asmight be expected, is one of his mostenthusiastic admirers, says that, "inimaginative powers, Wordsworth standsnearest of all modern writers to Shakspeareand Milton, and yet in a kindperfectly borrowed, and his own."The author of an essay on his theoryand writings, printed in Blackwood'sMagazine for 1830, gives a very fairestimate of his poetical genius. " Thevariety of subjects," he observes, " whichWordsworth has touched ; the variedpowers which he has displayed ; thepassages of redeeming beauty, interspersedeven amongst the worst anddullest of his productions; the originalityof detached thoughts, scatteredthroughout works, to which, on thewhole, we must deny the praise oforiginality ; the deep pathos, and occasionalgrandeur of his style ; the realpoetical feeling which generally runsthrough its many modulations; hisaccurate observation of external nature; and the success with which heblends the purest and most devotionalthoughts with the glories of the visibleuniverse all these are merits, which sofar' make up in number what theywant in weight,' that, although insufficientto raise him to the shrine, theyfairly admit him within the sacred templeof poesy." For our own parts, thoughwe are not among those who call, assome of his admirers do, the poetry ofWordsworth " an actual revelation,"we admit to have found in his worksbeauties which no other poet, perhaps,could have struck out of the peculiarsphere to which he has confined hisimagination. His Recollections of EarlyChildhood, and a few others, are sublimecompositions ; whilst, on the other hand,his Lines to a Glow-worm, et id omnegenus, are despicable and ridiculous.The private character of Mr. Wordsworthhas never been impeached byhis most virulent enemies, if he hasany ; and no man is more esteemed andrespected for his amiable qualities.LITERATURE.SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE.SAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGE,was born at Bristol, about 1770, wherehe received the earliest portion of hiseducation. He was afterwards sent toChrist's Hospital, London, where, hesays, in his Biographia Literaria, " Ienjoyed the inestimable advantage of avery sensible, though, at the same time,a very severe master, the Rev. JamesBowyer, who early moulded my tasteto the preference of Demosthenes toCicero, of Homer and Theocritus toVirgil, and again of Virgil to Ovid, &c."From Christ's Hospital he was sent toJesus College, Cambridge, where heobtained the Sir William Brown's goldmedal, for the best Greek ode, in 1792.About the same time, he became acquaintedwith Southey, then a studentof Baliol College, Oxford, and, likehimself, imbued with ardent predilectionsfor poesy and liberty. With himand some other young men, he enteredinto a scheme, which want of meansalone prevented them from putting intoexecution, for settling on the SusquehannaRiver, in North America, undera pantisocratic form of society. About1794, he retired to Alforton, in Somerswhere he was joined by hisfriend Wordsworth, with whom hepassed his time in literary pursuits,and in wandering about the Quantohills, with such an air of mystery, thatthey became objects of suspicion to theneighbourhood. A spy was set upontheir conduct, and an examination actuallyappears to have taken place, bythe village authorities, of a poor rusticwho was supposed to have discoveredtheir dangerous designs. Our authorhas given a ludicrous account of this inthe work before quoted from, and theconclusion is worth extracting, as developingsomewhat of his habits andpoetical character. " Has not this Mr.Coleridge been wandering on the hillstowards the channel, and along theshore, with books and papers in hishand, taking charts and maps of thecountry ?" " Why, as to that, yourhonour," was the rustic's reply ; " Iam sure 1 would not wish to say illof any body ; but it is certain that Ihave heard " " Speak out, man ! don'tbe afraid : you are doing your duty toyour king and government. What haveyou heard?" " Why, folks do say, yourhonour, as how that he is a poet ; andthat he is going to put Quanto, andall about here, in print; and as they(Wordsworth and Coleridge) be so muchtogether, I suppose that the strangegentleman (Wordsworth) has some concernin the business." The businesswhich engaged him, was the compositionof a poem, to be called The Brook,which, had he finished, it was his intentionto have dedicated to the committeeof public safety, as containing the chartsand maps with which he was reportedto have supplied the French government,in aid of their plans of invasion.A perusal of Bowles's Sonnets appearsto have first inspired him with ataste for poetry, of which his earliestspecimen was given to the public in asmall volume, published previously tothe foregoing incident, in which publicationa monody on the death of theunfortunate Chatterton was universallyadmired. In 1795, he published someanti-ministerial pamphlets ; and in thefollowing year, made an unsuccessfulattempt to establish a periodical paper,called The Watchman, at the persuasion,he says, of sundry philanthropistsand anti-polemics. His nextpublication was a poem on the prospectof peace ; he shortly afterwards accompaniedSir Alexander Ball, governorof Malta, as his secretary ; and, on hisreturn from this employment, becameentitled to a pension. This so far improvinghis circumstances, as to leavehim at full liberty to pursue his literarydesigns, he engaged in the publicationof a variety of works, and delivered twopublic courses of lectures, one on theplays of Shakspeare, and another onpoetry and the belles lettres, whichgained him a reputation for considerableoratorical powers. In 1813, hepublished Remorse," a tragedy ; followed,in 1817, by Sibylline Leaves ;A Collection of Poems ; his BiographiaSAMUEL TAYLOR COLERIDGELiteraria, or biographical sketches ofhis life and opinions ; and other works,poetical and political. In 1818, hecommenced The Friend, a series ofessays, that extended to three volumes ;and "in the tenth and eleventh numbersof which, he says, he has left arecord of his principles. In 1825, hepublished Aids to Reflection, in theformation of a manly character, &c. ;and, in 1830, his Treatise on the Constitutionof the Church and State, accordingto the idea of each : with aidstowards a right judgment of the latecatholic bill. Mr. Coleridge is at presentresiding at Highgate, where heoccasionally receives his literary friends,and passes his time in reading, and theamusements of his garden. He is saidto excel all his contemporaries in powersof argument ; and, when once fairlylaunched on any favourite topic, to bepossessed of the faculty of rivetting, forhours, the attention of his audience, bythe charm of his eloquence alone.In addition to the works alreadymentioned, he wrote, during the peaceof Amiens, essays for The Morning Postand Courier. Mr. Fox is said to havepointed his allusion to these contributions,when he declared, that thewar, which followed the above treaty,was a war raised by The Morning Post.Whilst Mr. Coleridge was staying atRome, Buonaparte is said to have sentan order for his arrest, from which hewas rescued, partly by the forbearanceof the late pope, Pius the Seventh. Ourpoet, however, has never displayed anyevidence of his having been guided byany fixed political creed ; and he altogetherdisowns, as was hinted by TheMorning Chronicle, that he ever betteredhis fortune by his labours as apolitical writer. Indeed, it is as a poetonly that he will be known by posterity ;however zealously his friends may labourto procure a reputation for himas the founder of a sect in morals orphilosophy. The chief fault of Coleridge'spoetry lies in the style, whichhas been justly objected to on accountof its obscurity, general turgidness ofdiction, and a profusion of new-coineddouble epithets. With regard to its obscurity,he says, in the preface to a lateedition of his poems, that where heappears unintelligible, " the deficiencyis in the reader." This is nothing moreor less than to suppose his readers endowedwith the powers of divination ; forwe defy any one who is not in the confidenceof the author upon the subject,to solve the riddle which is appended,as a conclusion, to Christened. Hemight as well attribute deficiency ofcapacity to a beholder of his countenance,who should fail, in its workings,to discover the exact emotions of hismind ; for Mr. Coleridge has affordedno clearer clue to the generality of hispoetical arcana. This is particularlymanifest in his singularly wild andstriking poem of The Ancient Mariner,on which he is said to have written thefollowing epigram, addressed to himself:Your poem must eternal he,Dear sir ! it cannot (ail ;For, 'tis incomprehensible,And without head or tail.Mr. Coleridge is unquestionably atthe head of the Lake school of poetry,and excels all his fraternity of that classin feeling, fancy, and sublimity. Someof his minor poems will bear comparisonwith those of the bards of this orany other age or country; and hisverses on Love appear to us the mosttouching, delicate, and beautiful delineationof that passion, that ever waspenned. Mr. Coleridge, who is muchesteemed in private life, is, we believe,a widower, but has two sons surviving,who have graduated at the universities.SIR WALTER SCOTT, BART.His illustrious author, descendedfrom a respectable family, and the sonof a writer to the signet, was born atEdinburgh, on the 15th of August,1771. Ill health rendered necessary hisearly removal to a farm in the country,called Sandyknow, near the Vale ofTweed, where he resided for some time,under the care of his paternal grandfather.The mode in which he passedLITERATURE.this portion of his youth, and thescenery by which he was surrounded,are strikingly described in the introductionto the third canto of Marion.He received the rudiments of educationat an academy kept by a Mr.Leechman, in Edinburgh, whence hewas removed to the high school, thenunder the superintendence of Dr.Adam ; but, during the four years heremained there, he does not appear tohave displayed any remarkable abilities.There is his own authority for saying,observes the writer of his life in Chambers'sEdinburgh Journal, that even inthe exercise of metrical translation, hefell far short of some of his companions,although others preserve a somewhatdifferent recollection, and state, thatthis was a department in which he alwaysmanifested a superiority. Hispassion for tale-telling probably was nosmall hindrance to his advancement atschool, as he himself confesses in hisgeneral introduction to a new editionof his novels. " I believe," he says,some of my old schoolfellows can stillbear witness that I had a distinguishedcharacter for that talent, at a time whenthe applause of my companions wasmy recompense for the disgraces andpunishments, which the future romancewriter incurred, for being idle himselfand keeping others idle, during hoursthat should have been employed on ourtasks. The chief enjoyment of myholidays was to escape with a chosenfriend, who had the same taste withmyself, and alternately to recite to eachother such wild adventures as we wereable to devise. We told, each in turn,interminable tales of knight errantry,and battles and enchantments, whichwere continued from one day to anotheras opportunity offered, without our everthinking of bringing them to a conclusion.As we observed a strict secrecyon the subject of this intercourse,it acquired all the character of a concealedpleasure ; and we used to select,for the scenes of our indulgence, longwalks through the solitary and romanticenvirons of Arthur's Seat, SalisburyCrags, Braid Hills, and similarplaces in the vicinity of Edinburgh ;and the recollection of those holidaysstill forms an oasis in the pilgrimagewhich I have to look back upon."On leaving school, in 1783, lie appearsto have had a strong desire for amilitary life ; but a lameness in his rightleg prevented him from following hisinclination. On being told that thisdefect was an insuperable bar to hiswishes, he, in an agony of mortified feeling,went and suspended himself by thewrists from his bed-room window, andon being discovered in this situation,said he wished to prove, that howeverunfitted by his limbs for the professionof a soldier, he was at least strongenough in his arms. In the October ofthe year last-mentioned, he became astudent of the University of Edinburgh,and left it in a year or two,without having added much to his stockof classical knowledge. At the age offifteen, the breaking of a blood-vesselbrought on an illness, which, to use hisown words, " threw him back on thekingdom of fiction, as if by a species offatality." Being for some time forbiddento speak or move, he did nothingbut read, from morning to night; andby a perusal of old romances, old plays,and epic poetry, was unconsciouslyamassing materials for his futurewritings. His studies, he tells us, resembledthose of Waverley in a similarsituation ; " the passages concerningwhose reading," he adds, " were imitatedfrom recollections of my own."In his sixteenth year, he commencedstudying for the bar, and became anapprentice to his father, and a pupil ofProfessor Dick, the professor of civillaw in the university. On the 10thof July, 1792, he passed advocate, andbegan life in an elegant house in themost fashionable part of the town ; butbeing already placed beyond the reachof want by the affluence of his father,and his intellect being by no means ofthe forensic cast, he, with the exceptionof one occasion in defence of a prisoner,gave no indication of professional capacities,nor exerted himself to displaythem.Taking advantage, therefore, of theoccurrence of circumstances favourableto the development of his poeticalgenius, he, after a few years' practice,gave up the bar, and devoted himself toliterary pursuits. This was primarilyin consequence of an introduction toMr. Lewis, author of The Monk, whoseimitations of the German ballad poetshad acquired for their author a degreeSIR WALTER SCOTT.of fame which roused the ambition ofScott. He had already made some progressin the language alluded to, but,with the exception of a few verses on athunder storm, and other subjects, composedat the high school, he does notappear, up to this period, to have attemptedany thing in rhyme, " I hadnot, for ten years," he says, " indulgedthe wish to couple so much as love anddove; when, finding Lewis in possessionof so much reputation, and conceivingthat, if I fell behind him in poeticalpowers, I considerably exceeded himin general information, I suddenly tookit into my head to attempt the style bywhich he had raised himself to fame."His first essay was a translation ofBurger's Leonora, which, consisting ofsixty-six stanzas, he began one eveningafter supper, and finished by day-breakthe following morning. He publishedit, together with The Wild Huntsman,in 1796, under the title of The Chase,and William and Helen ; but its fate,he confesses, was by no means flattering,and a great part of the edition wascondemned to the service of the trunk-makers.In 1797, he became quarter-masterin the Edinburgh volunteer lightdragoons ; and, in the same year, hemarried Miss Margaret Carpenter,daughter of a French refugee, and whopossessed an annuity of 400 per annum.He soon afterwards took a houseat Lasswade, on the banks of the Esse ;and, in 1799, he was appointed sheriffof Selkirkshire, into which county heconsequently removed, and engaged thehouse of Asherteil, on the banks of theTweed, where he resided until his removalto Abbotsford. In the sameyear, he published Goeth of Berlichingen,a tragedy, translated from theGerman of Goethe; and, in 1802, appearedhis first publication of any note,entitled The Minstrelsy of the ScottishBorder, in two volumes, to which athird was added in the following year.The work displayed much curious andabstruse learning, and gained the authora considerable reputation as an historicaland traditionary poet. In 1803, hecame to the final resolution of quittinghis profession, observing ' there wasno great love between us at the beginning,and it pleased heaven to decreaseit on farther acquaintance." In his introductorynarrative to a late edition ofThe Lay of the Last Minstrel, he givesa very interesting sketch of his reasonsfor renouncing the bar, and of themanner in which he had passed part ofhis time previous to the above period.Since my fourteenth or fifteenthyear," he says, " my health, originallydelicate, had been extremely robust ;"and in defiance of his lameness, hecontinues, " I had often walked thirtymiles a day, and rode upwards of ahundred without stopping." An unwillingnessto resign this sort of exercisewas not one of the least inducementsto his secession from the bar ;whilst his income, as he says, beingequal to all the comforts and some ofthe elegancies of life, he was not pressedto an irksome employment by necessity,and was, consequently, themore easily seduced to choose the employmentwhich was most agreeable.In 1805, he published The Lay ofthe Last Minstrel, which was composedat the rate of a canto per week ;and, on its completion, produced him600. He was shortly afterwards appointeda principal clerk in the courtof session, on the retirement of Mr.Home, upon an understanding, at ourauthor's request, that the former shouldcontinue to draw the emoluments untilhis decease. When George the Thirdsigned the commission, he is reportedto have said that he was happy to haveit in his power to reward a man ofgenius, and a person of such distinguishedmerit. Mr. Scott received thesalary attached .to the office about sixyears afterwards, which, together withthe profits of his shrievalty, amountedto 1,500 per annum. In 1806, appeareda collection of his poems, entitledBallads and Lyrical Pieces, which weresucceeded by an elegant edition of hisPoetical Works, in five volumes. In1808, he sold, for 1,000, his Marion ;the extraordinary success of which inducedhim, he says, for the first andlast time in his life, to feel somethingapproaching to vanity. It was succeededby his edition of Dryden'sWorks, with a life of the author ; and,in 1809, he assisted in editing TheState Papers and Letters of Sir RalphSadler, which were published in twoquarto volumes. In 1810, he composedhis Lady of the Lake ; in his introducetion to a late edition of which, he tellsus, that a lady of taste having stronglyadvised him not to risk a fall in theestimation of the public by the publicationof this poem, he replied, " If Ifail, it is a sign that I ought never tohave succeeded, and 1 will write prosefor life." Its success, he adds, was soextraordinary, as to induce him, for themoment, to conclude that he had atlast fixed a nail in the proverbially inconstantwheel of fortune, whose stabilityin behalf of an individual whohad so boldly courted her favours forthree successive times, had not, as yet,been shaken. In 1811, appeared hisDon Frederick ; and, in 1813, Rokeby,which met with a less favourable receptionthan a burlesque upon it underthe title of Jokebv. It was succeeded,in 1814, by The Lord of the Isles ; butit made so little impression upon thepublic, that, in allusion to this and thetwo preceding productions, a friendobserved to him, " his works only founda tolerable sale in consequence of havinghis name upon the title-page." To putthis assertion to the proof, he publishedhis next poems anonymously, entitledThe Bridal of Triermain, and Haroldthe Dauntless, which are certainly theleast popular of his poetical compositions.He now resolved to attempt prosewriting; and, in the year last-mentioned,he. published Waverley, about athird of which he had written elevenyears previously, but had thrown itaside in consequence of the unfavourableopinion of a critical friend. It seemsthat he took more than ordinary painsto conceal that he was the author ofthis work, even after it had been fullyestablished in the estimation of thepublic. The writer of his life, beforequoted from, assigns as one reason forthis, Sir Walter's reluctance to beconsidered as one writing for fortune,and having previously expressed anopinion, that our author's desire of becominga land proprietor was a passionwhich far exceeded his appetite forliterary fame, observes, " It was nowthe principal spring of his actions, toadd as much as possible to the littlerealm of Abbotsford, in order that hemight take his place not among thegreat literary names which posterity isto revere, but among the county gentlemenof Roxburgshire." With a view,according to the same authority, ofprocuring the means of extending hisestate, Sir Walter composed that delightfulseries of fiction, which, atthe termination of the Georgian era,amounted to no less than seventyvolumes. From 1815 to 1819, appeared,successively, Guy Wandering ;the Antiquary ; and the first series ofThe Tales of My Landlord, containingThe Black Dwarf and Old Mortality ;Rob Roy; and the second series of TheTales of My Landlord, containing TheHeart of Mid Lothian ; and the thirdseries of Tales of My Landlord, containingThe Bride of Lammermoor andA Legend of Montrose. In all of these,with the exception of Old Mortality, hehad contrived to keep clear of nationalprejudices; but, in the work just alludedto, his partial portraiture of the cavaliersoffended his countrymen, andgave rise to a pamphlet from Dr.M'Crie in The Christian Instructor,which Sir Walter answered in a subsequentseries of The Tales of MyLandlord. In 1820, in which year hewas* made a baronet, were publishedIvanhoe, one of the most popular, andThe Monastery and The Abbot, the leastmeritorious, of the Waverley novels.In 1821, appeared Kenilworth ; whichwas succeeded, successively, by ThePirate ; The Fortunes of Niger ; Severalof the Peak ; Question Durward ; Talesof the Crusaders ; Woodstock ; Chroniclesof the Canongate, first and secondseries ; and Anne of Geierstein, whichwas published in 1829. In the meantime,some of the most important transactionsof his life had occurred ; thebankruptcy of Messrs. Constable andCo., in January, 1826, had involvedhim in obligations to the amount of100,000 ; and, in the following May,he had the misfortune to lose his wife.He bore the former event with greatmagnanimity. " It is very hard," washis observation to a friend on the occasion." thus to lose all the labours of alifetime, and be made a poor man atlast, when I ought to have been otherwise.But if God grant me health andstrength for a few years longer, I haveno doubt that I shall redeem it all."He now felt himself called upon to redoublehis literary exertions ; and, afterhaving sold his house and furniture inSIR WALTER SCOTT.Edinburgh, he published, in 1827, hisLife of Napoleon Buonaparte, in ninevolumes octavo ; the profits of which,amounting to 12,000, with other earningsand resources, enabled him to payhis creditors a dividend of about sixshillings in the pound.It was in this year, at the firstannual dinner of the Edinburgh TheatricalFund Association, that Sir Walteravowed himself to be the author of TheWaverley Novels, and threw off themantle of disguise, which, as he afterwardsremarked to a friend, was gettingsomewhat tattered. " He did notthink," he said, " that in coming to theassembly rooms that day, he .wouldhave the task of acknowledging, beforethree hundred gentlemen, a secret,which, considering that it was communicatedto more than twenty people,had been remarkably well kept. Hewas now before the bar of his country,and might be understood to be on histrial before Lord Meadowbank as anoffender, yet he was sure that everyimpartial jury would bring in a verdictof not proven. He did not now thinkit necessary to enter into the reasons ofhis long silence : perhaps caprice had agreat share in it. He had only to say,however, that the merits of these works,if they had any, and their faults, wereentirely imputable to himself."In November, 1828, he published thefirst, and in 1829, the second part of ajuvenile history of Scotland, entitledThe Tales of a Grandfather; and in thesame year appeared a new edition of theWaverley Novels, the copyright of whichwas purchased for 8,400. This wasillustrated by notes and prefaces, and,in some parts, amended by the author,whose creditors or himself were to havehalf of the profits, in consideration ofSir Walter's literary aid. In additionto those already mentioned, our authorwrote several minor and fugitive works,particularly the lives of Swift andDryden, with an edition of their works;Paul's Letters to his Kinsfolk ; a poemcalled The Field of Waterloo ; An Accountof the Regalia of Scotland ;Helicon Hill, a dramatic poem ; AnIntroductory Essay to Border Antiquities; and the articles, Chivalry,Romance, and The Drama, for theSupplement of the sixth edition of TheEncyclopaedia Britannica. He hadalso written some political papers onthe Tory side, particularly in a weeklyjournal called The Beacon ; but thosefor which he is most celebrated are theletters signed Malachi Malagrowther,in which he opposed the parliamentaryregulations, then in progress, for reducingthe monetary system of Scotlandto an equality with that of England.He was particularly careful aboutthe proof of these letters ; which beingremarked to him by Mr. Ballantyne,the printer, " Yes," said he, in a tonethat electrified even this familiar friend,my former works were for myself,but this is for my country."Sir Walter Scott, is upwards of six feetin height ; bulky, but not corpulent inthe upper part of his body ; and slightlylame m his right limb, which requiresto be supported by a staff. The mostremarkable part of his person is saidto be his head, which is tall andcylindrical, with a small chin, largebushy eyebrows, thin lips, and littlegrey eyes, possessing, says his biographer," the extraordinary property ofshutting as much below as from above,when their possessor is excited by aludicrous idea." When not animated byconversation, his countenance is sometimesheavy, if not vacant; but thecheerfulness of his mind renders, ingeneral, his aspect more humorous thansolemn.His great intellectual characteristicsare, his powers of memory and imagination,his faculty of combining andembellishing past events, and his skillin portraying natural character. As apoet, he is neither profound nor sublime; he deals, as in his prose, with thebeings of the past ; but, having little orno scope for the delineation of familiarcharacter, his verses, though repletewith good feeling and pleasing imagery,are deficient in interest to the generalreader, and fail to awaken his sympathies,though they may gratify his taste.It is in the character of a novelistthat his name will go down to posterity,as the inventor of a new class of fictitiouswriting, in which respect he is onlyequalled by Shakspeare, Milton, Byron,Godwin, Banim, and Shelley. His Lifeof Napoleon is a decided failure ; we invain look either for the accuracy of thehistorian or the profundity of the philosopher; and imagination takes up muchLITERATURE.of the ground where we are entitled toexpect the fruits of research. As awriter of English, if he be consideredin that light only, he does not rankhigh ; many of his sentences beingslovenly and defective in their construction,and deformed by no smallquantity of Scepticism. Perhaps themost objectionable feature in his novelsis their unvarying tone of deference toestablished authority, and the aristocraticmanners which he infuses intoall his descriptions of a character inordinary life. " He seems," says awriter, from whom we have beforequoted, " to have never conceived theidea of a manly character in middle orhumble life ; and, in his novels, wherean individual of these classes is introduced,he is never invested with anyvirtues, unless obedience, or even servilityto superiors, be of the number."The private character of Sir WalterScott is irreproachable, and he is saidto have passed through every period ofhis life without a single stain upon hischaracter. He is generous and benevolent,affable and gracious, and sototally free from literary vanity, thathe might be almost supposed to beunconscious of the reputation he hasattained. Riding and walking form hisfavourite exercise, and this, with thesuperintendence of his planting andagricultural operations, occupies thechief part of his day from eleven tillfive ; his hours of composition being confinedto the time between seven o'clockand the former hour in the morning.He is passionately fond of field sports,and every thing connected with them,and is particularly attached to dogsand horses.Sir Walter held a conspicuous placein the esteem of George the Fourth,during whose visit to Scotland he actedas a sort of master of the ceremonies ; andwhen his majesty was first informed ofhis approach to the royal vessel in theLeith Roads, he exclaimed, " What,Sir Walter Scott ? the man in ScotlandI most wish to see : let him come up."An anecdote is told of Burns and Scott,when the latter was fifteen years of age,and was in the company of the formerat Edinburgh. Burns happening toask who was the author of some linesunder a picture, no one was able toinform him but Scott, on which theAyrshire poet complimented him forhis good taste, in reading such anauthor as the one who had been thesubject of inquiry ; and, turning halfaway, said to the company, " Thisboy will be heard of yet." Sir Walter,it is said, is much given to punning :a friend borrowing a book, one day, heput it into his hands with these words :Now I consider it necessary to remindyou, that this volume should besoon returned ; for, trust me, 1 find,that although many of my friends arebad arithmeticians, almost all of themare good book-keepers"Of the memory of the subject of ourmemoir, two wonderful instances arerecorded : one, of his having repeatedthe whole of Campbell's Pleasures ofHope, after twice perusing it; and theother, of his going through the wholeof a ballad, three years after he hadfirst heard it.JAMES MONTGOMERY.JAMES MONTGOMERY, the eldestson of a Moravian minister, was born onthe 4th of November, 1771, at Irvine, inAyrshire, Scotland. At an early age,he was placed, by his parents (previousto their departure for the West Indies,where both of them died), at a Moravianseminary, at Flick, in Yorkshire.Here he remained ten years; and, notwithstandingthe confined mode of educationpursued there, continued to makeconsiderable literary progress, independentlyof his scholastic studies. Bythe time he was twelve years old, hisideas on poesy had so expanded, thathe had filled two volumes with verses ;and, in two years afterwards, he addedA Mock-heroic Poem, in three books, inimitation of Homer's Fro<js and Mice.Encouraged by the approbation withJAMES MONTGOMERY.which these efforts were received byhis immediate friends, he attempted, butultimately laid aside, two epic poems,which, however, displayed no ordinarygenius. The conductors of the FlickAcademy finding him averse to becomeone of their ministry, placed him witha retail shopkeeper at Fairfield, in Yorkshire;but, disgusted with his occupation,he quitted it at the end of a year,and set out, with three shillings andsixpence in his pocket, "at the age ofsixteen, to begin the world." His projectwas to proceed at once to London ;but he found the world, as he progressed,very unlike what he had figured tohimself, in his fervid moments at Ful-nick.It was in the metropolis, says awriter in The Monthly Magazine, thathis heated imagination had depictedthe honours and riches that awaitedhim," were to be found ; but to go therewas impossible; and, on the fourthday, he engaged himself ina situationsimilar to that which he had left, atWash, near Rotterdam. He remainedbut a twelvemonth in this situation,still cherishing the idea of metropolitanfame; as a step to which, he had senta manuscript volume of his poems toMr. Harrison, a bookseller in PaternosterRow, who, upon the arrival ofour youthful author in London, tookhim into his shop, but declined to publishhis poems.After a quarrel with Mr. Harrison,and a vain attempt to procure the publicationof an Eastern Tale, he returnedto his former employment in Yorkshire;but, in 1792, still yearning after literaryfame, he engaged himself to Mr. Gales,a bookseller, at Sheffield, and the publisherof a newspaper, called The SheffieldRegister. In this he occasionallywrote; and, in 1794, on the flight ofMr. Gales from England, to avoid aprosecution, our author undertook theeditorship and publication of the paper,the name of which he changed to TheIris. Though he observed a greaterdegree of moderation in politics thanhad been used by the former editor,the paper was still obnoxious enoughto government, to involve its proprietorin a prosecution. This was forthe printing of a song in commemorationof the destruction of the Bastile,which had appeared in The SheffieldRegister a year ago, but had been recentlycirculated by a hawker, at whoseanxious request our author had reluctantlystruck off a few copies. He wasaccordingly tried for a libel in January,1795 ; and, on conviction, sentenced toa fine of 20, and three months' imprisonmentin York Castle.On resuming his editorial duties, he Iabstained, as much as possible, from jpolitics ; but he had not been long liberated,before he was again prosecutedfor a libel on a magistrate of Sheffield,in his account of a riot which had takenplace in the town. He was sentencedto pay a fine of 30, and to be imprisonedfor six months; but, after hisrelease, it is said his prosecutor tookevery opportunity of showing him respectin public, and to advance his interest.In the spring of 1797, he printedhis Prison Amusements, the productionof his pen during his recent confinement;and, on the establishment of ThePoetical Register, he contributed to thefirst volume his Battle of Alexandria,and other poems. In 1805, he publishedThe Ocean ; and, in the followingyear, The Wanderer of Switzerland,and other poems, which, in spite of amost illiberal criticism in The EdinburghReview, rose into popularity, andcompletely established the reputation ofthe author as a poet. In 1809, appeared,in quarto, his poem of The West Indies,a second edition of which appeared, inoctavo, in 1810, and ten thousand copiesare said to have been since circulated.In 1812, appeared his world before theFlood, and other poems, of which awriter in The Monthly Magazine hasjustly said, that " no man of taste orfeeling can possibly read it, withoutwishing to make others participate inthe pleasure he has derived from it,"Besides the works already noticed, andupon which his fame, as a poet, principallyrest, he has published Thoughtson Wheels ; Greenland, and otherpoems ; Polyhymnia, Songs to ForeignMusic; and Songs of Zion, being imitationsof the Psalms; and, in 1828,appeared his Pelican Island, and otherpoems.In person, Mr. Montgomery is describedas rather below the middlestature ; slightly formed, but well proportioned,with fair complexion, yellowhair, and a countenance having a melancholybut interesting expression. HisLITERATURE.modesty and reserve keep him silentamong strangers ; but he is said, by hisfamiliar acquaintance, to possess colloquialpowers of a first-rate order. Likehis prototype, Cowper, he entertains anoverpowering sense of his religious obligations; and exhibits, occasionally, amelancholy gloom, which enchains hisvigorous and elastic fancy, and arreststhe progress of his playful pen.Mr. Montgomery is one of the poetsof the present day, who, though not ofthe highest class, will hereafter take hisplace in a rank superior to that whichhe now occupies in the eye of thepublic. He has, however, already enjoyedmore than an ordinary share ofreputation, and the gratification of seeingsome of his minor poems adoptedas standard quotations in reference tocertain subjects, both for their moraland poetical beauty.JAMES HOGG.JAMES HOGG, known by the soubriquetof The Ettrick Shepherd, wasborn in 1771, and is the son of a respectablefarmer and sheep-dealer, ofEttrick, in Scotland. He received butascanty education, and, at the early ageof seven, became a cowherd, and wasafterwards raised to the more dignifiedpost of shepherd. During his progressin these callings, he suffered many hardships,in describing which, in his publishedautobiography, he says, " Timeafter time, I had but two shirts, whichgrew often so bad, that I was obliged toquit wearing them altogether; for,when I put them on, they hung in longtatters as far as my heels. At thesetimes," he adds, " I certainly made avery grotesque figure ; for, on quittingthe shirt, I could never induce mybreeches to keep up to their propersphere." It was not till his eighteenthyear, that he began to read poetry ; atthis time, he was in the service of Mr.Laidlaw, whose lady lent him TheGentle Shepherd, besides some theologyand, occasionally, a newspaper,which, he says, he " pored overwith great earnestness ; beginning at thedate, and reading straight on, throughadvertisements of houses and lands,balm of Gilead, and every thing." In1790, he hired himself to a new master,of the same name, with whom he livednine years in the capacity of shepherd,and by whom he was treated with thekindness of a parent. This gentlemanpossessed many valuable books, all ofwhich Hogg was allowed to read ; and,in the spring of 1793, he made his firstessay in verse, which, in his literarycareer, was followed by some pastoralsand ballads, and a comedy, entitledThe Scotch Gentleman. In allusion tothe composition of this comedy, he says,in his autobiography, " Whether, mymanner of writing it out was new, Iknow not; but it was not withoutsingularity. Having very little sparetime from my flock, which were unrulyenough, I folded and stitched a fewsheets of paper, which I carried in mypocket. I had no inkhorn ; but, inplace of it, I borrowed a small vial,which I fixed in a hole in the breastof my waistcoat ; and, having a cork, 'affixed by a piece of twine, it answeredthe purpose full as well."In 1801, He ventured to publish avolume of his poems ; and, afterwards,whilst still in the capacity of a shepherd,being encouraged by WalterScott, to publish The Mountain Bard,which was succeeded by his work onthe management of sheep, he becamemaster of nearly ,300; a sum, he says,which made him "perfectly mad :" andit may be taken as a proof of his temporaryinsanity, observes his biographer,that he hired two extensive farms,the management of which required tentimes the capital he possessed." Theconsequence was, that at the end ofthree years, he found himself penniless,and was compelled to return to his oldassociates at Ettrick, but, being unable toobtain occupation, he, in 1810, took hisdeparture for Edinburgh, determined,as he says, " to force himself into noticeas a literary character." Fortune,however, was not yet propitious ; a volumeof songs, called The Forest Min-robertSOUTH E Y.slrel, added nothing to his coffers ; andhe was unsuccessful in attempting toestablish a periodical paper, called TheSpy. His abilities, however, were notwholly unknown in Edinburgh, wherehe became one of the principal conductorsof a debating society, called TheForum ; and the publication of hisQueen's Wake, in 1813, at once establishedhis reputation in the Scottish metropolis.His Pilgrims of the Sun, andMajor of the Moor, which followedsuccessively, were not so popular,though he himself thought both of themsuperior to The Queen's Wake. Hisnext scheme was to publish a volume,containing a poem from every livingpoet in Great Britain ; but this beingfrustrated by Sir Walter Scott and LordByron declining to contribute, he publisheda volume of imitations, called ThePoetic Mirror, which was well received,and had a profitable sale. In addition tothe works already mentioned, he publishedPerils of Man ; Perils of Woman ;The Brownie of Bodsbeck, and othertales ; Winter Evening Tales ; andJacobite Relics of Scotland. Theseworks were followed, in 1825, by hisQueen Hyde, a poem, which madesome noise in the literary world. In1829, he printed his Shepherd's Calendar,in two volumes. Besides these,he has been a considerable contributorto the various annuals and magazines :but his greatest celebrity, as a periodicalwriter, is in connexion with Blackwood'sMagazine, of which he was the principalfounder.Mr. Hogg is now married, and comfortablysettled on a considerable farm,but it is doubtful whether his emolumentshave not fallen far short of themerits of a man of his genius andcelebrity. Lord Byron was one ofthose who thought highly of Hogg ;and used to call him a strange being,of great, though uncouth, powers.ROBERT SOUTHEY.I ROBERT SOUTHEY, the son of alinen-draper, of Bristol, was born thereonthe 12th of August, 1774. He received1 the rudiments of education at a dayschool in his native city, and was afterwards placed under the care of a privatei tutor, previously to his being sent toWestminster, which he entered at theage of fourteen. By a strict attentionto his father's maxim, " to tie thestocking up tight, and be punctual," hepassed through the school with sufficientsteadiness to avoid corporalpunishment, though his sympathy forothers induced him to write some essaysin a periodical paper, called The Flagellant.In November, 1792, he was entereda student of Baliol College, Oxford,with the intention of studying for thechurch; but imbibing Unitarian principles,and fired with the then recentevents of the French revolution, he becamea red-hot republican; and, formingan acquaintance with Coleridge,entered into the pantisocratic scheme,mentioned in our memoir of that poet.In 1793, he married a Miss Flicker,and in the same year, published, inconjunction with his friend Lovel, TheRetrospect, and other poems, under thesignatures of Moschns and Sion. Aftertaking his bachelor's degree, he leftOxford, and became a member of Gray'sInn ; and, about the same period, hegave to the world his Wat Tyler, inwhich he advocated republican principles,with an enthusiasm and vehemence,which he afterwards, either frominterest or principle, much regretted.He also sought to suppress the workitself, and made an application for aninjunction against Carlile and others,who had printed it, but the chancellorrefused to interfere, on the ground ofits objectionable principles. Aftermaking a six months' tour in Spainand Portugal, he published an epicpoem, in ten books, entitled Joan ofArc, a second edition of which appearedin 1797, together with a volumeof minor poems.In 1798, he printed Letters fromSpain and Portugal, with translationsfrom the poems of both countries ; andshortly afterwards he contributed, withLITERATURE.Mrs. Opie and others, to The AnnualAnthology for 1799 and 1800. In 1801,he obtained the appointment of secretaryto Mr. Carry, chancellor of theExchequer for Ireland ; and after theunion, he was fortunate enough toobtain the grant of a pension of 2QQa-year.On his retirement from office, hetook up his residence at Keswick,where, devoting himself to literary employments,he produced, successively,Amadis de Gaul, from the Spanish ;an edition of the works of Chatterton ;Thalia, the Destroyer; Metrical Tales,and other poems ; Madoc ; Palmerof England, from the Portuguese ; Lettersfrom England, written under thefictitious name of Espriella ; and theRemains of Henry Kirkee White, withhis life, in two volumes ; to which hehas since added a third. In 1808, heprinted the Chronicle of the Cid, fromthe Spanish; in 1810, appeared thefirst volume of his History of Brazil,which he has since completed by asecond; and, in 1812, he published anamusing miscellany, entitled Omnia.These were succeeded by his Curse ofKehama, Life of Nelson, and his poemof Frederick, the last of the Goths.In 1815, two years before which hehad succeeded Mr. Pye, as poet laureate,he published the Poet's Pilgrimageto Waterloo ; and, in 1821, came outhis Vision of Judgment, which gave riseto Lord Byron's poem of the samename, in The Liberal, and to a severecastigation of the laureate in a prefacethereto. His next publications were aHistory of the Peninsular War, in threevolumes, quarto ; and his famous Bookof the Church, which was replied to byMr. Charles Butler, on behalf of theRoman catholics, whom our authoranswered in a supplement to his formerwork, entitled Vindicate Ecclesiae anglican.In 1829, he published hisColloquies on the Progress and Prospectsof Society ; and, in the same year,he added to his poetical works his Allfor Love, and The Pilgrim to Com-estella, neither of which added to hisreputation. In addition to the worksbefore-mentioned, Mr. Southey haswritten The Birth, Lys, and Actes ofKing Arthur ; A Tale of Paraguay ;The Life of Wesley; besides severalpieces, prose and poetical, in the variousperiodicals of the day. Some time ago,the University of Oxford conferredupon him the degree of LL.D., and hewas also returned to parliament for aministerial borough, but declined takinghis seat.The laureate is undoubtedly a man ofgenius and erudition, but we doubtwhether any of his works are destinedto reach posterity. As a poet, his reputationhas already faded ; though hisThalia, and a few of his miscellaneouspoems, deserve to be rescued from oblivion,containing, as they do, beautiesof a rare and original character. Thereis as much chaff in his prose as in hispoetry ; and, indeed, the chief fault ofhis writings is the preponderance ofquantity over quality. Speaking of him,in 1813, his inveterate enemy, LordByron, says, " Southey I have not seenmuch of. His appearance is epic ; andhe is the only existing entire man ofletters. His manners are mild, but notthose of a man of the world ; and histalents of the first order. His prose isperfect. Of his poetry there are variousopinions: there is, perhaps, too muchof it for the present generation ; posteritywill, probably, select. He haspassages equal to any thing. At present,he has a party, but no public exceptfor his prose writings. The Life ofNelson is beautiful." This is still afair estimate of his abilities ; for, lookingback upon his performances of the lastseventeen years, we see nothing inthem that lias advanced his literary reputation.A reviewer in Blackwood'sMagazine calls his History of Brazilthe most unreadable production of ourtime;" and observes, that his Historyof the Peninsular War is " little betterthan another Caucasus of lumber."Upon the whole, however, he rankshigh among the writers of the presentcentury ; though, if his grade be determinedby his popularity, it will befound to be lower than his admirerssuspect, or than he himself, perhaps,deserves.His character has been variously represented: according to Mr. Coleridge,it is all that is estimable, and has, forits only enemies, " quacks in education,quacks in politics, and quacks in criticism."No one, however, we believe,disputes the fact of his being an amiablemember of society, and a zealous phi-thomasCAMPBELL.lanthropist; but whether he has giventhe most satisfactory evidence of hispolitical integrity and tolerant sentiments,is, at the least, doubtful.We neither approve of, nor coincidewith, Lord Byron's vituperation of Mr.Southey; but we cannot forbear suggesting,that one who has held suchopposite opinions, sincere as we believehis present ones to be, questions withan ill grace the sincerity of either hispolitical or poetical opponents.THOMAS CAMPBELL.THOMAS CAMPBELL was born atGlasgow, in 1777, and received the rudimentsof education at the grammar-school and university of that city. Atthe latter, he obtained a bursary, in histhirteenth year, and distinguished himselfparticularly by his poetical versionsof the Greek tragedians, for which he obtainedseveral prizes. He also attendedthe lectures of Professor Millar, fromwhose society and instruction he is saidto have acquired that philosophical easeand freedom of style, which have sincedistinguished his writings. After quittingthe University of Glasgow, he, forashort time, resided amongst the mountainsof Argyleshire, and then removedto Edinburgh, where his talents soongained him the notice and friendship ofStewart, Playfair, and other eminentliterati in the Scotch metropolis.At the age of nineteen, he commencedwriting his poem of The Pleasures ofHope, which, in the progress of its composition,he used to read to a Mrs.Jones, an actress, who instructed himin the English pronunciation, and thusenabled him to give a greater polish tohis numbers. The poem was publishedin 1799; a performance, in one so young,equally surprising and admirable, andby which he was at once raised to therank of a first-rate poet. After payinga visit to the continent, where he hadan interview with Klopstock, he tookup his residence in London, and continuedto reside there till his marriage,in 1808, when he removed to Sydenham,which is, we believe, his presentplace of abode. In 1809, he publishedGertrude of Wyoming, and some smallerpieces ; many of which, however, notwithstandingtheir brevity, will formprincipal links in the chain by whichlie will be handed down to posterity.He soon after accepted the appointmentof professor of poetry in the RoyalInstitution, where he delivered severalcourses of lectures ; and he subsequentlyundertook the editorship of The NewMonthly Magazine, to which his nameand contributions have imparted nosmall portion of celebrity. The poems,however, which he occasionally inserted,are, with a few exceptions,contemptible ; nor did he obtain muchmore credit by the publication ofTheodoric, and other poems, in 1824.A minor piece, called The Last Man,is the only one worthy of his genius,in this volume ; which, upon the whole,only served to show that the author ofThe Pleasures of Hope, was descendingfrom a height which he could notgo beyond.In 1829-30, he was elected lord rectorof the University of Glasgow ; and hemay be said to have been the originatorof the present London University,though she political position of Mr.Brougham, and the eclat it receivedfrom being coupled with his name, haveeclipsed, in some degree, the claims ofour poet. He enjoys, it is said, a pensionfrom government, bestowed uponhim for his services in writing politicalparagraphs, in support of Lord Grenville'sadministration. In addition tothe works before-mentioned, Mr.Camp-bell has published, anonymously, infour volumes, octavo, Annals of GreatBritain, from the Accession of Georgethe Third to the Peace of Amiens,which hare been generally ascribed tohim, though he has never avowed himselfthe author. He has also contributedseveral articles on poetry and the belleslettres to the pages of the EdinburghEncyclopaedia ; and published, in 1819,in seven volumes, octavo, Specimens ofLITERATURE,the British Poets, with biographical andcritical notices, and an Essay on EnglishPoetry.As a prose writer, Mr. Campbell willspeedily be forgotten ; but, as long as ataste for English poetry exists, thePleasures of Hope, Hohenlinden, Lo-chief'sWarning, and a few other pieces,will never cease to have a numerousproportion of readers. The eleganceand euphony of his versification havebeen justly and universally admired ;but this unvarying delicacy and polishwould be sometimes well exchangedfor that fine and exciting discord, whichis considered to be no less a characteristicof the sublime and beautiful inpoetry, than in music.Mr. Campbell seeks to engage andto please, rather than to rouse andastonish ; and, in the former respect,he has the merit of succeeding, with apropriety of sentiment, and a chastenessof diction, that renders his writingsattractive and agreeable to all classes ofreaders. Upon the whole, we cannotgive a better idea of the poetical characterof the subject of our memoir,than by applying to him Dr. Anderson'sobservations on the poet, Gray :His pieces have all the marks ofclose study and patient revision ; andthe smallness of their number, comparedwith the length of time he wasknown as a poet, sufficiently shews thatthey were kept long under his owneyes, before they were submitted tothose of the public. They may, therefore,be regarded as a kind of standardof the correctness to which Englishpoetry has arrived in our day."Mr. Campbell is much esteemed byhis intimate friends, and is said to beone of those convivial geniuses, whoare by no means averse to the assistanceof Bacchus in their ascent to Parnassus.THOMAS MOORE.THOMAS MOORE, son of a respectabletradesman of Dublin, was bornthere on the 28th of May, 1780. Afterhaving gone through a previous courseof education under Mr. Samuel White,tutor to Sheridan, he was entered ofTrinity College, in his native city, wherehe graduated in November, 1799. Hethen went to England, and became astudent of the Middle Temple ; but,though ultimately called to the bar,literary pursuits prevented him fromfollowing it as a profession.In 1800, he published his translationof the Odes of Anacreon, which werereceived with merited applause, andproduced, from the Honourable HenryErskine, the following complimentaryimpromptu:Ah ! mourn not for AnacnAh ! weep not for Anacreon fledThe lyre still breathes he touched before,For we have one Anacreon Moore.These were succeeded by his miscellaneouspoems, published under thename of Little, which are still popular ;though, it is said, the author keenly regretsthat he ever had the vitiated tasteto compose them. Whatever may betheir poetic merit, which is undoubtedlygreat, too much cannot be said in reprehensionof the immoral and licentioustrain of thoughts which they suggest,and that under the semblance of themost artless innocence. " No girl,"said Lord Byron, " will ever be seducedby reading Don Juan ; they will go toLittle's poems for that." In 1803, aboutwhich time appeared his Candid Appealto Public Confidence, or Considerationson the Actual and ImaginaryDangers of the Present Crisis, he wasappointed registrar to the court ofAdmiralty, in the island of Bermuda,whence he visited America, and returnedto England in 1806. He shortlyafterwards published Remarks on AmericanSociety and Manners, in a volumecomprising epistles, odes, &c., many ofwhich being open to the same objectionsas those which had appeared under thename of Little, were attacked by Mr.Jeffrey, in the Edinburgh Review, in amanner that produced a challenge fromMr. Moore. A meeting accordinglytook place at Chalk Farm ; but the duelwas prevented by the interference of tthe police, and the pistols, on examina 'THOMAS MOORE.tion, were found to contain paper pellets,which had been judiciously substitutedby the seconds for bullets. This circumstancegave rise to Lord Byron'sobservations in his English Bards, andproduced, on the part of Mr. Moore, aremonstrance with his lordship, whodisclaimed any intention of personaloffence, and afterwards became one ofMr. Moore's warmest friends.In 1811, appeared his M. P., or theBlue Stocking ; and, in the followingyear, his celebrated production, entitledIntercepted Letters; or, TheTwopenny Post-bag, by Thomas Brown,the Younger; of which fourteen editionshave been printed. It lashes severelyone elevated personage, and several ofthe nest eminent characters of the Toryparty ; and, in sparkling wit, keensarcasm, and humorous pleasantry, isrivalled only by another volume, entitledThe Fudge Family in Paris, which waspublished in 1818. In 1813, the fameof our poet was increased by the appearanceof his exquisite Songs, to SirJ. Stevenson's selection of Irish melodies; and, in 181C, he published ASeries of Sacred Songs, Duets, andTrios, the music to which was composedand selected by himself and Sir JohnStevenson. In 1817, appeared his beautifulpoem of Alla Rooks, an orientalromance, uniting the purest and softesttenderness with the loftiest dignity,and glowing in every page with allthe fervour of poetry : it is said to haveproduced him three thousand guineas.In 1823, came out The Loves of theAngels, a composition containing manypassages of great beauty ; but, upon thewhole, inferior to his former productions,and far beneath the Heaven and Earthof Lord Byron, a poem founded on thesame subject, and between which and theformer, a comparison was suggested bytheir appearance about the same time.In 1825, was published his Lite ofSheridan, an amusing work, but failingentirely to establish the fame of theauthor as a biographical writer. Georgethe Fourth, hearing some one say thatMoore had murdered Sheridan, in thisproduction, is reported to have exclaimed," No, but he has certainlyattempted his life." He was not moresuccessful in his Life of Byron, whichappeared, in two volumes, quarto, in1830, a partial and inefficient performance,by which neither the reputationof the author has been advanced,nor the character of Lord Byronvindicated. In our memoir of his lordship,we have alluded to the gift of hispapers to Mr. Moore, in Italy ; the circumstancesunder which he subsequentlydestroyed them are well known,t appears that he had received 2,000for the manuscripts from Mr. Murray,when some members of Lady Byron'sand his lordship's family made suchrepresentations to him, as induced himto refund the above sum, and to throwinto the fire the whole, or a greaterpart, of the materials for his lordship'slife. His generosity has been commendedon this occasion ; but, makingevery allowance for the feelings bywhich he was influenced, he hardlyacted fairly by his friend, in not havingfulfilled his intentions, as it is evidentthat Lord Byron would not haveintrusted to him those interesting documents,had he anticipated their voluntarydestruction. In addition to theworks before-mentioned, Mr. Mooreis the author of Corruption and Intolerance,a poem ; The Sceptic, a philosophicalsatire; Fables for the HolyAlliance; Rhymes on the Road; TheEpicurean, a tale ; and The Life ofCaptain Rock. He has also written anumber of miscellaneous pieces, bothin prose and verse, which have beeninserted in various periodical journals ;and a variety of beautiful songs, whichhave become permanently popular.The peculiar charm of Mr. Moore'spoetry is too universally acknowledgedto admit of question ; but it has, nevertheless,many glaring defects, whichhave been too generally overlooked.There is a mannerism in his versewhich palls ; a voluptuous redundancyof imagery, and exuberance of harmony,which enchant the ear, and the imagination,but seldom penetrate, thoughthey have just pathos enough to touch,the heart. He rarely rises to the sublime,but as rarely sinks below the beautiful; he is always graceful arid elegant;and his art is s'o exquisite, that if notnature, it may be easily mistaken for it.His most finished performances are tobe found in Alla Rocks ; some portionsof The Fire Worshippers have neverbeen surpassed ; and the character ofJohanna, in The Veiled Prophet ofLITERATURE.Khorassan, is a sublime conception,sublimely executed.It is, however, as a song writer, thatMr. Moore has become so universallypopular, both in Ireland and England;but it is to be lamented that even hisexquisite melodies have failed to destroythe vitiated taste of the public in favourof the trash which is usually wedded tothe music of almost every song thatmakes its appearance in this country.The words of Mr. Moore's songs, too,occasionally convey a deeper meaningthan is apparent upon the face of them :that beginningWhen first 1 knew thee warm and young,disguises, under the complaint of a betrayedlover, a most beautiful andspirited reproof of George the Fourth,for his disappointment of the politicalhopes to which he had given birth whenPrince of Wales.In private life, Mr. Moore is said topartake of the convivial spirit of hismuse, and to be as much an admirer ofsparkling eyes and sparkling glasses atthe social board, as he is in his poems.He sings and composes with taste; andis usually cheerful and witty in company,though we have heard it said,that where he is expected to be so, hetakes care to disappoint anticipation.Being at dinner, one day, where theabsence of game was lamented, a gentlemanpresent, alluding to the fascinatingmanners of Mr. Moore, whokept the "table in a roar," said, "Why,gentlemen, what better game wouldyou wish than Moore game, of which, Iam sure, you have abundance?" Hisindependent and patriotic notions havebeen the same from the first ; and it issaid that he refused, from consistencyof principle, a valuable appointment inIndia, which was offered him by theTory party. He is married, and hasissue.HENRY Kirk WHITE.HENRY Kirk WHITE, the sonof a butcher, at Nottingham, was bornthere, on the 21st of March, 1785. Atthe age of three years, he was placed ata female seminary, and by his attachmentto juvenile literature, attractedthe particular notice of his schoolmistress,whom he has celebrated inhis poem of Childhood. Even in hisinfancy, his thirst for knowledge was soextraordinary, that it required the mostaffectionate solicitations, and sometimesa degree of austerity, to induce him tobe less constant in his application tostudy. At seven years of age, he used toemploy himself, unknown to his parents,in teaching the servants to read andwrite, and his own desire of receivinginstruction was not less remarkable,on his being put to school, about thistime, with the Rev. Mr. Blanchard,at Nottingham. Here he learned therudiments of mathematics and theEnglish and French languages, and inall respects displayed wonderful powersof acquisition. " When about eleven,"says Dr. Southey, in his life of White,he, one day, wrote a separate themefor every boy in his class, which consistedof about twelve or fourteen ; themaster said he had never known themwrite so well upon any subject before,and could not refrain "from expressinghis astonishment at the excellence ofHenry's." His schoolfellows consideredhim as a particularly cheerful, amiable,and even sportive companion ; buthaving lampooned one of the ushers,he, in revenge, told our author's motherwhat an incorrigible son she had, andhow unlikely he was to make any progressin his studies." He was, in consequence,removed to the academy ofMr. Henry Shipley ; and, about thesame time, he is said to have derivedgreat gratification at being releasedfrom the degrading occupation of abutcher's errand-boy, in which he hadhitherto been employed every market-day,and at other leisure times. Hisfamily, also, having removed to a morecommodious house in the town, he wasallotted a small apartment to himself,which he called his study. On attaininghis fourteenth year, he was placedin a stocking-frame to prepare himselfHENRY Kirk WHITE.for the hosiery line ; but being averseto the occupation, he was subsequentlyarticled to Messrs. Oldham and En-field,attornies of Nottingham. Hedevoted himself with steadiness to hisprofession during the day, and passedhis evenings in the acquirement of theLatin, Greek, and Italian languages ;and, afterwards, the Spanish and Portuguese.His proficiency soon displayeditself, and caused him to be elected amember of the Nottingham LiterarySociety, who, shortly after his admission,appointed him their professor ofliterature, in consequence of his deliveryof an admirable extempore lecture onGenius, of nearly two hours' duration.He might now, says one of his biographers,be called " the Crichton ofNottingham ;" for chemistry, astronomy,drawing, music, and even practical mechanics,equally claimed his attention ;and his attainments in each were considerable.At the age of fifteen, he obtained,from the Monthly Preceptor,two prizes, a silver medal and a pair oftwelve-inch globes, for a translationfrom Horace, and a description of an imaginarytour from London to Edinburgh.In 1802, he had written a volume ofpoems called Clifton Grove, and otherpieces, in the hope that the publicationof them would enable him to study atcollege for the church, though feeling nodislike to his own profession, in whichhe was ambitious of rising. "A deafness,however," says Southey, " to which hehad always been subject, appeared togrow worse, and threatened to precludeall hope of advancement; andhis opinions, which had once inclinedto deism, had now taken a strong devotionalbias." After receiving a politerefusal from the Countess of Derby, forpermission to dedicate to her his poems,he obtained the consent of the Duchessof Devonshire to the use of her name,and they accordingly appeared, in 1804,inscribed to her grace, who, however,took no further notice of the author orhis book. Some remarks upon it, inThe Monthly Review, describing it asbeing published under the discouragementsof penury and misfortune, causedhim much mortification, as will be seenfrom the following letter : " The unfavourablereview (in The Monthly)of my unhappy work, has cut deeperthan you could have thought ; not in aliterary point of view, but as it affectsmy respectability. It represents meactually as a beggar, going about gatheringmoney to put myself at collegewhen my work is worthless; and thiswith every appearance of candour.They have been sadly misinformedrespecting me : this review goes beforeme wherever I turn my steps ; it hauntsme incessantly, and I am persuaded itis an instrument in the hands of Satanto drive me to distraction. I mustleave Nottingham."Messrs. Oldham and Enfield havingagreed to give up the remainder of histime, Henry now zealously devotedhimself to the study of divinity ; andreading, among other books, Scott'sForce of Truth, he remarked that itwas founded upon eternal truth, andthat it convinced him of his errors.The avidity of his search after knowledgeincreased daily, or rather, nightly ;for it is said that he frequently limitedhis time of rest to a couple of hours,and, with a desperate and deadly ardour,would often study the whole nightlong. The night, he used to say, wasevery thing to him ; and that if theworld knew how he had been indebtedto its hours, they would not wonderthat night images were so predominantin his verses. The result of this applicationwas a severe illness ; on hisrecovery from which, he produced thosebeautiful lines, written in MilfordChurch-yard.In July, 1814, his long-delayed hopesof entering the university were aboutto be gratified : " I can now informyou," he writes to a friend, in thismonth, " that I have reason to believemy way through college is close beforeme. From what source I know nqt ; butthrough the hands of Mr. Simeon, I amprovided with 30 per annum ; and,while things go on prosperously, as theydo now, I can command jfe20 or SOmore from my friends ; and this, in allprobability, until I take my degree.The friends to whom I allude are mymother and brother." In addition tothis, an unknown friend offered himj30 a-year, which he declined, as alsothe assistance of the Eland Society,where he had been previously examinedby upwards of twenty clergymen, who iexpressed themselves in terms of astonishmentat his classical proficiency,LITERATURE.and were well satisfied with his theologicalknowledge. Mr. Simeon, whohad promised him a sizership at St.John's, now advised him to degradefor a year, which he, in consequence,passed at Winteringham, in Lincolnshire,under the tuition of the Rev.Mr. Grainger. Here intense applicationto his studies brought on a secondfit of illness, from which he was scarcelyrecovered at the time of his return toCambridge, in October, 1805. Duringhis first term, he announced himself acandidate for an university scholarship,but ill health compelled him to declineit ; he, however, made great exertionsto undergo the college examination,which he was enabled to do with theaid of strong stimulants, and medicines ;and he was pronounced the first man ofhis year. The efforts he put forth onthis occasion, probably, cost him hislife, for he remarked to a friend, "thatwere he to paint a picture of Famecrowning a distinguished under-graduate,after the senate-house examination,he would represent her, asconcealing a death's head under a maskof beauty."After paying a visit to London, hereturned to Cambridge, in January,1800, and prepared himself for thegreat college examination which tookplace in June, when he was again pronouncedthe first man. . The collegenow offered to supply him with a mathematicaltutor, free of expense ; andexhibitions, to the amount of 68a-year, being procured for him, he wasenabled to dispense with further assistancefrom his friends. Logarithms andproblems now engrossed the attentionof his already overstrained mind ; buthis feeble frame, not equally under hiscommand, soon checked the rapid butdestructive advances of his mentalpowers. One morning, his laundressfound him insensible, bleeding in fourdifferent places in his face and head :he had fallen down in a state of exhaustion,in the act of sitting down todecipher some logarithm tables. Stillhe persisted to nourish " the woundthat laid him low ;" but nature was atlength overcome : he grew delirious,and died on the 19th of October, 1806,in his twenty-first year.Thus fell, a victim to his own genius,one, whose abilities and acquirementswere not more conspicuous than hismoral and social excellence. " It isnot possible," says Southey, " to conceivea human being more amiable inall the relations of life. He was theconfidential friend and adviser of everymember of his family ; this he instinctivelybecame : and the thorough goodnessof his advice is not less remarkablethan the affection with which it isalways communicated." Good sense,indeed, at all times, and latterly, ferventpiety, appear to have been his chiefcharacteristics ; the latter enabled himto overcome a naturally irritable temper; and it was impossible, says theabove authority, for man to be moretenderly patient of the faults of others,more uniformly meek, or more unaffectedlyhumble.With regard to his poems, observesthe laureate, " Chatterton is the onlyyouthful poet whom he does not leavefar. behind him ;" and, in alluding tosome of his papers, handed to him forperusal after the death of White, heobserves, " I have inspected all theexisting manuscripts of Chatterton, andthey excited less wonder than these."GEORGE GORDON, LORD BYRON.GEORGE GORDON, the only son ofCaptain John Byron, by his secondwife, Miss Gordon, of Might, and grandsonof the celebrated Admiral Byron,was born in Holies Street, London, onthe 22nd of January, 1788. His ancestry,of which he is said to have been moreproud than of having been the authorof Childee Harold and Manfred, wascomposed of persons of distinction, butpossessing much of that daring recklessnessof character, which so early displayeditself in the subject of our memoir.His great uncle, Lord William,to whom he succeeded, was tried forkilling his relation, Mr. Chaworth, in aLORD & \ HO N .duel ; and his father, who had causedhis first wife to die of a broken heart,after having seduced her, when Marchionessof Carmarthen, became thehusband of our poet's mother, as heopenly avowed, for her fortune alone ;after the dissipation of which, he separatedfrom her, and died at Valenciennes,in 1791. At this time, youngByron resided, with his mother, atAberdeen, where, in November, 1792,he was sent to a day school ; but, accordingto his own account, " learnedlittle there, except to repeat by rotethe fir-t lesson of monosyllables'' Afterremaining a year in this school, he wasplaced with a clergyman, named Ross,under whom, he says, he made astonishingprogress ; and observes, that themoment he could read, his grand passionwas history. His next tutor wasnamed Paterson ; with him, he adds,I began Latin in Ruddiman's grammar,and continued till I went to thegrammar-school, where I threaded allthe classes to the fourth, when I wasrecalled to England by the demise ofmy uncle."The anecdotes which are told of himat this time, display his temper in anunfavourable light, both in his infancyand boyhood. Mr. Moore relates, thatwhilst yet in petticoats, being angrilyreprimanded by his nurse for havingsoiled or torn a new frock, in which hehad just been dress d, he got into oneof his " silt-nt rages" (as he himself hasdescribed them), seized the frock withboil his hands, rent it from top tobottom, and stood, in sullen stillness,setting his censurer and her wrath atdefiance. The same authority tells us,that once, in returning home from schoolat Aberdeen, Byron fell in with a boywho had, on some former occasion, insultedhim, but had then got off unpunished; little Byron, however, at thetime, promising to*" pay him off'" wheneverthey should meet'again. Accordingly,on this second encounter, thoughthere were some other boys to take hisopponent's part, he succeeded in inflictingupon him a hearty beating. Onhis return home, breathless, the servantinquired what he had been about, andwas answered by him, with a mixtureof rage and humour, that he had beenpaying a debt, by beating a boy accordingto promise ; for that he was *Byron, and would not belie his motto.Other anecdotes are told of him, whichshow him to have been passionate andresentful to that degree, as to leave itdoubtful whether the description of himas "a malignant imp," is not more applicableto his early years, than that of "alively, warm-hearted, and high-spiritedboy.'"' Before closing our account ofhis infancy, we should not omit to statethat he suffered much from the malformationof one of his feet, whichgave him much pain and mortificationthroughout his life. Even when a child,an allusion to this infirmity so provokedhim, that he once struck at a personwho remarked it, with a little whipwhich he held in his hand, exclaiming,impatiently, as his eyes flashed fire,Cinna speak of it !" He himselfsays, in some memoranda of his earlydays, that he never felt greater horrorand humiliation than when his mother,in one of her fits of passion, called hima " lame brat :" and it is certain, thathe always felt it as a sort of ignominy,notwithstanding Mr. Moore's assertionthat in after-life, " he could sometimestalk indifferently, and even jestingly, ofthis lameness." His attachment toMary Duff* commenced when he wasonly eight years of age ; but, though,eight years afterwards, the account ofher marriage with another " nearlythrew him into convulsions," and forawhile embittered his existence, it was,he adds, " the recollection, not the attachment,which afterwards recurred tomeso forcibly." This affection, however,was not without its influence uponhis mind, and probably tended to increasethat love of contemplation andsolitude, which he is said to have sometimescarried to a dangerous excessamong the mountainous scenery of thehighlands.Jn 1798, he prepared to quit Scotlandfor Newstead, in consequence ofhis accession to his family title, ofwhich, perhaps, he was not a littleproud; for his mother having said tohim, some time in the previous year,whilst perusing a newspaper, that shehoped to have the pleasure of sometimeor other reading his speeches inthe house of commons ; he replied, " Ihope not ; if you read any speeches ofmine, it will be in the house of lords."On his arrival at Newstead, he conti-literature.need his studies under Mr. Rogers, aschoolmaster in the neighbourhood,and was also attended by a quack ofthe name of Lavender, who had undertakento cure the defect in his foot. Ofthis man, he had a great abhorrence,and took every opportunity of ridiculinghim ; and, about the same time, thefirst symptom of his predilection forrhyming showed itself, in four lines ofdoggerel, respecting an old woman whohad given him some offence. In 1799,he was removed to London ; and, atthe suggestion of his guardian, the Earlof Carlisle, placed under the care ofDr. Baillie. who also attended him onhis subsequent removal to the school ofDr. Genuine, at Dulwich, where he appearsto have gained the esteem bothof his master and schoolfellows. Hisreading in history and poetry, says Dr.Grannie, was far beyond the usualstandard of his age ; and " he showedan intimate acquaintance with the historicalparts of the Holy Scriptures;" anassertion which serves to confirm thesubsequent declaration of Byron himself," that he was a great reader andadmirer of the Old Testament, and hadread it through and through before hewas eight years old." The progress hewas rapidly making under Dr. Granniewas, unfortunately, interrupted by thefoolish indulgence of his mother, whotook him home so frequently, and behavedwith so much violence whenremonstrated with on the subject, thatLord Carlisle determined upon removinghis ward to Harrow, whither he wassent in his fourteenth year.In 1800, he had, as he expresses himself,made " his first dash into poetry ;the ebullition," he adds, " of a passionfor my first cousin, Margaret Parker,one of the most beautiful of evanescentbeings." This was succeeded by hisAttachment for Miss Mary Chaworth,whom he used to meet during the Harrowvacations ; she was two years olderthan himself, and does not appear tohave given sufficient encouragement tohis addresses, to warrant his declarationthat she jilted him ;" especially as shewas, at the time of their first acquaintance,engaged to Mr. Musters, whomshe subsequently married. There is nodoubt, however, that his affection for thelady (who is now dead) was sincere, andthat the loss of her had an embitteringinfluence upon his future life. A person,who was present when Miss Chatsworth'smarriage was first announcedto him, has thus described the scenethat occurred : " Byron, I have somenews for you," said his mother. "Well,what is it ?" " Take out your handkerchieffirst, you will want it." " Nonsense!" " Take out your handkerchief,I say." He did so, to humour her.Miss Chaworth is married." An expressionvery peculiar, impossible todescribe, passed over his pale face, andhe hurried his handkerchief into hispocket; saying, with an affected air ofcoldness and nonchalance, "Is that all?"Why, I expected," said his mother,you" would have been plunged ingrief." He made no reply, and soonbegan to talk about something else.This took place in 1805, the year ofhis leaving Harrow, which he quittedwith the character of a plain-spoken,clever and undaunted, but idle, boy.His master, Dr. Drury, for whom healways entertained respect and affection,spoke of him as one who " might beled by a silken string to a point, ratherthan by a cable ;" and being asked hisopinion of his pupil, after some continuanceat Harrow, by Lord Carlisle,he replied, that " he had talents whichwould add lustre to his rank." Thoughgenerally, however, reputed to be tooindolent to excel in school, it seems thathe collected a vast fund of information,which was little suspected by those whosaw him only when idle, in mischief,or at play. " The truth is," he says,that 1 read, eating, read in bed, readwhen no one else read, and had readall sorts of reading since I was fiveyears old, though I never met with areview till I was in my nineteenthyear." He was not, at first, liked by hisschoolfellows ; but with some of themhe ultimately formed friendships, towhich he always reverted with a melancholydelight, broken, as most ofthem were, by his own waywardness,or the peculiar circumstances which attendedhis subsequent career. His intrepiditywas shown in several pugilisticcombats, many of which he undertookin the defence and protection of otherboys. One of his schoolfellows says,that he has seen him fight by the hourlike a Trojan, and stand up, againstthe disadvantages of his lameness, withLORD BYRON,all the spirit of an ancient combatant.On the same person's reminding him ofhis battle with Pitt, lie replied, " Youare mistaken, I think ; it must havebeen with Rice-pudding Morgan, orLord Jocelyn, or one of the Douglass,or George Raynsford, or Price (withwhom I had two conflicts), or withMoses Moore (the clod), or with somebodyelse, and not with Pitt ; for withallthe above-named, and other worthiesof the fist, had I an interchange ofblack eyes and bloody noses, at variousand sundry periods. However, it mayhave happened, for all that." He alsotold Captain Medwin, in allusion to twoof his actions at Harrow, that he foughtLord Carthorse for writing " D datheist " under his name ; and preventedthe school-room from beingburnt, during a rebellion, by pointingout to the boys the names of theirfathers and grandfathers on the walls.In 1805, he was entered of TrinityCollege, Cambridge, which he describesas "a new and heavy-hearted scene tohim ;" adding, it was one of the deadliestand heaviest feelings of his life, tofeel that he was no longer a boy. Hischief ambition seems to have been toattain the reputation of a rake and aspendthrift ; and his principal fear, lesthe should become too fat, to preventwhich, he took as much violent exerciseas his naturally delicate constitutionwould allow. Among other of hiseccentricities, for which he was moreremarkable than his profligacy, thoughhe seemed to take a pride in exaggeratingthe latter, it is said that he kepta bear, with the intention, as he observed,of training it up for a degree.The time not passed by him at the university,he at first spent with his mother,at Southwest, but her violent temper,which his own was not calculated toappease, soon led to their separation ;and he afterwards resided in London,Little Hampton, Harrowgate, and otherplaces of fashionable resort. At thisperiod, he is said to have been remarkablybashful, though he subsequentlyso far overcame his shyness, as to takea prominent part in some private theatricalsat Southwest. In November,1807, his Hours of Idleness was printedat Newark ; and, in the following year,appeared the memorable criticism uponthem in The Edinburgh Review, whichwas decidedly unjust, though few, perhaps,will agree with the subject of ourmemoir, that these poems were as goodas any he ever produced. The impressionwhich the criticism above-mentionedmade upon our poet, is described,by one who witnessed his fierce looksof defiance, during a first perusal of it,as fearful and sublime. Among theless sentimental effects of this reviewupon his mind, says Mr. Moore, heused to mention that, on the day heread it, he drank three bottles of claretto his own share after dinner ; thatnothing, however, relieved him till hehad given vent to his indignation inrhyme ; and that " after the fij st twentylines, he felt himself considerably better."During the progress of the satire,he passed his time alternately at New-stead,London, and Brighton, where hetook lessons in boxing, and appearedin public with a mistress who accompaniedhim, dressed in boy's clothes,and whom he introduced as his youngbrother.On coming of age, in 1809, he apprisedLord Carlisle of his wish to takehis seat in the house of peers ; and tothe formal reply of the earl, and hisrefusal to afford any information respectingthe marriage of our poet'sgrandfather, is owing the bitternesswith which he attacked the former inhis English Bards. He at length tookhis seat on the 13th of March, and wentdown to the house for that purpose,accompanied only by Mr. Dallas, whomhe had accidentally met. " He wasreceived," says that gentleman, " inone of the ante-chambers, by some ofthe officers in attendance, with whomhe settled respecting the fees he had topay : one of them went to apprise thelord-chancellor of his being there, andsoon returned for him. There werevery few persons in the house. LordEldon was going through some ordinarybusiness. When Lord Byron entered,I thought he looked still paler thanbefore ; and he certainly wore a countenancein which mortification wasmingled with, but subdued by, indignation,He passed the woolsack withoutlooking round, and advanced to thetable, where the proper officer was attendingto administer the oaths. Whenhe had gone through them, the chancellorquitted his seat, and went towardsLITERATURE.him with a senile, putting out his handwarmly to welcome hint ; and, thoughI did not catch his words, I saw thathe paid him some compliment. Thiswas all thrown away upon Lord Byron,who made a stiff bow, and put the tipsof his fingers into Lord Eldon's hand.The chancellor did not press a welcomeso received, but resumed his seat ; whileLord Byron carelessly seated himself,for a few minutes, on one of the emptybenches to the left of the throne, usuallyoccupied by the lords in opposition.When, on his joining me, I expressedwhat I had felt, he said, ' if I had shakenhands heartily, he would have set medown for one of his party ; but I willhave nothing to do with any of them,on either side: 1 have taken my seat,and now I will go abroad.' We returnedto St. James's Street, but he didnot recover his spirits." Another accountstates that he offended the chancellorby replying to him, when heapologized for requiring the evidence ofAdmiral Byron's marriage, as being apart of his duty : " Your lordship wasexactly like Tom Thumb; you didyour duty, and nothing more."Shortly after he had taken his seat,his satire was published anonymously,of which, though the success, at thetime, highly gratified him, he, someyears afterwards, wrote, " Nothing butthe consideration of its being the propertyof another, prevents me fromconsigning this miserable record ofmisplaced and indiscriminate anger tothe flames." Before a second editionwas published, he left England, accompaniedby Mr. Hothouse, under theinfluence "of those melancholy feelings,which he has described in the earlypart of the first canto of Chjlde Harold,in which poem a pretty accurate accountof his travels is given, during his twoyears' residence abroad. Almost everyevent he met with, he has made subservientto his muse, particularly theincident on which is founded his Giaour,and it was during this tour that heswam from Sestos to Abydos.In July, 181 1, he returned to England,and being visited by Mr. Dallas, putinto his hands a Paraphrase of Horace'sArt of Poetry, expressing a wish that itshould be printed under the latter'ssuperintendence ; but he mentionednothing of Childee Harold's Pilgrimage,until Mr. Dallas expressed his surprisethat he should have written so littleduring his absence. He then told hisfriend that " he had occasionally writtenshort poems, besides a great manystanzas in Spenser's measure, relativeto the countries he had visited ;" and,at the same time, handed them to Mr.Dallas, observing, that they were notworth troubling him with. This gentlemanhad no sooner perused thepoem, than he endeavoured to persuadethe author of its superiority, in everyrespect, to the Paraphrase of Horace ;but it was not until after much real oraffected reluctance, that he consentedto the publication of Childee Harold, inpreference to that of the former. Helead scarcely made up his mind on thesubject, before he was called to New-stead,by the illness of his mother, who,however, died a short time before hisarrival, on the 1st of August. He issaid to have been sincerely affected ather loss ; and, on being found sittingnear the corpse of his mother, by Mrs.Byron's waiting-woman, he, in answerto her remonstrance with him for sogiving way to grief, exclaimed, burstinginto tears, " I had but one friend in theworld, and she is gone!" His subsequentconduct, however, had an eccentricityabout it, which brought the sincerityof his grief into question : " Onthe morning of the funeral," says Mr.Moore, " having declined following theremains himself, he stood looking, fromthe abbey door, at the procession, tillthe whole had moved off; then turningto young Ashton, who was the onlyperson left besides himself, be desiredhim to fetch the sparring gloves, andproceeded to his usual exercise with theboy. He was silent and abstracted allthe time ; and, as if from an effort toget the better of his feelings, threw moreviolence, Ashton thought, in his blowsthan was his habit ; but, at last, thestruggle seeming too much for him,he flung away the gloves, and retiredto his room."A few months after the death of hismother, a correspondence took placebetween himself and Mr. Moore, theSet, of whose duel with Mr. Jeffrey,iron had given a ludicrous, butuntrue, account in his English Bards,After several letters of an explanatory,rather than hostile, nature, had passedLORD BYRON .on both sides, and in which each exhibiteda manly and forbearing spirit,they became mutual friends, and remainedso ever afterwards. On the 27thof February, 1812, Lord Byron madehis first speech in the house of lords, onthe subject of the Nottingham Frame-breakingBill, and appears to havepleased both himself and his hearers.I Mr. Dallas, who met him coining outof the house, says, that he was greatlyelated ; and, after repeating some of thecompliments which had been paid him,concluded by saying, " that he had, byhis speech, given the best advertisementfor Childee Harold's Pilgrimage,"which was two days afterwards published.The effect upon the public, ashis biographer observes, was electric;as he has himself said, in his memoranda," he awoke one morning, andfound himself famous." The first editionof his work was disposed of instantly; " Childee Harold," and " LordByron," were the theme of every tongue;the most eminent literati of the day,including many whom he had attackedin his satire, left their names at hisdoor ; upon his table lay the epistolarytribute of the statesman and philosopher,the billet of some incognita, orthe pressing note of some fair leader offashion; and, in fine, " he found himselfamong the illustrious crowds ofhigh life, the most distinguished object."'i he sum of 600 which he receivedfor the copyright of the poem, he presentedto Mr. Dallas ; observing, " hewould never receive money for hiswritings;" a resolution which be subsequentlyabandoned. Among other re-suits of the fame he had acquired byhis Childee Harold, was his introductionto the prince regent, which took placeat a ball, at. the request of his royalhighness, whose conversation so fascinatedthe poet, that had it not been,says Mr. Dallas, for an accidental deferringof the next levee, he bade fairto become a visitor at Carlton House, ifnot a complete courtier.In the spring of 1813, he published,anonymously, his poem on waltzing;and as it was not received with the applausehe anticipated, did not avowhimself to be its author. In the sameyear, appeared The Giaour, and TheBride of Abydos ; the former of whichreached a faith edition in four months.Mr. Murray offered him a thousandguineas for the copyright of the twopoems, but he still refused to derive anypecuniary benefit from his writings.In 1814, his Corsair was published;the copyright of which he presented toMr. Dallas. Fourteen thousand copiesof the poem were sold in one day ; butthe popularity which this and his otherworks had procured for him, began tobe lessened by his verses to the PrincessCharlotte, and by a certain peculiarityof conduct which was looked upon asmore indecorous than eccentric. Underthese circumstances, he was persuadedto marry, and, in consequence, proposedto Miss Milbanke, the daughterof Sir Ralph Milbanke; but was at firstmet with a polite refusal. He was,however, not so much mortified as notto make her a second offer, though hesays, in his memoranda, that a friendstrongly advised him against doing so ;observing, that " Miss Milbanke had,at present, no fortune, and that hisembarrassed affairs would not allowhim to marry without one ; that shewas, moreover, a learned lady, whichwould not at all suit him." He thenagreed that his friend should write aproposal for him to another lady, and arefusal being the consequence, he said,you see, after all, Miss Milbanke isto lee the person : I will write to her :"which he accordingly did, and was accepted.His marriage took place atSeaman, on the 2nd of January, 1815;a day to which he seems to have alwaysreverted with a shudder, and on whichhe, in reality, perhaps, experiencedthose emotions so touchingly describedin his beautiful poem of The Dream.Superstition had, no doubt, some influenceover his mind on the occasion ;for, in addition to the circumstanceshereafter related in his own words, hefancied, a short time previous to hismarriage, that he had seen, at New-stead,the ghost of the monk which wassupposed to haunt the abbey, and toappear when misfortune impended overthe master of the mansion, a legendwhich he has versified in the sixteenthcanto of Don Juan. His own memorandarelative to his union form an interestingprelude to its unhappy consequences."It had been predicted byMrs. Williams," says he, " that twenty-sevenwas to be the dangerous age forLITE RATURE.me. The fortune-telling witch wasright : it was destined to prove so. Ishall never forget the 2nd of January.Lady Byron was the only unconcernedperson present : Lady Noel, her mother,cried : I trembled like a leaf, made thewrong responses, and after the ceremonycalled her Miss Milbanke. Thereis a singular history attached to thering : the very day the match wasconcluded, a ring of my mother's,that had been lost, was dug up by thegardener at Newstead. I thought itwas sent on purpose for the wedding ;but my mother's marriage had notbeen a fortunate one, and this ring wasdoomed to be the seal of an unhappierunion still. After the ordeal was over,we set off for a country seat of SirRalph's ; and I was surprised at thearrangements for the journey, andsomewhat out of humour to find alady's maid stuck between me and mybride. Jt was rather too early to assumethe husband, so I was forced tosubmit ; but it was not with a very goodgrace. I have been accused of saying,on getting into the carriage, that I hadmarried Lady Byron out of spite, andbecause she had refused me twice.Though I was, for a moment, vexed atthe prophecy, or whatever you maychoose to call it, if I had made so un-cavalier,not to say brutal, a speech, Iam convinced Lady Byron would instantlyhave left the carriage to me andthe maid. She had spirit enough tohave done so, and would properly haveresented the insult. Our honeymoonwas not all sunshine ; it had its clouds ;and Hothouse has some letters whichwould serve to explain the rise and fallin the barometer ; but it was neverdown at zero."About ten months after his marriage,the birth of his daughter took place ;an event that was, in a few weeks,followed by a total separation of theparents. So many various reasons havebeen assigned for this step, by the friendsof either party, and so much more thanhas yet come to light, has been insinuatedby Lady Byron herself, that thereal cause of their continued disunionstill remains a mystery. Our poet hasavowed, both in his conversation andcorrespondence, that, during his residencewith his wife, he had nothing tocomplain of; and it was only when hefound her unwilling to resume her connexionwith him that he gave vent tothat bitterness of spirit with which healludes to her in some of his poems.Mr. Moore speaks with an evident biasin favour of the subject of his biography ;but, whatever inferences may be drawnfrom the sacrifice of the papers relatingto this affair, at the request of LadyByron's family, and the previous requestof the lady herself to her husband,that he would not publish them, on hissending them to her for perusal, whichshe declined, it is clear, from the factsthat have as yet been made public,that the conduct of Lord Byron wasat least as culpable, as that of his wifeappears, in the absence of further explanation,to have been extraordinary.Many excuses, however, are to be madefor the subject of our memoir, who wasmost unwarrantably calumniated on theoccasion, and publicly taxed with crimes,of which conjugal infidelity was not theleast, though, perhaps, at the time ofits imputation, the most unjustifiable.The ostensible cause of their separationwas the involvement of his lordship'saffairs, and his connexion with themanaging committee of Drury Lane,which led him into a course of life unsuitableto the domestic habits of LadyByron. " My income, at this period,"says his own account of the affair,was small, and somewhat bespoken.We had a house in town, gave dinnerparties, had separate carriages, andlaunched into every sort of extravagance.This could not last long. Mywife's 10,000 soon melted away. Iwas beset by duns, and, at length, anexecution was levied, and the bailiffsput in possession of the very beds wehad to sleep on. This was no veryagreeable state of affairs, no very pleasantscene for Lady Byron to witness;and it was agreed she should pay herfather a visit till the storm had blownover, and some arrangements had beenmade with my creditors."The lady, however, expressed herdetermination never to return to him,in a letter which had been preceded byone, beginning, as he ludicrously says,dear duck !" "You ask me," he says inacommunication to Captain Medwin,if no cause was assigned for this suddenresolution ? if I formed no conjectureabout the cause ? I will tell you : ILORD BYRON.-147have prejudices about women ; I donot like to see them eat. Rousseaumakes Julie un peu gourmande ; butthat is not at all according to my taste.I do not like to be interrupted when Iam writing. Lady Byron did not attendto these whims of mine. The onlyharsh thing I ever remember saying toher was, one evening, shortly before ourparting. I was standing before the fire,ruminating upon the embarrassmentof my affairs, and other annoyances,when Lady Byron came up to me,and said, ' Byron, am I in your way ?'to which I replied, ' D - ably ! I wasafterwards sorry, and reproached myselffor the expression ; but it escapedme unconsciously, involuntarily: Ihardly knew what I said."His lordship's next poems were, Laura,The Siege of Corinth, and Arising ; thetwo last of which appeared february,1816 ; and, in the following April, heagain left England, having previouslypublished The Sketch, and his celebratedFare thee well. He set out upon histravels in no very dejected state ofmind, which may be accounted for br byan observation in one of his letters, thatagitation or contest of any kind gavea rebound to his spirits, and set him upfor the time." After reaching France.he crossed the field of Waterloo, andproceeded, by the Rhine, to Switzerland,where he became acquainted withShelley ; and, whilst at Geneva, beganthe composition of a poem founded onhis recent separation ; but, hearing thathis wife was ill, he threw the manuscriptinto the fire. From Switzerland heproceeded to Italy, where he residedprincipally at Venice, and transmittedthence to London his third and fourthcantos of Childee Harold, the Prisoner ofChillon, and other poems, Manfred, andThe Lament of Tasso. He also wrote,in that city, his Ode to Venice, andBeppo, which he is said to have finishedat a sitting. His mode of living is accuratelydescribed in his own lettersfrom Italy, which show him to have beenequally candid and shameless in theconfession of his amours. The first connexionhe formed was with the wife of alinen-draper, in whose house he lodged ;and highly censurable, says Mr. Moore,as was his course of life, while underthe roof of this woman, " it was venial,in comparison with the strange, headlongcareer of license, to which hesubsequently so unrestrainedly and defyinglyabandoned himself." It will beunnecessary, after this admission fromhis most partial biographer, to say morethan, that, after a gross and degradingcourse of libertinism, his desires werecontracted into a passion for the CountessGuicdoli ; with whom he first becameacquainted in the April of 1819,and, in a few months, he became heracknowledged paramour. In the sameyear he was visited, at Venice, by Mr.Moore, to whom he made a present ofthe memoirs, which have been beforealluded to. He brought them in, saysMr. Moore, one day, in a white leatherbag, and holding it up, said, "lookhere ; this would be worth somethingto Murray, though you, I dare say,would not give sixpence for it." "Whatis it?" "My life and adventures: itis not a thing that can be publishedduring my life-time, but you mayhave it, it you like, there, do whateveryou please with it." In giving the bag,continues Mr. Moore, he added, " youmay show it to any of our friends youthink worthy of it."The Countess Guiccioli having goneback to Ravenna, at her husband's desire,Lord Byron was about to returnto England, when a letter from hisinamorata changed his mind, and heresumed his connexion with her, on herseparation from her husband, whichtook place, on an understanding thatshe should in future reside with herfather, Count Gamba. She accordingly,in July, 1820, removed from Ravennato the count's villa, a distance of aboutfifteen miles from the city, where ourpoet now took up his abode, visitingMadam Guiccioli once or twice in amonth. After he had been about atwelvemonth at Ravenna, the state ofthe country began to render it unsafefor him to remain there any longer;and the Gambas (the father and brotherof the Countess Guiccioli) havingbeen exiled, he was induced to removewith them to Pisa, in the autumn of1821. It appears, that he was himselfsuspected of having secretly joined theCarbonari ; but, though such was thefact, and he had received warnings todiscontinue his forest rides, he, as heobserves, " was rot to be bullied," anddid not quit Ravenna till he had shownLITERATURE.the authorities he was not afraid ofremaining. His poetical productions,within the three last years, were, ,his tragedies of Marino Falter,the Two Oscar, and Sardanapalus,The Prophecy of Dante, Cain, and severalcantos of* Don Juan, the sixteenthcanto of which he completed at Pisa.At this place he also wrote Werner,The Deformed Transformed, Heavenand Earth, and the celebrated Vision ofJudgment; the two last of which appearedin The Liberal, the joint productionof himself, Mr. Shelley, andMr. Leigh Hunt, who had joined hislordship at Pisa. Of this periodical it isunnecessary to say more, in this place,than that it failed after the fourth number,and gave rise to a prosecutionagainst the publisher, on account of TheVision of Judgment.An affray with some soldiers of Pisa,who, for some reason or other, hadattempted to arrest our poet, and someother Englishmen, induced him to remove,with the Gambas, to Leghorn,and, subsequently, to Geneva, where hetook up his residence, in September,1822. The fervour of his attachmenthad now, probably, declined towardsthe Countess Guiccioli ; and, anxiousfor more stirring scenes than those inwhich he had hitherto mixed, he engagedin a correspondence with theleaders of the insurrection in Greece,which ended in his departure for thatcountry, in the summer of 1823. Hehas been censured by some for quittingItaly without having made a provisionfor his mistress, but it seems that shehad refused to accept of any : uponwhat terms they parted is doubtful ; ior,according to Mr. Gait, a friend of hiswas told, by the lady herself, " thatshe had not come to hate Lord Byron,but she feared more than loved him."Her brother, however, Count Gamba,accompanied his lordship to Cephalonia,where he equipped forty Suites toassist in the defence of Missoionghi,and undertook to provide a loan of12,000 for the equipment of a fleetagainst the Turks.In the beginning of January, 1824,he entered Missoionghi, where the inhabitants,who hailed his corning as thatof a Messiah, received him with enthusiasticdemonstrations of respect andapplause. He began by attempting toinduce the Greeks to a more civilizedsystem of warfare than had been, latelycarried on ; and, with this view, he notonly personally rescued a Turk fromsome Greek sailors, on the very dayof his landing, but released severalprisoners in the town, and sent themback to Prevent, in the hope that itwould beget a similar mode of treatmenttowards the captives in the handsof the Turks. He then formed a brigadeof Suites, five hundred of whom hetook into his pay; and 'burning,"says Colonel Stanhope, ." with militaryardour and chivalry, prepared to leadthem to Lepanto." The insubordination,however, among the troops, and thedifferences that hourly arose amid thehalf-famished and ill-accoutred garrison,rendered this step impracticable,and threw him into a state of feverishirritation, that destroyed his self-possessionat a time when it was most necessaryto the cause he was struggling toserve. An attack of epilepsy was theconsequence of this state of mind, andon his recovery, he was strongly urgedto remove, tor a while, from the marshyand deleterious air of Missoionghi. Thishe indignantly refused to do ; "I willremain here," he said, to CaptainParry, " until Greece is secure againstthe Turks, or till she has fallen undertheir power. All my income shall bespent in her service ; but, unless drivenby some great necessity, 1 will nottouch a farthing of the sum intendedfor my sister's children. When Greeceis secure against external enemies, Iwill leave the Greeks to settle their governmentas they like. One servicemore, and an eminent service it will be,I think I may perform for them. You,Parry, shall "have a schooner built forme,or I will buy a vessel ; the Greeksshall invest me "with the character oftheir ambassador, or agent : 1 will gotothe United States, and procure thatfree and enlightened government toset the example of recognizing the federationof Greece as an independentstate. This done, England must followthe example, and Greece will thenenter into all her rights as a member ofthe great commonwealth of ChristianEurope."This was the last ebullition of a mindwhich was now tottering to its filial decadence,though it occasionally brokeLORD BYRON.out in those meteor-like flashes, whichhad belonged to its early vigour. Onthe 12th of April, a fever, of whosepremonitory symptoms he had not beensufficiently heedful, confined him to hisbed, and his physician, Dr. Bruno, proposedbleeding 'him, as the only meansof saving his life. This, however, herepeatedly refused ; declaring, that hehad only a common cold, and that hewould not permit the doctor to bleedhim for the mere purpose of getting thereputation of curing his disease. Atlength, on the 14th, after some controversyamong the physicians, whonow all saw the necessity of bleeding,he consented to the operation ; and alsoon the 16th, saying, as he stretchedout his arm, " I fear they know nothingabout my disorder; but, here, takemy arm, and do whatever you like."On the 17th, his countenance changed;and he became slightly delirious ; hecomplained that the want of sleepwould drive him mad ; " and." he exclaimedto his valet, Fletcher, " Iwould ten times sooner shoot myselfthan be mad ; for I am not afraid ofdying I am more fit to die than peopleimagine." It was not, however, till the18th, that he began to think himself indanger, when he called Fletcher to hisbed-side, and bid him receive his lastinstructions. " Shall I fetch pen, ink,and paper?" said the valet, as he approached: " Oh, my God ! no ;" wasnis reply ; " you will lose too muchtime, and I have it not to spare." Hethen exclaimed, " Oh ! my poor dearchild ! my dear Ada could I havebut seen her give her my blessing."And, after muttering something unintelligible,he suddenly raised his voice,and said, " Fletcher, now, if you donot execute every order which 1 havegiven you, I will torment you hereafter,if possible." The valet replying thathe had not understood one word of whathis lordship had been saying, " Oh,my God!" he exclaimed, " then all islost, for it is nov too late, and all isover : yet, as you say, God's will, notmine, be done but, I will try to mywife ! my child ! my sister! you knowall you must say all you know mywishes." Here his words became unintelligible.Stimulants were now, indirectopposition to the opinion of Dr.Bruno, administered to him, after takingwhich, he said, " I must sleep now,"and never spoke again. For twenty-fourhours he lay in a state of lethargy,with the rattles occasionally in histhroat; and at six o'clock in the eveningof the 19th, an , exclamation ofFletcher, who saw him open and thenshut his eyes, without moving hand orfoot, announced that his master was nomore.The death of Lord Byron created amournful sensation in all parts of thecivilized world : his failings were forgottenin his recent struggles for thedelivery of Greece, and one universalsound of admiration and regret wasechoed throughout Europe. The authoritiesof Missolonghi paid every tokenof respect to his memory that reverencecould suggest, and before his remainswere deposited in their final resting-place,some of the most celebrated menof the present century had, in glowingterms, expressed their sense of hismerits. His body, after having beenbrought to England, and refused intermentin Westminster Abbey andSt. Paul's, was conveyed to HucknellChurch, near Newstead, in conformityto a wish of the poet, that his dustmight be mingled with his mother's.As the procession passed through thestreets of London, a sailor was observedwalking, uncovered, near the hearse,and, on being asked what he was doingthere, replied, that he had servedLord Byron in the Levant, and hadcome to pay his last respects to hisremains ; " a simple but emphatic testimony,"observes Mr. Gait, " to thesincerity of that regard which his lordshipoften inspired, and which, withmore steadiness, he might always havecommanded''The character of Lord Byron has, oflate years, been so frequently andelaborately discussed, that a lengtheneddissertation upon it in this place wouldbe equally tedious and superfluous. Itsbest development is furnished by hismemoirs, and, having read these, wemay, without fear of controversy, cometo the conclusion, that in regard to hisrelation to society he was neither agreat nor a good man. Had he beendesirous of becoming so, it was not impossiblefor him to have succeeded ;the path of rectitude was not a greatermystery to him than to other men ; andLiteral U RE.the metaphysical subtlety that has beenemployed to prove him the possessor ofhigh and virtuous principles, only showshow far he has diverged from the trackto which his panegyrists would wish torestore him. It has been said, that hewas not driven to profligacy by inclination,but was goaded into it by theworld's attributing to him vices of whichhe was not guilty, but which he in consequence,out of scorn and defiance,chose to commit. " 1 took," he himselfsays, " my gradation in the vices withgreat promptitude, but they were notto my taste ; I could not be a libertinewithout disgust ; and yet this very disgust,and my heart thrown back uponitself, threw me into excesses, perhaps,more fatal than those from which Ishrunk." This is a metaphysical apology,calculated, perhaps, to mystify thejudgment, and cajole the sympathies,of a portion of mankind towards himby whom it is put forth ; but, surely, itis nothing more than the recklessavowal of a perverted and a depravedmind, too indolent, too weak, or tooproud, to adopt any other mode ofblunting the sting of one vice, than byplunging into another still more odious.We confess we are not among thosewho see, in the circumstances of hislordship's life, sufficient reason for thatwaywardness of mind and conductorwhich his poetical and neural characterform so singular a combination ; andfrom which, after all, he only averts ourcontempt, by investing it with an aspectthat disdains our pity. Lord Byron isnot the only sensitive young man whohas entered upon life with blightedhopes, but it is doubtful whether theremembrance of them would be acceptedas an apology for a similar career to thatof his lordship, even though the suffererpossessed not the faculty of venting hisanguish in verse, the opportunity ofdrowning it in dissipation, or the meansand leisure of softening it by traveland amusementThe subject of our memoir, however,was not without redeeming qualities :he was brave, generous, and benevolent; but he was also passionate, disingenuous,and resentful ; and moreready to inflict a wound, than to submitto one himself. He was sensitive to apainful degree, both in his sentiments,and his feelings ; but, though he writhedunder an attack upon either, his pridehindered him from showing what hesuffered, even when such emotions proceededfrom impulses the most honourableto human nature. He certainlytook pleasure in showing the dark sideof his character to the world; for thosewho were admitted to an unreservedintimacy with him, give indubitabletestimony of his possessing, in a veryeminent degree, all the social and companionablequalities, a heart exquisitelyalive to the kindness of others towardshimself, and a hand unhesitatinglyprompt in complying with the supplicationsof distress. There is, indeed,no reason to doubt his own allegation,(for falsehood was not one of his characteristics)when he says, " If salvationis to be bought by charity, I have givenmore to my fellow-creatures in this life,than I now possess. I never in my lifegave a mistress so much as I have sometimesgiven a poor honest man in distress."Captain Medwin describes himas the best of masters, and as beingperfectly adored by his servants, towhose families and children he alsoextended an affectionate kindness. Hishabits, in the latter part of his life, wereregular and temperate, even to asceticabstinence ; he seldom eat meat ordrank wine, living chiefly upon biscuits,coffee, eggs, fish, vegetables, and sodawater, of which he has been known todrink fifteen bottles in a night. Riding,swimming, and pistol-shooting, were hisfavourite amusements ; and one of threethings which he used to pride himselfupon, was his ability to snuff out acandle with a bullet, at twenty yardsdistance ; the other two were, his featof swimming across the Hellespont, andbeing the author of a poem (The Corsair),of which fourteen thousand copieswere sold in one day. He had a greatpartiality for children ; and, besides theaffection he always manifested for hischild, Ada, he is" said to have felt severelythe loss of a natural daughter,born in 1817, and who died at fiveyears of age. Prejudice, affectation,and vanity, displayed themselves inmany parts of his conduct; he wouldtalk of avoiding Shakspeare, lest heshould be thought to oue him anything; and delighted in the addition ofNoel to his name, because, as he said,Buonaparte and he were the onlyLORD BYRON.public persons whose initials were thesame; peculiarities which induced Mr.Hazlitt to call him "a sublime coxcomb."His pride of birth we have before alludedto : it would, probably, have been somewhatdiminished, had he been aware ofthe singular fact of a baton sinister beingin the escutcheon of his family. Thoughhe professed to despise the opinion ofthe world, no man was a greater slaveto it, in some respects, than himself.Speaking of duelling, he would say,we must act according to usages; anyman will, and must, fight, when necessaryeven without a motive." He washimself concerned in many duels, assecond, but only in two as principal :one was with Mr. Hothouse, before hebecame intimate with him. Of his person,he was particularly vain, and it wascertainly of a superior order ; he wasabout five feet eight and a half inchesin height, with a high forehead, adornedwith fine, curling, chestnut hair ; teeth,says an Italian authoress, which resembledpearls ; hands as beautiful asif they had been the works of art ; eyesof the azure colour of the heavens ;cheeks delicately tinged with the hueof the pale rose ; and withal, a countenance,in which the expression of anextraordinary mind was fascinatinglyconspicuous.The religious sentiments of LordByron appear to have been much misrepresented: " I am no bigot to infidelity,"he says, in one of his letters,and did not expect that, because Idoubted the immortality of man, Ishould be charged with denying theexistence of a God." Mr. Moore havingsuspected that Mr. Shelley swayed hislordship's opinions, the latter writes,pray, assure Mr. Moore that I havenot the smallest influence over LordByron in this particular; if I had, Icertainly should employ it to eradicatefrom his great mind the delusions ofChristianity, which, in spite of his reason,seem perpetually to recur, and tolay in ambush for the hours of sicknessand distress." It is doubtful, however,though he educated his naturaldaughter in the catholic faith, and himselfobserved some of its ceremonies,whether he was a believer in the tenetsof Christianity. He perceived andneeded the consolation to be derivedfrom a sincere adoption of its creed,but his intellectual pride would notsuffer him to prostrate his reason at thehumiliating shrine of faith.The following anecdotes are interesting,and, upon the whole, favourableillustrations of the paradoxical characterof Lord Byron : A young lady oftalent being reduced to great hardshipson account of her family, came to theresolution of calling on Lord Byron, athis apartments in the Albany, for thepurpose of soliciting his subscription toa volume of poems. Having no knowledgeof him, except from his works,she entered his room with diffidence,but soon found courage to state herrequest, which she did with simplicityand delicacy. He listened with attention,and, when she had done speaking,began to converse with her in so gentleand fascinating a manner, that shehardly perceived he had been writing,until he put a slip of paper into herhand, saying it was his subscription ;but," added he, " we are both young,and the world is very censorious ; andso, if I were to take any active part inprocuring subscribers to your poems, Ifear it would do you harm rather thangood." The young lady, on looking atthe paper, found it a check for 50.During his residence at Venice, thehouse of a shoemaker, who had a largefamily, being destroyed by fire, LordByron ordered a new habitation to bebuilt at his own expense, and presentedthe tradesman with a sum equal invalue to the whole of his loss. Whilstat Metaxata, in the island of Cephalonia,hearing of several persons having beenburied under an embankment whichhad fallen in, he immediately hastenedto the spot, accompanied by his physician.After some of their companionshad been extricated, the labourers becomingalarmed for themselves, refusedto dig further, when Byron himselfseized a spade, and, by his exertions,assisted by the peasantry, succeeded insaving two more persons from certaindeath. One of his household havingsubjected him to much perplexity byhis amorous propensities, he hit uponthe following means for curing them :A young Suite of the guard beingdressed up like a woman, was instructedto attract the notice of-the gay Lothario,who, taking the bait, was conducted bythe supposed female to one of LordLITERATURE,Byron's apartments, where he was almostterrified out of his senses by thesudden appearance of an enraged husband,provided for the occasion. Thefollowing anecdote shows how jealoushe was ot'his title: an Italian apothecaryhaving sent him, one day, a packetof medicines addressed to" MonsieurByron, he indignantly sent the physicback to learn better manners. Hiscoat of arms was, according to LeighHunt, suspended over the foot of hisbed ; and even when a schoolboy atDulwich, so little disguised were hishigh notions of rank, that his companionsused to call him the Old EnglishBaron. When residing at Mity-line, he portioned eight young girlsvery liberally, and even danced withthem at their marriage feast ; he gave acow to one man, horses to another, andsilk to several girls who lived byweaving. He also bought a new boatfor a fisherman who had lost his ownin a gale; and he often gave GreekTestaments to the poor children. AtRavenna, he was so beloved by thepoor people, that his influence overthem was dreaded by the government ;and, indeed, wherever he resided, hisgenerosity and benevolence appear tohave been eminently conspicuous.Of the merits so universally acknowledgedof Lord Byron, as a poet, littleneed be said; in originality of con-depthand vigour ofboldness of imagination, and power ofcaption, depth and vigour of thought,boldness of imagination, and power ofexpression, he is unrivalled. His mostsublime performances are Manfred,Childee Harold, Heaven and Earth, andCain ; the first of these pieces has beenhighly commended by Goethe, whopronounces some parts of it superior tosome of the productions of Shakspeare.His great and favourite art lies in hisportraiture of the human character,thrown back upon itself by satiety,conscious of its own wreck, yet disdainingpenitence for the vices it acknowledges,unable to find relief in itself,and scorning to derive consolationfrom others. In this respect, he surpassesMilton, who has only depictedthe horrors of remorse ; a far less difficulttask. Satan has an end in view, towhich he is driven by despair and hate :Manfred has none, yet, in the sternapathy of his soul, he appears to usmore terribly sublime even than Luciferhimself. Don Juan is Lord Byron'smost remarkable production ; it containssome of his finest and most commonplacepassages, and shows a commandof language and versatility of style thathave never been equalled. The tendency,however, of this, and some otherof his poems, cannot be too explicitlycondemned. Sensuality, in Don Juan,has one of its most powerful and accomplishedadvocates ; the sting by whichit is followed he calls the misfortuneof nature, instead of the consequence ofvice ; and, thus, instead of exalting ournotions of virtue, makes us regard theexercise of it as a melancholy and irksomeduty.PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY.PERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY, theeldest son of Sir Timothy Shelley,Baronet, of Castle Goring, Sussex,was bi>rn in that county, on the 4th ofAugust, 1792. At the age of thirteenhe was sent to Eton, where he was distinguishedfrom his schoolfellows by amelancholy and reserved disposition,and an abstinence from every amusementnatural to youth. He soon beganto developed a rigid unconventionaltenacity of character, in relation towhat he deemed the reason and justice01 things, and he was in consequence,at an earlier period than usual, removedto the University of Oxford. Here hispenetrating and inquisitive mind displayedmore fully that pertinacious butconscientious eccentricity, which forbadehis assent to the most commontruths without investigation ; and, inconsequenceof publishing a pamphlet,in which he attacked the ordinarilyreceived notions of the being of God, hewas expelled the university, on hisrefusal to retract his opinions. This stepdrew upon him the displeasure of hisfamily, whose total discountenance ofPERCY BYSSHE SHELLEY.him soon after followed, on his marriage,at the age of about seventeen oreighteen, with a lady equally young.The union ended in misery to both ;after the birth of two children theyseparated by mutual consent, and Mrs.Shelley subsequently destroying herself,the subject of our memoir was lookedupon as her murderer, and spoken ofwith proportionate obloquy.A perusal of Mr. Godwin's PoliticalJustice, had first induced Shelley toadopt the systematic rule of conduct, bywhich he subsequently squared all hisactions, at the sacrifice of every worldlyinterest. His conduct was, in consequence,equally noble and extraordinary;and though, it is said, " he hadonly to become a yea and nay man inthe house of commons, to be one of therichest men in Sussex," he declined itto live upon a comparative pittance.After a visit to Italy, where he formeda friendship with Lord Byron, andcomposed his Rosalind and Helen, andOde to the Euganean Hills, he returnedto England, and married the daughterof Mr. Godwin, with whom he residedfor some time at Great Marlow, inBuckinghamshire. Here he was remarkablefor his unostentatious charity ;and he not only administered pecuniaryrelief to the poor, but visited them whensick in their beds, having previouslygone the round of the hospitals, onpurpose to be able to practise onoccasion. At Marlow, he composed theRevolt of Islam, his introduction towhich, addressed to his wife, is, perhaps,one of the most beautiful and touchingpieces of poetry ever composed. Aboutthis time he was deprived of theguardianship of his two children, inconsequenceof his alleged sceptical notions,and of certain peculiar opinionsrespecting the intercourse of the sexes.After his separation from them, whichdeeply affected him, and increased hisdisgust towards the institutions of hiscountry, he returned, with his familyby his second wife, to Italy, where hejoined Lord Byron and Leigh Hunt inaperiodical, called The Liberal. InJune, 1822, he visited the former, atPisa, and, on the 7th of July, set off, inaboat, on his return to his own family,at Clerici, in the bay of Spezzia, when atremendous storm came on, and, in aweek afterwards, the body of Shelley,with those of Mr. Williams, and a seaman,his only companions, were washedon shore near Via Reggio. Theirremains, after having been interred bythe Italian authorities, were, at therequest of their respective friends, dugup, and reduced to ashes, when thoseof Shelley were deposited in the protestantburial ground at Rome, near thegrave of Keats.In person, Mr. Shelley was tall andslight, of a consumptive constitution, andsubject to spasmodic pains, the violenceof which would sometimes force him tolie on the ground till they were over.The marks of premature "thought and;trouble were more visible in his framethan his countenance, which, says thewriter, from whom we have "beforequoted, " had a certain seraphiccharacter, that would have suited aportrait of John the Baptist, or theangel, whom Milton describes as 'holdinga reed tipped with fire.' " He hada small, but well-shaped, face, with afair and delicate complexion, cheeksnot devoid of colour, and large animatedeyes, that had almost an appearance ofwildness. His voice was weak andshrill, and had a peculiar effect on thosewho heard it for the first time. Hepassed a solitary and temperate life;rising early in the morning, and retiringto bed at ten o'clock, having, inthe meantime, written, studied, andread to his wife, and taken sparingly ofhis meals, which consisted, at dinner,of vegetables, as he partook neither ofmeat nor wine.Of the tendency of Mr. Shelley'sspeculative opinions we cannot approve;but it is time that the character of sucha man, as the facts we are about to relate,shew him to have been, should berescued from obloquy. His purse, thoughhe possessed but a very limited income,was at the service of all who needed it ;it was not uncommon with him, says ourprevious authority, to give away all hisready money, and be compelled to takea journey on foot, or on the top of astage, no matter during what weather.He allowed to a literary acquaintancea pension of 100 per annum ; but, saysMr. Leigh Hunt, the princeliness of hisdisposition was seen most in his behaviourto myself, who am proud torelate, that Mr. Shelley once made meapresent of 1,400 to extricate me fromLITERATURE.debt, and his last sixpence was ever atmy service, had I chosen to share it.The following anecdote is told by thesame gentleman, in his account of LordByron, and some of his contemporaries ;Shelley, at the time, being on a visit tohis house at Hampstead. " As I approachedmy door," says Mr. Hunt,I heard strange and alarming shrieks,mixed with the voice of a man. Thenext day it was reported, by the gossips,that Mr. Shelley, no Christian, (for itwas he, who was there) had broughtsome very strange female into the house,no better of course than she ought to be.The real Christian had puzzled them:Mr. Shelley, in coming to our housethat night, had found a woman, lyingnear the top of the hill, in fits. It wasa fierce winter night, with snow upon theground, and winter loses nothing of itsfierceness at Hampstead. My friend,always the promptest, as well as mostpitying, on these occasions, knocked atthe first houses he could reach, in orderto have her taken in, but the invariableanswer was that they could not do it.At last, my friend sees a carriage drivingup to a house at a little distance. Theknock is given ; the warm door opens ;servants and lights pour forth. Now,thought he, is the time. He puts onhis best address, which anybody mightrecognize for that of the highest gentleman,as well as an interesting individual,and plants himself in the wayof an elderly person, who is steppingout of the carriage, with his family.He tells his story ; and asks him if hewill go and see the poor woman ? ' No,sir ; there's no necessity for that sort ofthing, depend on it : impostors swarmevery where, the thing cannot be done.Sir, your conduct is extraordinary.'Sir,' cried Mr. Shelley, at last, assuminga very different appearance, and forcingthe flourishing householder to stop, outof astonishment, ' I am sorry to say,that your conduct is not extraordinary ;and, if my own seems to amaze you, Iwill tell you something that may amazeyou a little more, and, I hope, willfrighten. It is such men as maddenthe spirits and the patience of the poorand wretched ; and, if ever a convulsioncomes in this country, which is veryprobable, recollect what I tell you ; youwill have your house, that you refuse toput the miserable woman into, burntover your head.' 'God bless me, sir!dear me, sir !' exclaimed the frightenedwretch, and fluttered into his mansion.The woman was then brought to ourhouse, which was at some distance, anddown a bleak path: the next day myfriend sent her comfortably home;" and,adds Mr. Hunt, this was one of themost ordinary of Shelley's actions.As a poet, we think Shelley has neverbeen surpassed ; and we could point outmany of his passages which are withouttheir equal, even if we look for theirparallel in the works of Shakspeare,Byron, and Milton. But the wildspeculative sublimity of his thoughts,the refined intellectuality of his ideas,and the mysterious intertexture ofsentiment with feeling, which are thecharacteristics of his poetry, will alwayshinder him front becoming popular. Yet,with all this, there is a simplicity abouthis writings, as remarkable, it has beenobserved, as its views and speculationsare remote and peculiar. A very justnotion of his style has been taken bythe biographer to whom we have beforealluded, who observes, that in allShelley's works there is a wonderfullysustained sensibility, and a languagelofty and fit for it. " He has the art,"continues the same authority, "of usingthe stateliest words and the most learnedidioms without incurring the charge ofpedantry, so that passages of moresplendid and sonorous writing are notto be selected from any writer since thedays of Milton ; and yet, when hedescends from his ideal worlds, andcomes home to us in our humble bowers,and in yearning after love and affection,he attunes the most natural feelings toa style so proportionate, and withal toa modulation so truly musical, that thereis nothing to surpass it in the lyrics ofBeaumont and Fletcher." In additionto the works before mentioned, Shelleyis the author of Queen Mab, Plaster,Prometheus Unbound, the tragedy ofThe Cenci, and a volume of posthumouspoems.Appendix.VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.ROGERS,(WooDEs,) was born aboutthe year 1670 ; and, in 1708, at whichtime he was an officer in the navy, wasintrusted, by a body of Bristol merchants,with the command of two vessels,the Duke archduchess of Bristol, ona cruising expedition round the world.He set sail on the 1st of August, havingthe celebrated Dampier as his pilot. InJanuary, 1709, after having passed thestraits of Magellan, he experienced atremendous storm, of which he gives avery vivid account. " We have nonight here," he observes, on the 10th ofJanuary, his situation being, at thattime, lat. 61 deg. 53 min., long. W.from London, 79 deg. 58 min. ; beyondwhich he was unable to penetrate ; but,he continues, " for aught we know, wehave run the farthest that any onehas yet been to southward." On the1st of February, he made for theisland of Juan Fernandez ; and on thefollowing day, having sent some of hismen on shore, " our boat," he says,returned, bringing abundance of era w-fish, with a man, clothed in goat-skins,who looked wilder than the first ownersof them'' This was no other thanthe celebrated Alexander Selkirk, theoriginal of De Foe's romance of RobinsonCrusoe. " He had been on theisland," says Captain Rogers, "fouryears and four months ; being leftthere by Captain Stradling, in theCinque Ports, a ship that came herelast with Captain Dampier, who toldme that this man was the best inher ; so I immediately agreed with himto be a mate on board our ship." Afterexamining the island of Juan Fernandez,our voyager steered for thecoast of Peru, where he captured andplundered the town of Guayaquil. He hadpreviously taken several rich Spanishprizes, and was in full chase of a galleonof Manilla, when the bad state of hisvessel compelled him to put into PortSegura, on California. In January,1710, he again set sail, and, after touchingat Guam, Batavia, and the Cape ofGood Hope, proceeded to England,where he arrived, in October, 1711. In1717, he was appointed governor ofProvidence Island, in the Bahamas,where he exterminated the piratesinfesting those parts, and fitted outseveral ships for carrying on a tradewith the Spaniards in the gulf of Mexico.His death took place in 1732. The firstaccount of his voyage appeared, writtenby himself, in 1712 ; and a French editionwas published, at Amsterdam, in1716. Although containing no newdiscovery, it is a most useful and instructivework, especially for the informationit conveys respecting the Spanishand Portuguese colonies, much of whichwas gained by the author, from thepapers found in the various prizes whichhe had captured. It is also well worthyof perusal, if only for the interestingaccount contained in it of AlexanderSelkirk, and of the island of Juan Fernandez.DRURY, (ROBERT,) was, accordingto his own account, born in CrutchedFriars, in London, on the 24th of July,1687. At the age of fourteen, he wentout to the East Indies, and was on hisway home, in 1702, in the Degrade,when the vessel struck upon a bank, onthe south side of the island of Madagascar.The crew got to shore upon araft, and were soon afterwards required,by one of the native kings, to assist himin a warlike expedition, which theyagreed to do, but not until they hadseized upon the king and his son, as hostagesfor their own safety. Incautiously,however, afterwards delivering them up,the whole crew, after having expendedall their ammunition, were surroundedand seized, and butchered, one afteranother, before the face of Drury, whowas the only one, besides two others,that escaped the horrible massacre. Onthis island, the subject of our memoirremained in slavery for fifteen years,APPENDIX.during which time he was employedin a variety of the most degrading occupations.The result of a hostile feud,in which he was compelled to take part,put him in possession of a young girlwhom he married, and became muchattached to. His affection for her, however,was not strong enough to preventtheir separation ; and, on her refusalto join him in his attempt to escape tohis own country, he set out alone, and,falling in with another Englishman,they contrived to leave the island together.Drury returned to his nativecountry in 1717, with his complexionso altered by the sun, that his friendscould scarcely recognise him ; andspeaking a language as unintelligibleto others, as his own now appeared tohimself. Having been left a small inheritanceby his father, he made anothervoyage to Madagascar, and finallyreturned to England in 1720, when heobtained the situation of porter at theIndia House, and wrote an account ofhis captivity, which was published in1729. Nothing can be more interestingthan the events related in this account,which, from their extraordinary nature,do not always appear, and have, bysome, been denied, to be credible. Thereis, however, such an air of truth aboutthe whole, joined to the subsequentconfirmation of many of the events, byAdmiral Benbow's son, one of the companionsof Drury's shipwreck, that ifsnarrative may be read without suspicion,and is now generally admitted tobe in accordance with truth. The timeof his death is not known.MIDDLETON, (CHRISTOPHER,)was one of those adventurous navigatorswho attempted to find a north-westpassage. He sailed from England inMay, 1741 ; and, after having passedthe winter at the entrance of ChurchillRiver, in Hudson's Bay, he proceededto Wager River, and penetrated towardsthe west as far as 88 degrees. Hethen steered to the north-west, andreached a bay, which he called RepulseBay, in consequence of being prevented,by the land and ice, from making furtherprogress. On the 9th of August,he sailed back to England, when aviolent .controversy took place betweenhim and Mr. Dobbs, a gentleman offortune, at whose instance, the subjectof our memoir had undertaken theexpedition. Middleton having declaredthat an opening out of Wager Riverwas, in reality, nothing more than ariver, an anonymous writer informedDobbs that it was, in fact, a strait ; andthat Middleton, if he had chosen, mighthave effected a passage through it.Public opinion was rather against ourvoyager on the point, and the Admiralty,in hopes of determining the question,offered a reward of 20,000 towhomsoever should discover the existenceof such a passage. A societywas soon formed, by Dobbs, for fittingout a new expedition, which wasintrusted to the command of CaptainMoor. The result proving that WagerRiver was not a strait, completely establishedthe reputation of Middleton, whowas, in consequence, presented with amedal, and elected a member of theRoyal Society. Middleton and Moordiffer, considerably, in their hydrographicalaccounts ; but, upon the whole,the former is most to be relied on, and,in some instances, he is confirmed byCaptain Parry. Captain Middletondied on the 24th of January, 1770.MONTAGU, (Edward Worsley,)only son of the celebrated Lady Maryand Mr. Worsley Montagu, was born atWharncliffe Lodge, near Sheffield, inthe year 1713, and received his educationat Westminster School, from whichhe thrice ran away ; and, in one of hiselopements, exchanged clothes with achimney-sweeper, whose occupation he,for a short time, followed. His nextfrolic was to cry flounders, at Othersand shortly afterwards he sailed,as a cabin-boy, to Spain, where hehired himself as a mule-driver ; and,proceeding to Cadizz, was recognized bythe English consul, who sent him backto England. He was then placed, byhis friends, under the care of a privatetutor, with whom he travelled to theWest Indies, and afterwards to thecontinent, where he seems to have pursueda line of conduct and adventure,in which, in some instances, the criminalitywas equal to the extravagance.I have conversed," he says, in a letterto a friend, " with the nobles of Germany,and served my apprenticeship inthe science of horsemanship p at theircountry seats. I have been a labourerVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.in the fields of Switzerland and Holland,and have not disdained the humbleoccupations of postillion and ploughman.I assumed, at Paris, the ridiculouscharacter of a petit-maitre. 1was an abbe at Rome. I put on, atHamburg, the Lutheran ruff, and, witha triple chin, and a formal countenance,I dealt about me the word of God, soas to excite the envy of the clergy."On his return to England, he obtained aseat in the house of commons, which heoccupied in two successive parliaments,and, for some time, devoted himself toliterary pursuits. Becoming, at length,involved, in consequence of his expensivehabits, he again left his nativecountry, and began a new course ofeccentricity and adventure. He travelledinto Italy, where he professedthe Roman catholic religion, which heforsook for that of the Mahometan, onhis arrival in Egypt. He appears tohave resided chiefly at Rosetta, whencehe made excursions to various placesbordering on the Adriatic and Mediterranean,attracting attention by thesingularity of his habits and demeanour.After he had embraced Islamism, heassumed the license, allowed by thatreligion, with respect to the sex ; and,in many places where he subsequentlyresided, was accompanied by a harem ofwomen, of various nations and complexions.On the death of his wife, awoman of low origin, and with whom henever cohabited, he, in order to preventhis estate falling to the Bute family, hitupon an expedient, the singularity ofwhich was in perfect accordance withthe former acts of his life. Having nolegal offspring, he directed a friend inEngland to advertise for a youngwoman, already pregnant, who wouldbe willing to marry him ; and one ofthe many applicants having been fixedupon, he was on his way home toespouse her, when he died at Padua,in 1776. The life of so singular a character,is matter of contemplation ratherfor the philosopher, than the biographer.By the latter, he can only be consideredas he appears in the course of hisadventures ; an apostate without conviction,and a wanderer, without anyother aim than that of sensuality orcaprice. He was, however, an acuteobserver of nature ; and may have hadreasons, known only to himself, foracting so singular a part in the theatreof life. He was a perfect master of theHebrew, Arabic, Chaldaic, and Persianlanguages ; and, besides communicatingthree papers to the Royal Society, onsubjects connected with his travels,acquired great literary reputation bythe previous publication of a work,entitled Reflections on the Rise andFall of the Ancient Republics. Itappeared in 1759 ; but, in 1788, apamphlet was published, in which thework was attributed to the pen of theRev. Mr. Foster, private tutor to Mr.Montagu. He is alluded to, by Mr.Sharp and Dr. Moore, in their respectiveworks upon Italy, and is mentioned bythe latter as " acute, communicative,and entertaining ; and blending, in hisdiscourse and manner, the vivacity of aFrenchman, with the gravity of a Turk."ELLIS, (HENRY,) born some timeabout the year 1720, having offered hisservices to the committee of a companywho had raised a subscription to defraythe expense of an expedition to discovera north-west passage into the SouthSea, went out, in the character of theiragent, in the May of 1746. The parthe was to take in this voyage, to theundertakers of which, if successful,government had offered a reward of20,000, was to make draughts of allthe newly-discovered countries ; thebearings and distances of headlands ; tomark the soundings, rocks, and shoalsupon the coast ; to examine the saltnessof the water ; observe the variation ofthe compass ; notice the different naturesof the soil ; and to collect, to theutmost of his power, metals, minerals,and all kind of natural curiosities. Onthe 21st of June, while about sixtyleagues to the westward of Rowan andBarra isles, his ship caught fire nearthe powder-room ; and, in this state,proceeded many miles before it wasextinguished, the crew cursing, praying,and crying, in the agonies of fear anddespair. To the eastward of CapeFarewell, in Greenland, Ellis fell in withan abundance of low ice and drift-wood ;and, on nearing Hudson's Straits, wasmet by a mass of icebergs, which hedescribes as being five or six hundredyards thick. On the 8th of July, hemade an exchange of commodities withthe Esquimaux, off the ResolutionAPPENDIX.islands, whence he proceeded, along thenorth shore of Hudson's Straits, toMarble Island ; after exploring which,he proceeded to Fort Nelson with theintention of wintering there, but wascompelled, by the opposition of the governorof the Hudson's Bay Company,to remain in Hayes River, in latitude57 deg. 30 min. At the termination ofthe winter, in June, 1747, he sailedto the northward of Cape Churchill,whence he proceeded, unimpeded bythe ice, to Gentry Island, Knight's, SirBaby's, Merry's, and Jones's ; nearwhich, when in latitude 62 deg., hewas astonished to find that the needlesof his compass lost their magneticalqualities. After, in vain, attempting toenter an opening he had discovered tothe south side of Sir Baby's Island, heproceeded to Whale Cove, Cornet's Inlet,Cape Try, and, finally, to Wager Strait,where he landed, in order to determinewhether it was a strait, bay, or river;and, at the same time, was compelledto relinquish all hope of discoveringa north-west passage. Accordingly,after making various and ineffectualattempts to accomplish the object of hisvoyage, he was compelled to return toEngland, where he arrived on the 14thof October, 1747 ; and, in the followingyear, published an account of his travels,which has been translated into theFrench, German, and Dutch languages ;and extracts from which are to be foundin most of the collections of voyagespublished on the continent of Europe.Notwithstanding the failure of his expedition,he states, in his work, hisopinion of the existence of a northwestpassage, and that all possiblemeans had not been yet taken forascertaining it. Ellis was remuneratedfor his services, by being made governorof New York, and, afterwards, ofGeorgia; but his health subsequentlycompelled him to visit Italy, where hepassed the remainder of his days, employedprincipally in nautical and mineralogicalresearches. He was met,at Marseilles, by the celebrated Germanauthor, Sulzer, in 1775, and was seenat Naples in 1805 ; since which time noaccount is found of him. His work,though occasionally too elaborate anddiscursive, contains much new andvaluable information, especially thatpart relating to Wager Strait ; and theminute details he gives of the mannersand character of the Esquimaux, arerelieved by interesting and amusinganecdotes of that people. " One ofthem," he relates, " after having beenfed on English diet, being present whenone of the Englishmen was cutting up aseal, from whence the train oil ran veryplentifully, licked up what he could savewith his hands, and said, ' Ah ! commendme to my own dear country,where I could get my belly full of this.' 'IVES, (EDWARD.) embarked in August,1754, at Spithead, with the fleetunder Admiral Watson, destined for theWest Indies, and remained in the navalservice, in the capacity of surgeon, untilthe death of the admiral, in 1757. Inthe November of that year, he set outfrom Calcutta, and, after visiting Ceylon,and some islands in the PersianGulf, sailed up the Tigris, as far asHillel, whence he proceeded to Bagdad.After having passed some time inexploring the antiquities in the environsof that city, he continued his journey,by way of Mosul, to Aleppo, wherehe embarked for Latakia ; thencevisited the isle of Cyprus; and, landingat Leghorn, travelled through Italy toEngland, which he reached in March,1759. The route which he traversedfrom Persia to this country was onelittle frequented ; and his account of hisjourney, published in 1775, in quarto,and subsequently translated into German,is valuable, not only in a geographicaland historical point of view, but tfor the excellent observations contained |in it of the manners and customs ofthe Indians, the antiquities of ancientCtesiphon, &c. Mr. Ives died on the25th of September, 1786.CARTERET, (PHILIP,) the time ofwhose birth and death is not exactlyknown, after returning from a voyageround the world, which he had madewith Commodore Byron, was, on the22nd of August, 1766, appointed to thecommand of the Swallow ; in which heaccompanied Captain Wallis, to assistthat gentleman in making discoveries inthe southern hemisphere. After passingMadeira, the strait of Magellan, andwatering at the Spanish isle, Masafuero,he discovered, in latitude 20 deg. 2 min.south, and longitude K3 deg. 21 min.VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.hwest, an island to which he gave thename of Pitcairn, the same which wasafterwards inhabited by the mutineersof the Bounty, and which CaptainCarteret describes as being so high thathe saw it at the distance of fifteenleagues. From thence he proceeded inanorth-westerly direction, and discoveredOsnabufg, Duke of Gloucester,and Queen Charlotte's islands, distinguishingall the different parts of each,by names which he gave them, andby which they still continue to becalled. His next discoveries consisted,successively, of Gower's Island, Simpson's,Carteret's, Hardy's, Wallis's,Leigh's, and several others, in thecourse of his passage to Nova Britannia,which land he found to be divided by astrait, supposed, by former navigators,to be only a bay, into two islands ; toone of which he gave the name of NovaHibernia, and distinguished the intersectingchannel by the appellation of St.George's. After discovering and namingthe islands of Sandwich, Byron, NewHanover, the Duke of Portland's, the Admiralty,Durour's, Matte's, Stephen's,and Freewill, he proceeded to, andalong the coast of, Mindanao, where hisobservations enabled him to correct severalmistakes made by Dampier in hissurvey of that island. From Mindanao,he sailed to the isle of Celebes, the straitof Macassar, Contain, and Batavia,whence he proceeded, round the Capeof Good Hope, to England, where hearrived on the 20th of March, 1769.Having had to contend with many difficultiesduring his voyage, among others,the unsound condition of his ship, andthe bad state of his own health, he didnot pursue his discoveries to the extenthe had contemplated ; he, however,accomplished enough to enrich geographywith most important additions, andto obtain a high and honourable placein the list of British navigators. Hisjournal, published by Dr. Hawkesworth,n 1773, contains a careful and particularaccount of his proceedings ; and,with the aid of maps and prints, conveysa very accurate idea of the state inwhich Carteret found the countries hevisited, and the inhabitants with whomhe communicated.Wallis, (CAPTAIN SAMUEL,) wasborn about 1730, and after distinguishing himself in other undertakings, he,j on the 19th of June, 1766, received hiscommission to hoist his pendant onboardthe Dolphin, a twenty-gun ship,to complete the discoveries and operationsof the celebrated CommodoreByron. He sailed on the 22nd ofAugust, accompanied by the Swallow, iCaptain Carteret ; and, arriving at Cape iVirgin Mary, was invited to land by the iinhabitants, of whom he gives a de jscription, agreeing with that of Conimo- !dore Byron, stating their height to be jfrom six to seven feet. Having, withsome difficulty, passed the straits ofMagellan, he, on the 12th of April, enteredthe Pacific Ocean ; and in the :course of his navigation, discovered !Whitsun Island, Queen Charlotte's, .Egmont, Gloucester, Cumberland, OsnaburgIslands, and Otaheite, orGeorge the Third's Island. With thenatives of the last-mentioned island hehad a slight skirmish, which was spokenof by the editor of tho Life of LordClaremont, published in 1810, as " aninfernal massacre." The natives, however,made the first attack on CaptainWallis, and the above expression istotally inapplicable and unjustifiable.On the 25th of July, he observed, atOtaheite, an eclipse of the sun, whichlasted one hour, nine minutes, and tenseconds ; after which he explored theinland part of the island, where he metwith a very kind reception, and wasvisited by the queen, who shed tearsat his departure, which took place onthe 27th. On the 28th, he again discoveredland, which he named Sir Charles 'Saunders' Island ; and he afterwards, iin succession, discovered other islands,which he named Lord How's, Scilly,Boscawen's, Keppel's, and Wallis'sIslands, and others. After an absenceof nearly ten years, Captain Wallis returnedto England, where he died, butat what time, is unknown. An accountof his voyage will be found in Dr.Hawkesworth's collection of Voyagesround the World.CARVER, (JONATHAN,) was bornat Saltwater, in the province of Con !necticut, in 1732. He embraced a filiitry career, and, in the French war !commanded, with reputation. a company jof provincials, in the expedition acresthe lakes against Canada. On. the con IAPPENDIX.elusion of the peace, in 1763, he undertookto explore the vast territory gainedby Great Britain in North America.His object was to acquire a knowledgeof the manners, customs, languages,soil, and natural productions of thedifferent nations that inhabit the backof the Mississippi ; and to ascertain thebreadth of the vast continent extendingfrom the Atlantic to the Pacific Ocean,in its broadest part, between 43 and 46degrees northern latitude. He, accordingly,left Boston, in 1766, and, havingreached Michellimackinac, the remotestEnglish port, applied to Mr. Rogers,the governor, for an assortment of goods,as presents for the Indians inhabitingthe track he intended to pursue. Havingreceived a part of the requiredsupply, with a promise that the remaindershould be sent after him atthe Falls of St. Anthony, he continuedhis journey ; but, in consequence of themisapplication of the goods by those towhom they were intrusted, they didnot reach him, and he was under thenecessity of returning to La Prairie LeChien. Hence, in the beginning of theyear 1767, he directed his steps northward,with a view of finding a com- Imedication from the heads of theMississippi into Lake Superior, in orderto meet, at the grand portage on thenorth-west side of that lake, the tradersthat usually come, about this season,from Michellimackinac. He reachedLake Superior in proper time, but as thetraders had no goods which they couldspare to sell, " I found myself," hesays, " obliged to return to the placefrom whence I began my expedition,which I did, after continuing somemonths on the north and east bordersof Lake Superior, and exploring thebogs and rivers that empty themselvesinto this large body of water." Soonafter his arrival at Boston, in October,1768, up to which time he had travellednear seven thousand miles, he set outfor England, " to communicate thediscoveries he made, and render thembeneficial to that kingdom." On hisarrival, he presented a petition to theking, praying for a reimbursement ofthe sums he had expended in the serviceof government; and, after undergoingan examination by the board oftrade, he received permission to publishhis papers. He accordingly sold themto a bookseller for publication, for whichthey were just ready, when lie receivedan order from the board to deliver intothe plantation office, all his charts andjournals, which he was obliged to repurchasefrom the bookseller at a verygreat loss. " This fresh disbursement,"he says. " I endeavoured to get annexedto the account I had already deliveredin, but this request was denied me, andI was obliged to rest satisfied with anindemnification for my other expenses."This strange and unjust proceeding, onthe part of government, reduced Carverto great distress ; but, having kept acopy of his papers, he was enabled topublish his Travels in 1778, a work ofpeculiar interest. The profits he derivedfrom it were, however, insufficientto relieve his necessities, and, inthe winter of 1779, he obtained anexistence by acting as clerk in a lottery-office.In the early part of 1780, hewas reduced to a state of extreme destitution,and whilst suffering from theunited effects of bodily want and mentaldisappointment, was attacked by adysentery, which terminated his exist |once. The circumstances of his death Iwere made known to the public by the !benevolent Dr. Lettsom, who brought !out a new edition of his Travels, for the jbenefit of his widow and children ; andmade such a representation of theauthor's sufferings, as finally led to theinstitution of the Literary Fund. " Insize," says Dr. Lettsom, (i Captain Carverwas rather above the middle stature,and of a firm muscular texture ; hisfeatures expressed a firmness of mindand boldness of resolution ; and he retaineda florid complexion to his latestmoments." Besides his Travels, CaptainCarver wrote an excellent Treatise onthe Cultivation of the Tobacco Plant.STAUNTON, (Sir GEORGE Leonard,Baronet,) was born in Ireland,about 1735, and was sent, in early life,to study medicine at Montpelier, wherehe took the degree of M. D. In 1762,he embarked for the West Indies, andpractised his profession in Grenada, ofwhich he subsequently became actorsand acted as secretary tothe governor, Lord Macartney, untilthe taking of the island by the French.He held the same situation under thatnobleman, on his appointment to theVOYAGERS AKl5 TRAVELLERS.governorship of Madras, and took therean active part in the arrest of GeneralStuart, who had opposed the authorityof the governor. He also negotiated atreaty with Tippoo Said, and had theaddress to induce the French admiral,Suffrein, to suspend hostilities beforeGondelour, previously to the officialannouncement of the peace. On hisreturn to England he was presented,by the East India Company, with apension of 500 a-year; and by theuniversity of Oxford, with the diplomaof LL.D"; and, about the same time,was created a baronet. In 1792, heaccompanied Lord Macartney to China,as secretary of legation, with the titleof minister plenipotentiary, in whichoffice he displayed considerable zeal,prudence, and ability. He returned toEngland in 1794, and published a mostable history of this celebrated embassy,in two volumes, quarto, with anotherfolio volume of plates. The work, whichis spoken of in The Annual Register, asone rather of learning and observation,than of genius and reflection, has beentranslated into French and German.He died, at his house, in London, of aparalytic attack, in January, 1801 ;being', at the time, a fellow of the RoyalSociety, and a proprietor of the RoyalInstitution. He was a man greatlyesteemed in all the rt nations of life, bothas a public and private character; and,besides his work on China, wrote acomparison between the literature ofFrance and England, and translatedsome medical treatises, written by Dr.Starch, of Vienna.CHANDLER, (RICHARD,) was bornin 1738, and, after having graduatedM. A. at Oxford, took holy orders, andobtained, successively, the living ofWard-egham, in Hampshire, and therectory of Tilehurst, in Berkshire. Hisclassical proficiency caused him to beselected to edit the Oxford Marbles,which appeared in 1763, under the titleof Marmot Oxoniensia, and procuredthe author much reputation. In 1764,he was appointed, by the DilettantiSociety, to visit the east, for the purposeof exploring the antiquities of thatcountry. He was accompanied by Mr.Revert, the architectural surveyor, andMr. Pars, the draughtsman ; all ofwhom returned to England in theautumn of 1766. The result of theirtravels was published in 1769, in onefolio volume, entitled Ionian Antiquities,which was much applauded by theliterary world. The subject oi burmemoir, however, derived more permanentand exclusive reputation, by afurther publication, in 1774, calledInscriptions Antique, &c. ; a workwhich displayed great learning and accuracyon the part of the author. Ashort while previous to its appearance,he had been created D. D. ; and, in1775 and 1776, he added to his fame bythe successive publications of his Travelsin Asia Minor, two volumes, quarto,and Travels in Greece. In 1802, appearedhis History of Ilium or Troy;and he was engaged in writing a historyof William Waynflete for sometimebefore his death, which occurred inJuly, 1810. His life of Waynflete waspublished in the following year.CLERKE, (CHARLES,) born somelime in the year 1741, was educated inthe marine academy, at Portsmouth,and served in the wear of 1756, duringwhich he had several narrow escapesfrom death ; and, in one action, fellwith the mizen mast, of which he wasat the top, into the sea, and was theonly one among the crew of his shipwho survived the destruction of it. Onentering upon his career of discoveries,he formed part of almost all the expeditionssent out from England to explorethe South Sea. In 1764. 1765, and1766, he followed the track of CommodoreByron, and, accompanied CaptainCook in his voyages round the world,in 1768, 1772, and 1776 ; in the last ofwhich he commanded the Discovery,and, on the death of Cook, becamehead of the expedition. About thetime of this event, a consumption, withwhich he had been attacked since hisdeparture from England, made it necessaryfor him to seek a warm climate;but, instead of doing so, he persistedin continuing his researches for a northwestpassage, and, on leaving the SandwichIsles, sailed towards the north,till he found it impracticable to proceedfurther. Accordingly, he put into theharbour of St. Peter and St. Paul,where he died, on the 22nd of August,1779. He was an officer of consummateskill in naval affairs, and the one mostAPPENDIX,able to fill the place of Cook, whoseplan of operations he continued to followin a most skilful and praiseworthymanner. He re-explored the SandwichIsles, and visited Kamschatka, advancingas far north, between the twocontinents, as 69 degrees latitude, whenhe demonstrated the impossibility ofpenetrating through the ice, either bythe coast of Asia, or that of America.In the account of Cook's third voyage,he is mentioned with great praise bythat navigator.BllYDONE, (PATRICK,) was bornabout the year 1741, and, after completinghis education at one of theuniversities, set out for the continent,for the purpose of making " discoveries,as to the precise state and temperatureof the air on the summits of the highestmountains of Europe." Accordingly,after passing through France, he visitedthe Alps, and Apennines, where he soastonished the inhabitants, by his apparatusand experiments, that he wascalled a conjuror and magician. Inthe Alps, he relates his observation of amost extraordinary phenomenon thebursting of a thunder storm under hisfeet. About 1768, he made a tourthrough Sicily and Malta, and, aftervisiting the principal places in each, andseveral islands in the Mediterranean,returned to England in 1771, and publishedan account of his travels, whichcontains, among other curious information,some valuable and interestingremarks on the state of the atmosphereat the summit of Mount Etna. Thiswork obtained him great credit, and hewas shortly afterwards nominated tothe appointment of comptroller of theStamp office. He was also elected amember of the principal learned andscientific societies ; and, up to the timeof his death, which occurred on the 19thof June, ISIS, he continued to writemany able essays, which were insertedin the Philosophical Transactions. Mr.Bygone was a disciple of the franklinphilosophy, particularly on thesubject of electricity, to which he attributedmany of the phenomena ofnature, and considered it to be " a fifthelement, distinct from, and superior to,the other four." He made several experimentswith the electric kite ; andused to declare, that he could detectthe electric fluid whenever he combedhis head, or took off his stockings.HUDDART, (JOSEPH,) an eminentnavigator and hydrographer, was theson of a shoemaker at Alley, in Cumberland,where he was born in 1741. Heevinced an early predilection for a maritimelife, and commenced his navalcareer as the commander of a smalltrading vessel engaged in the herringfishery in the Firth of Forth. Havingstudied astronomy and ship-building, hesoon gave proof of his skill in thosesciences, by the construction of a smallship, which he entirely made with hisown hands, and of some hydrographicalcharts, which were held in greatestimation. Between 1768 and 1773,he made several voyages in his ownvessel ; and, at the same time, tooksoundings of the various ports and baysin St. George's Channel. His chartshaving drawn the attention of the EastIndia Company, he was taken intotheir service ; and, in the last-mentioned,and following years, he wasemployed in preparing a chart of thewestern coast of Sumatra. On his returnto England, he made a voyage toAmerica, in his own vessel, and wasafterwards commissioned to form a chartof St. George's Channel ; which difficulttask he accomplished, in 1777, withsurprising exactitude. In the course ofthe succeeding ten years, he made fourvoyages to Asia ; and, during thattime, completed a plan of the wholepeninsula, from Bombay to Coming:and taking advantage of the eclipse ofthe satellites of Jupiter, was enabled todetermine the longitude of Bombaywith a precision never before attained.On his return to England, in 1788, theEast India Company, as a recompensefor his services, appointed him one oftheir directors ; and he was, about thesame time, elected a member of theRoyal Society, to whose transactions hecontributed several valuable papers. Theloss of his cables, in one of his voyagesto India, during a tempest, induced himto turn his attention to the discovery ofa remedy against similar accidents ; andhe, eventually, produced a species ofrope, which was adopted, and is stillused in the British navy. He died in1816. Besides the charts before-mentioned,he published A Sketch of theVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.Straits of Gasper, a Passage betweenthe Islands of Barca and Billet.Swiss, (RICHARD,) was born about1745 ; and, being possessed of a fortunewhich permitted him to indulge histaste for travelling, he went to Scotland,and from thence to Holland, Belgium,France, Switzerland, Italy, Germany,and Bohemia. He remainedabroad till 1770; but, in 1772, againquitted England, and made the tour ofPortugal and Spain. In 1775, he visitedIreland, whence, on the breaking outof the revolution, he proceeded toFrance ; and, on his return home, devotedhimself to literature, and the arts,particularly music. He died in 1821,leaving Travels in Spain and Portugalduring 1772 and 1773, quarto, withmaps and engravings, translated intoFrench and German ; Travels in Irelandduring 1775, also translated intoGerman and French ; Anecdotes onthe Game of Chess ; Journey to Paris,during the Revolution ; and. Miscellanies,two volumes, octavo. Althoughthe works of Twiss possess but littlenovelty, or profundity of observation,they procured him a reputation amongliterary men, and his election as amember of the Royal Society. His animadversionsupon the character of theIrish excited the wrath of many of thenatives, who retaliated, by placing hispicture at the bottom of a certain chamberutensil, which, in Ireland, still goesby the name of Twiss.IRWIN, (Elles,) was born at Calcutta,in the year 1748 ; and afterhaving received his education in England,returned, in 1767, to Madras,where he obtained a situation, as acivilian, in the service of the East IndiaCompany. A short time after his arrival,he was much patronised by thethen governor, Lord Pilot ; on the imprisonmentand deposition of whom, hewas himself suspended. After this event,of which he sent information to thedirectors of the Company, he set out forEurope, with the intention of travellingthither by a new and circuitous route.Accordingly, on the 16th of April, 1777,he embarked at Mocha for Suez ; inhis way whither, he was compelled toanchor on the coast of Arabia, at a placecalled Yambo, where no Europeanvessel had ever before touched, andwhere he was seized and imprisoned inatower ; from which he was onlyenabled to escape by bribing the commandantwith a rich present. Afterpaying a large sum for a vessel to conveyhim to Suez, he left Yambo on the10th of June ; but, instead of makingfor the former port, the treacherousArabians sailed to Cosire, in UpperEgypt, where he was compelled to landon the 9th of the following month.Towards the end of July, he joined acaravan, with which he proceeded toGuinah, where he was detained a prisonerfor some time, robbed of severalvaluable articles, and compelled to makeexpensive presents to the vizier. Onthe arrival of the great sheikh of theArabs, who took means to ensure hisfuture safety, his property was restoredto him ; and, on the 4th of September,he commenced his journey across theThebaid desert. After traversing nearlythree hundred and forty miles, he arrivedat Tuinah, supposed to be builton the site of ancient Babylon ; and, onthe 19th of September, embarked onthe Nile, and sailed down the river toOld Cairo, called, by the inhabitants,Miser ul Kara, or the City of Anguish.Having despatched a letter of thanks,and a present of a Turkey carpet, tothe Arab sheikh, he proceeded, by wayof Darame, Cairo, and Rosetta, toAlexandria ; whence he embarked forMarseilles, and reached England in thelatter part of the year 1777. On arrivingin London, he found that LordPilot had been restored to the governmentof Fort St. George, and himselfre-appointed to the station he had formerlyheld in the service of the EastIndia Company. Accordingly, havingmarried a Miss Brooke two years previously,he, in 1780, set out for India,taking precisely the same route overland,as he had before travelled, andarrived at Madras without havingencountered, in his journey, danger orimpediment. About this time, the EastIndian settlements being in a state ofrevolt and disorder, he was employed,by Lord Macartney, to assist in pacifyingthe natives ; for which purpose hewas intrusted with the superintendenceand administration of the provinces ofTinivelly and Madura ; a situation inwhich he employed such skilful andAPPENDIX,conciliatory measures, that the districts,under his direction, were very soonbrought to a state of quiet and security.In 1785, Mr. Irwin returned to England,when the East India Company,in consideration of his services, votedhim a liberal sum of money ; and, in1792, appointed him, in conjunctionwith others, to superintend their affairsin China ; whither he proceeded, and,after a stay of two years, again embarkedfor England. In 1795, he becamea candidate for an East Indiadirectorship, but did not succeed in obtainingit ; shortly after which, he retired,with his family, to Clifton, wherehe expired, on the 14th of October, 1817.The latter period of his life was employedin social and literary pursuits,besides the Account of his Adventuresduring a Voyage up the Red Sea, anda Journey across the Desert, he publishedseveral volumes of poems, chieflyon historical subjects, and all evincinga highly poetical genius. He was theauthor, also, of An Inquiry into theFeasibility of Buonaparte's Expeditionto the East; Epistle to Mr. Hayley ;and Napoleon, or the Vanity of HumanWishes. Mr. Irwin's character was remarkablefor its amiable simplicity:though seeing so much of the world, heknew little of that cunning which wouldprevent him from being its dupe. Suchwas his unvarying goodness and philanthropy,that it is said of him, he neverlost a friend and never made an enemy.STEWART, (JOHN,) commonlycalled Walking Stewart, was born inLondon, about the year 1749, and receivedhis education at Harrow, andthe Charter House Schools, successively.He made but small progress at either,being distinguished more for his levityand insubordination, than for his diligenceor capacity. Shortly after leavingschool, he went out as a writer in theservice of the East India Company, butexchanged it, on taking some offence,for that of Hyde Ah. Under thismonarch he embraced a military career,conducting himself in severalbattles with great valour, and wasraised to the rank of general. A woundwhich he received on the field, bafflingthe skill of the native surgeons, he requestedpermission of Hyde for a shortabsence, which the Eastern despotgranted ; but, at the same time, dreadingthe information which Stewartmight convey, of the resources of hisempire, gave secret orders for his assassination.Having, however, some knowledgeor idea of what was intended,our traveller, on arriving at the frontier,plunged into a stream, unseen byhis attendants ; and, after enduringmany hardships, arrived safe at aBritish port, where he remained untilcured of his wound. He next becameprime minister of the Nabob of Ascot,m which capacity he remained forsome years, at the end of which hereceived a suitable compensation forhis services, by the decision of the commissionersfor adjusting the nabob'saffairs in this country. He then tookhis departure from India, traversing, inhis way home, great part of Persia andTurkey, on foot. In his passage acrossthe Persian gulph, he narrowly escapeddeath ; a storm having arisen, it wasattributed, by the superstitious Mahometan,to the presence of Stewart, andhe, with difficulty, persuaded them torenounce their intention of throwinghim overboard. He subsequently traversedthe continent on foot, and, uponhis return to England, he renderedhimself notorious by appearing in themost public places of resort, in the costumeof an Armenian ; and endeavoured,in the course of casual conversationwith strangers, to convertthem to the Pythagorean doctrine,which he held in conjunction withatheism. He also wrote a few metaphysicaltracts on the same subject, butis speculations were so absurd, andhis ideas so unintelligible, that few pretendedto understand, and none venturedto approve them. Mr. Stewart,during his residence in France, had investedthe principal part of his propertyin the national funds, but the revolutiondepriving him of all but an annuityof 100, which he consented to take inlieu of his whole claim, he came toEngland, and lived upon that sum incomparative retirement. Being, however,awarded 10,000 for his demandsupon the Nabob of Ascot, he purchasedannuities to the amount of 900 a-year,and took apartments, which he splendidlyfurnished in the Chinese style, andopened them daily to his friends andacquaintances. He had a concert everyVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.evening, previous to the commencementof which he always read a philosophicallecture. Mr. Stewart died at his lodgingsin Northumberland Street, on AshWednesday, 1822, at the advanced ageof seventy-two. Independent of hisatheistical tenets, the character of thesubject of our memoir appears to havebeen highly estimable. He had anardent love for his fellow-creatures, andwhilst he still held his darling doctrineof the perfectibility of man, was alwaysalive to their wants and misfortunes.In his political sentiments, he was ferventlyloyal ; and, notwithstanding hiscontempt of all established religions,was a decided enemy to republicanmaxims and principles. Mr. Stewartcould never be prevailed upon to publishan account of any of his travels ; ofwhich, however, in conversation, hewould often give a most animated andinteresting description.LUCAS, (--) was born aboutthe year 1750 ; and being sent, when aboy, to Cadizz, for education as a merchant,had the misfortune, on his return,to be captured by a Sallee rover,and brought, as a slave, to the imperialcourt of Morocco. After three years ofcaptivity, he proceeded to Gibraltar,where, at the request of General Cornwallis,he accepted the offices of vice-consuland charge d' affaires in theempire of Morocco, and had the satisfactionto return, as the delegate of hissovereign, to the vej-y kingdom inwhich, for so long a period, he hadlived as a slave. About 1786, he returnedto England, and was appointedoriental interpreter to the British court ;the salary of which he was allowed toretain, on receiving permission fromthe king to undertake a journey toAfrica, as the servant of the AfricanSociety. In August, 1788, Mr. Lucasleft England, with instructions to passthe Desert of Sahara, from Tripoli toFezzan, where he was to collect whateverintelligence respecting the inlandregions of the continent, the people ofFezzan, or the traders who visited thecountry, might be able to afford ; andto return by the way of the Gambia, orby that of the coast of Guinea. In thelatter end of October, our travellerlanded at Tripoli, where he was receivedwith great complacency by thebashaw ; who, however, expressed hissurprise on being asked permission tovisit Fezzan, saying the journey hadnever been attempted by a Christian.Mr. Lucas replied, that he was inducedto undertake it in the hope of findingcertain Roman antiquities, and of collectinga variety of medicinal plants notto be found in Europe. Having obtaineda promise of protection from thebashaw, he was preparing to start forFezzan, when intelligence was conveyedto him of the revolt of the principaltribe of the tributary Arabs,against whom the bashaw had not yetsufficient force to march. Whilst lamentingrhe delay to which this circumstanceexposed him, two sheernessor descendants of the prophets, arrivedat Tripoli, and offered to be responsiblewith their lives, for safely conductinghim to Fezzan. Having accepted theiroffer, he left Tripoli on the 1st ofFebruary, 1789, with a party of eighteenothers, all armed, and himself mountedon a mule, with which he had beenpresented by the bashaw. On thefourth day of his journey, he reachedthe remains of the town of Debita,where'' says Mr. Lucas, " in theruins of a temple, and in the much moreperfect remains of several triumphalarches, the traveller contemplates themagnificence of an ancient Romancolony." On the seventh, he arrived atErrata, but the war with the rebelArabs rendering it unsafe for him toproceed further, he gave up all hopes ofreaching Fezzan before the winter ;and, in the mean time, resolved to availhimself of the utmost of such means ofinformation as the knowledge of hisfellow-travellers enabled them to afford,He had already discovered," says theeditor of Mr. Lucas's communicationsto the African Society, " that the littleold Sheers Mohammed had been oftenemployed by the King of Fezzan as hisfactor in the slave trade ; and, in thatcapacity, had travelled to Bornou anddifferent parts of Nigritia ; and he nowdetermined to cultivate his friendshipwith double solicitude, and by occasionalpresents and frequent conversation,to draw from him an account ofthe countries which he had seen." Inthis hope he, at various times, tookfrom his pocket a map of Africa, andhaving promised a copy of it to theAPPENDIX.sheers, in return for his informationrespecting the country* was soon possessedof such an account of Fezzan,Bornou, and Nigritia, especially thetwo former, as much diminished thechagrin of his own disappointment.On the 20th of March, Mr. Lucas leftMercator ; arrived on the 6th of Aprilat Tripoli ; and in England, on the26th of July. His account of thekingdom of Fezzan, confirmed by varioussources, appears in the proceedingsof the African Association, inwhose service he was succeeded by theenterprising Major houghton.SWINBURNE, (HENRYjsonof SirJohn Swinburne, Baronet, was born atthe seat of his father, Capheaton, inNorthumberland, some time in themiddle of the eighteenth century ; and,after receiving the rudiments of hiseducation at Scorn School, in Yorkshire,prosecuted his studies at Paris,Bordeaux, and the Royal Academy ofTurin. On the completion of his studies,in 1774, he married, and passedsix years with his wife in visiting themost remarkable places of France,Spain, Italy, and Germany ; in thecourse of which, he became acquaintedwith all the celebrated literary men ofthose countries, and received personalmarks of esteem from most of thesovereigns to whom he was introduced.On his return to England, he published,in one quarto volume, his travels inSpain ; and, in 1785, two volumes ofhis travels in the kingdom of the twoSimiles ; both of which have been translatedinto French, and the former wefind often referred to by England, in hisDigest of the History of Spain. Shortlyafter the publication of these works,the marriage of his daughter with PaulBenfield involved him in the disastersof that adventurer, and compelled himto quit England for Trinidad, where hedied, in the month of April, 1803. Hewas the first who introduced into Englanda knowledge of the arts and ancientmonuments of Spain ; his observationson which are full of judgment,and classically profound : his descriptionsare vivid and picturesque, and hisstyle lively, vigorous, and impressive.SMITH, (WILLIAM,) after perfectinghis education as a medical student,at the University of Cambridge, wentout as assistant-surgeon to the expeditionheaded by Captain Cook, in histhird voyage round the world. In 1781,he returned to England j and, in thefollowing year, published, in two foliovolumes, an account of his proceedings,with an accurate detail of the discoveriesand death of Captain Cook.This work obtained for him greatreputation, both as an author and traveller,and was considered much superiorto the two others which had justpreceded it on the same subject. It iswritten with admirable method; andwithout abounding in tedious reflectionsor ingenious speculations, presentsa statement of facts in a clear and interestingmanner, and conveys a vastbody of information respecting naturalhistory, in language simple and appropriate.The work obtained him thepatronage of Joseph the Second, whooffered him liberal and advantageousterms to undertake a voyage of discoveryin one of the emperor's ships ;but, on his arrival at Ostend, in 1785,he, unfortunately, fell from the mast ofa vessel, and died a few hours afterwards.FALCONBRIDGE, (ALEXANDER,)was an English surgeon, who madetwo voyages to the coast of Africa; and,during'his stay there, obtained such informationrespecting the slave trade, asenabled him to give a complete accountof that traffic, in a work which he publishedin 1789. He was accompaniedin his travels by his wife, who, afterhis death, which took place at SierraLeone, in 1792, published Two Voyagesto Sierra Leone in the Years 1791,1792, and 1793. This work, whichcontains a minute history of SierraLeone, and of the manners and customsof the inhabitants, is written in anagreeable style, and abounds with muchinteresting and original detail. It wasreprinted in 1794 and 1795.Mckenzie, (Sir ALEXANDER,)was originally a Canadian merchant,engaged in the north-west fur trade,and being, as he himself says, endowedby nature with an inquisitive mind andenterprising spirit, and possessing a constitutionand frame of body equal to themost arduous undertakings, he " notVOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS,only contemplated the practicability ofpenetrating across the continent ofAmerica, but was confident in the qualificationsto undertake the perilous enterprise."Previous to commencing hisvoyage he passed a year in England,employed in acquiring a knowledge ofastronomy and navigation. He thenreturned to Chippewa, and, on the3rd of June, 1789, set out on his expedition.The route pursued was, first,to the western part of the Lake of Hills,and thence to the north, by a riverwhich discharges itself into the GreatSlave Lake, at the western part ofwhich he entered a river, to which hegave his own name, being then in atrack wholly new to Europeans. Hefollowed the course of the stream tillthe 12th of July, when the ice opposingfurther passage, a situation in 69 deg.01 min. north, was the northern boundaryof his voyage, and he set out, onhis return to Fort Chippewa, wherehe arrived on the 27th of September.In October, 1792, he undertook a morehazardous expedition to the westerncoast of North America; and succeeded,in July, 1793, in reaching Cape Menzies,so named by Vancouver. This was hisfarthest progress to the wist, at whichstation the latitude was 52 deg. 21 min.north, and the longitude, calculatedfrom the mean of two emersions ofJupiter's satellites, 128 deg. 02 min.west. Mr. Mackenzie returned toEngland, in 1801 ; and, in the followingyear, was knighted. He published avery interesting account of his voyages,with excellent maps. The time of hisdeath we have been unable to ascertain.Sykes, (Lieutenant-colonel Michael,)born about 1765, deservesmention as a diplomatic traveller; inwhich character he has obtained somereputation by the manner in which heconducted two embassies to the court ofAva, in the East Indies. He also distinguishedhimself in his military capacity,and behaved with great gallantryin the Spanish campaign that terminatedwith the battle of Corunna ; atwhich time he held the rank of of the seventy-sixth foot.He died on the 22nd of January, 1809,on board the Mary, transport, on hispassage home, in consequence of hisprevious exertions and fatigues. Theaccount of his mission to Ava, publishedin 1800, is a highly interesting work, andis considered one of the most valuablesources of information relative to theBurmese kingdom, and the mannersof its inhabitants. Lieutenant-colonelSykes was of a very amiable disposition,and " possessed," says a writer in theGentleman's Magazine, " the highestcapacity for science with the mostbrilliant capacity for action."BARROW, (JOHN,) under secretaryto the Admiralty, and a member of theRoyal Society, was born about the year1765 ; and, devoting himself early tothe study of astronomy, geography, andmathematics, was enabled to teach theformer science at Greenwich, from 1786to 1791. In the following year, hejoined Lord Macartney's expedition toChina, as secretary to Sir GeorgeStaunton ; and, on his return, publishedwhat has been considered the best accountof this celebrated mission. Henext gratified his desire for travel, by ajourney to Africa, the southern part ofwhich, he visited without companion orservant. His account of this journey ishighly interesting, and is consideredthe safest guide for travellers in thatregion. His most elaborate work is AnHistorical Account of Voyages into theArctic Regions, published in 1818, forwhich his situation as under-secretaryto the Admiralty, and his own extensivegeographical information well fittedhim. Most of the scientific expeditionsthat have been undertaken fromEngland, for the last twenty years, aresaid to have been referred to Mr. Barrowfor approval ; and to his instructions,Parry, Franklin, &c., have beenmuch indebted. He is a member ofmost geographical societies, and carrieson a correspondence with all parts ofthe scientific world. His works onChina have been translated into Frenchby Make Brun, and the celebratedorientalist, De Guignes, wrote a particulartreatise on one of them, entitledObservations sur les Voyages de Barrowa la Chine. Mr. Barrow is alsothe author of A Description of VariousSorts of Mathematical Instruments, andof a Life of Lord Macartney.Wendell, (JOHN,) was born onthe 1st of June, 1769, at Threefold,APPENDIX.near Hexham, in Northumberland. Hereceived the rudiments of education ata school at Hartford, in Yorkshire, andafterwards entered Trinity College,Cambridge ; but before commencingresidence, he studied under Dr. SamuelParr, " whose truly affectionate regardfor his pupil," says Mr. Tweddell'sbrother and biographer, " spared nopains to perfect him in all the learningof Greece and Rome." His academicalproficiency procured him unprecedentedhonours ; and his various compositions,published in 1793, under the title of provisionsJuveniles, called forth a mostelegant tribute of praise from ProfessorHeine, of Goettingen, in a letter to Dr.Burgess, the Bishop of St. David's. In1792, Mr. Tweddell was elected a fellowof his college ; and, soon afterwards, becamea student of the Middle Temple ;but the profession of the law being unsuitedto his disposition, he took to thestudy of it with great reluctance. Itappears to have been his wish, says hisbiographer, " to employ his talents andcultivated address in diplomacy at thecourts of foreign powers ;" and with aview to this object, he, in 1795, set outon his travels. In his progress, hetraversed several of the mountainousand unvisited parts of Switzerland, variousparts of the east, and of the northof Europe, the islands in the Archipelago,and, finally, Athens; whereafterexploring with restless ardour, andfaithfully delineating, the remains ofart and science discoverable amidst hersacred ruins, he died, of a fever, on the25th of July, 1799. He was buried inthe Theseus, at Athens ; and a Greekinscription, composed by the ReverendRobert Walpole, in 1805, was, throughthe exertions of Lord Byron and Mr.Fiott, at length placed upon his grave,in 1811. After his death, his journalsand papers were placed in the custodyof the British ambassador at Constantinople;and the publication of themwas looked for, by the learned world,with much anxiety. Notwithstanding,however, the numerous inquiries aridapplications of his friends, they havenever been recovered; and it is still amystery for what reason, or by whomthey are withheld. A volume of hisRemains, edited by his brother, theRev. Robert Tweddell, appeared in 1815,containing a selection from his letters,a republication of his PrplusionesJuveniles, and a brief memoir of theauthor.Valencia, (GEORGE, Lord Viscount,)eldest son of the Earl of Mount-norris,was born at Arles Hall, Oxfordshire,on the 4th of December,1770. He was educated at Rugby andat Oxford ; and, on the completion of hiseducation, entered the army ; but gaveup his commission on his return fromthe continent, which he visited in 1789.In 1802, having previously married oneof Lord Courteney's daughters, bequitted England for the East Indies,with the intention of exploring theprincipal parts of that country, togetherwith Africa and Egypt, which he visitedin company with Mr. Salt ; and ascertainedthe greater portion of Bruce'sdisputed reports to be true. He, however,as well as Mr. Salt, denies the correctnessof Bruce's map of Abyssinia andhis chart of the Red Sea, and also contradictshis assertion of the inhabitants'practice of cutting pieces of flesh, forfood, off live oxen. At Bombay, hislordship proposed to the governor-generalto make a voyage to the Red Sea ifa cruiser were fitted out for him, offeringhis gratuitous services on the occasion.In this voyage, he discovered an islandwhich he supposes no European ever tohave visited before, and to which hegave the name of Valentia. He passedover the principal part of the groundtravelled by . Mr. Bruce, and subsequentlyby Mr. Salt; and, finally,visited the pyramids of Egypt. In1806, he returned to England ; twoyears afterwards, became member ofparliament for Yarmouth ; and, in 1809,published his travels, in three volumes,octavo ; the part relating to Abyssiniabeing written by Mr. Salt, from whosedrawings were taken the plates that accompaniedthe work. It is said thathis journey to India was at the expenseof government, who sent him out, as asecret agent, to Lord Wellesley, thengovernor-general, who employed himin a manner that gave great offence tothe British residents at the IndianDurbar. His lordship is now EarlMountnorris, and a member of theRoyal, Antiquarian, and Linnaean Societies.With the exception of thatportion written by Mr. Salt, the ac-voyagersAND TRAVELLERS,count of his lordship's travels is fraughtwith little interest, and contain fewfacts of importance to geographicalscience.Tucker, (JAMES KINGSTON,) bornat Greenwich, in Ireland, in August,1776, evinced, at an early age, a greatdesire for a nautical life, and for theexploration of distant countries. In1791, he embarked for the Antilles,and subsequently sailed to the Bay ofHonduras j shortly after which, a warbreaking out, he served, with great distinction,in the Indian and Malacca Seas,and, subsequently, in the Arabian Gulf;whence, in consequence of the effect ofthe heat upon his health, he was obligedto return home. In 1802, he went out,as first lieutenant of the Calcutta, toNew South Wales; and, after makingan accurate survey of Port Philip, andthe coast adjoining Bass Strait, returnedto England ; he quitted it again shortlyafterwards, and, in 1805, was takenprisoner by the French, and conductedto Verdun, where he married thedaughter of an officer in the East IndiaCompany's service. On his liberationin 1814, he returned to England, whenhe was promoted to the rank of commander;and, in the following year,he was sent out, by government, on anexpedition to the coast of Congo, toexplore the course of the Zaira, themouth of which river he reached onthe 18th of July, 1816. He continuedto proceed along it in a canoe, till the20th of August, when an immensecataract preventing his further progressby water, and the negroes who accompaniedhim refusing to carry his baggageby land, he was compelled to return,on foot, to his ship, after havingtravelled, from the sea, a distance oftwo hundred and eighty miles. Aboutthe 16th of September, he re-embarked,and finding his crew diminished, tonearly one-half, by the fatal effects ofthe rainy season, just then commencing,he removed to the Dorothea, in a state ofextreme lowness of spirits and despondency,and died shortly afterwards.The works he left behind him were, AnAccount of a Voyage to establish aColony at Port Philip, in Bass Strait,on the coast of New South Wales, publishedin 1805 ; Maritime and StatisticalGeography, printed in 1815, infour octavo volumes ; and an accountof his expedition to the river Zaira,which appeared in one folio volume,about two years after his death. Thesecond of these works was writtenduring his captivity, and contains a pictureof various phenomena of the ocean,and conveys much information on thesubject of commerce, fisheries, andcolonies.BUCHAN, (DAVID,) was made alieutenant in the navy in January, 1806,and in 1810, was sent out in the Adonisschooner, to the Bay of Exploits, " forthe purpose of undertaking an expeditioninto the interior, with a view ofopening a communication with the nativeIndians, if any such were to befound " On the 12th of January, 1811,he landed on the shores of the bay, and,after having proceeded about one hundredand thirty miles into the interior,he discovered a party of the inhabitants,and succeeded in so far gaining theirconfidence, that four of them consentedto accompany him on his expedition.He was, however, finally deserted bythem all ; and, on retracing his way backto the vessel, found two ot his crew murdered.His next service was in surveyingthe coasts of Newfoundland ; and inthe latter part of 1816, in which yearhe was promoted to the rank of commander,was thanked by the inhabitantsof that island, for his humane andenterprising conduct during the continuanceof the perilous and severewinter of the last-mentioned year. InJanuary, 1818, he accompanied CaptainFranklin on hi&expedition to the NorthPole, the latter commanding the Trent,brig, and himself the Dorothea, inwhich he arrived at the island of Spitz-bergenin the following May, and proceededthence towards Cloven Cliff,where he was twice repulsed in attemptingto pass an immense barrier of ice,and was at length surrounded, so as torender his vessel immoveable for nearlysix weeks. After penetrating as faras 80 deg. 14 min. north, beyond whichhe found it impossible to proceed, hereached the open sea, and returned toEngland, when he was appointed tocommand the Grasshopper, fitting outfor the Newfoundland station, wherehe arrived in 1819; was made a post-captainin June, 1823 ; and, in April,APPENDIX,1825, received the appointment of principalsheriff of Newfoundland. CaptainBuchan is married to a Miss Age.CAMPBELL, (the Rev. JOHN,) distinguishedhimself by his travels insouthern Africa, into which country hewas sent by the London MissionarySociety. He started from England, onhis first voyage, in August, 1812 ; and,arriving at the Cape of Good Hope onthe 22nd of October, he, after a stay oftwo months, commenced his journeyinto the interior. About thirty sixmiles eastward of the Cape, he came toa chain of mountains " so steep, as toresemble a wall raised towards theheavens," on the top of which, he enteredupon a wild and luxuriant wilderness; and, on the 20th of March, 1813,reached the settlement of BetheUdorf,founded by Dr. Vanderkemp, of whichhe gives a very unfavourable account.He left this place in April ; and, aftertravelling near a month without seeingany human faces but those of his ownfollowers, he came in sight of the Great,or Orange River, which crosses thecontinent directly westward, about the29th degree of south latitude, until itfalls into the Southern Atlantic Ocean.Crossing the river, he proceeded alongits banks to the great Bohemian townof Lattakoo ; paying, in his way thither,a visit to " the Blink, a shining mountain."His description of one of thecaverns of this mountain, is curious :the roof," he says, " was arched, andstudded with the projecting pieces ofthe shining rock, between which thereseemed something closely wedged, andwhich, as the explorers of the cavernlooked up, appeared exactly like carvedwork." Putting up the lights, however,close to the part, to satisfy theircuriosity more fully, they found thatthe supposed carved work was nothingbut myriads of sleeping bats ; which,crowded together in a dormant state,adhered to the roof by the claws oftheir hinder legs. At Lattakoo, helearned that an exploring party, to thenumber of twenty-two, who had beensent by Lord Carleton, from the Cape,had been all murdered ; and the inhabitantsthinking Mr. Campbell hadcome to avenge the deceased, at firstreceived him with fear and suspicion ;but he subsequently obtained their confidenceand attention to his religiousdiscourses; at the end of one of which,the king, Eatable, is reported to havesaid, " I believe there is a God, whomade all things ; who gives prosperity,sickness, and death ; but I do nut knowhim." Our traveller returned to theCape on the 9th of October; and, onreaching England, his intelligence wasdeemed so satisfactory, that he wascommissioned to undertake a secondjourney, which he commenced fromthe Cape on the 10th of January, 1820.Pursuing a different route from that bywhich he had before travelled to ,he again entered that city, onthe 20th of March, whence he proceededto Meribohwey, the capital ofthe Tammahans, a ferocious-looking,but peaceable and friendly people. Hecontinued his course through a beautifultract of country to Marlow, andKurrhechane, the capitals of the Ma-rootednation, which he reached inthe beginning, and left about the endof May ; and, on the 10th of November,he again arrived at the Cape. Thisjourney was, upon the whole, highlysatisfactory ; Mr. Campbell havingfound, in most places, and particularlyat Hurricane, the people hospitableand tractable, and willing to receive theinstructions of the missionaries. OfMr. Campbell's subsequent expeditionsinto Africa, no accounts have been yetpublished.RITCHIE, (JOSEPH,) was born atMotley, in Yorkshire, about 1790, andafterwards became secretary to theBritish consulate at Paris. Being informedof the views of the African Association,he made an offer of his servicesto that society, by whom he was accordinglysent out, with instructions toexplore the interior of Africa, and, ifpossible, to proceed to Timbuctoo. Onhis arrival at Malta, he was joined byCaptain Lyon, with whom he proceededto Tripoli, where, in compliance with theadvice of the bashaw, they both assumedthe Moorish costume, and also learnt therites and prayers of Islamism. Havingprovided himself with an assortment ofmerchandize, and a number of camels,Ritchie set out, in March, 1819, underthe protection of Mukni, the Bey ofFezzan, who conducted himself andhis companions, in safety, to Mourzuk,VOYAGERS AND TRAVELLERS.the capital of his dominions. Untiltheir arrival at this town, every thinghad augured favourably for their expedition,but the perfidious conduct of thebey here put an end to their hopes.Influenced, probably, by the hope ofbecoming possessed of the travellers'property, in the event of their death,the avaricious Mukni threw every obstaclein the way of Ritchie's selling hismerchandize ; and, having no other resource,he became thus exposed to greatprivations. Harassed and disappointed,his distress of mind was quickly succeededby an attack of the fever peculiarto the climate, beneath the fataleffects of which he soon sank, and died,on the 20th of November, 1819. Hewas buried by Captain Lyon, who,after having privately read over hisbody the burial service, according tothe church of England, publicly recitedpassages from the Koran, suited to theoccasion, lest the natives should suspectthe real character of himself and thedeceased. The remains of Ritchie hadscarcely been consigned to the grave,when a courier brought bills of exchangefor 1,000, granted to him by the Britishgovernment, with the appointmentof vice-consul at Mourzouk. CaptainLyon, feeling that the treachery of thebey would not allow him to continuehis travels, returned to Europe, andpublished, in London, in 1821, the accountof this expedition, which hasserved, at least, to give a more accurateknowledge of Fezzan. An abridgmentof the work appeared at Paris, in thesame year.HALL, (Captain BASIL,) was bornin Scotland, about 1792, and, havingentered, at the proper age, the navalservice, passed, with credit, through hisseveral promotions, up to his presentrank. He appears to have commencedhis literary career in 1815, when hepublished, at Edinburgh, a volume ofsongs and occasional poems; but hebecame better known, as an author,in 1818, at which time appeared hisAccount of his Voyages of Discovery tothe West Coast of Core, and theGreat Loo Chop Island, with a Vocabularyof the Language there spoken, byH. J. Clifford. Of this work, a secondedition was printed in 1826. It aboundswith much humour, and is an evidenceof the zealous pains which the authortook to inform himself of the nature ofthe place, and the habits of the natives.His next work was his Extracts, printedin 1824, in two volumes, duodecimo,from a journal, written on the Coast ofChili, Peru, and Mexico, in the years1820, 1821, and 1822, and of which asecond edition was likewise printed in182(5. In the meantime, in 1824, heappears to have been in command of theConway, in which he superintended,in latitude 61 degrees S., the ascertainingthe variation of the compass, bywhich Mr. Peter Barlow's method ofcorrecting the local attractions of vesselswas proved to be effective. Heobtained, however, his greatest degreeof notoriety, both as a traveller andwriter, by his publication, in 1829, ofhis Travels in North America, in theyears 1827 and 1828, accompanied byforty etchings. The work gave rise tothe publication of a Review of CaptainBasil Hall's Travels in North America,in which the writer accuses the captainof misrepresentation and falsehood. TheFragments have, however, become verypopular, and certainly abound with entertainmentand information, thoughthe latter, perhaps, may not always beso authentic as could be wished. CaptainHall, who possesses no inconsiderableshare both of scientific and literaryknowledge, is a fellow of the RoyalSociety, and the University of Oxfordlately conferred upon him the honorarydegree of LL.D. Of his generosity ofcharacter, it is related, that when thefirm of Constable and Co., of Edinburgh,became involved, in 1825, hewaived a claim upon it, in favour of adistressed family, to the amount of severalhundred pounds.HENNIKER, (Sir FREDERICK, Baronet,)was born on the 1st of November,1793. He received his educationat Eton, and St. John's College, Cambridge,where he proceeded to thedegree of B.A. ; and, on the death ofhis father, in July, 1816, succeeded tothe baronetcy. On quitting the university,he embarked for France, fromwhence he passed through Italy toMalta, and thence to Alexandria 'andUpper Egypt, Nubia, the Oasis, MountSinai, and through Palestine to Jerusalem;on descending from whence, toAPPENDIX.Jericho, he was attacked and severelywounded by banditti, by whom he wasleft for dead. He returned, by way ofSmyrna and Athens, to Vienna; and,in 1822, published, in one octavo volume,the result of his observations,under the title of Notes during a visitto Egypt, Jerusalem, &c. ; " written,"says his biographer, in The Gentleman'sMagazine, " in an easy andfamiliar style," enriched with "manyamusing particulars of his travels, adventures,and perilous escapes." Hesubsequently canvassed the borough ofReading, in anticipation of a dissolutionof parliament ; but being opposed tocatholic emancipation, he withdrew hispretensions a few days anterior to hisdeath, which happened on the 6th ofAugust, 1824, at his chambers in theAlbany.COCHRANE, (JOHN DUNDAS,)nephew of the Honourable Sir AlexanderCochrane, was born about theyear 1795 ; and, at the age of ten, wenton board of a man-of-war, in which heserved in various parts of the WestIndies, till his twentieth year. At theconclusion of the general peace, he travelled,on foot, through France, Spain,and Portugal ; and, in 1820, he offeredto undertake a journey into the interiorof Africa. Government not accedingto his wishes, he then procured leave ofabsence for two years, and set out on anexpedition, by foot, round the globe, asnearly as it could be done by land ; hisleading object being to trace the shoresof the polar sea along America. Havingreached St Petersburghh, and procuredthe necessary credentials for his journey,he set out for Siberia; but had notproceeded far, before he was attackedby robbers, stripped naked, and tied toa "tree, from which he was released bya boy, who accidentally passed thatway. After numerous other perils andadventures, he reached Krasnoufink,where the inhabitants requested hewould remain ten days, to be presentat a dinner, to be given in honour ofthe first Englishman who had visitedthe place, a compliment which hethought fit to decline. On his arrivalat Kamschatka, the danger he had undergone,and the difficulties he hadencountered, determined him to prolonghis journey no further ; and, accordingly,after a stay of seven months atKamschatka, and marrying a lady ofthat place, he set out on his return toEurope. In his account of this journey,he states that he travelled upwards ofsix thousand miles, and at an expensewhich fell short of a guinea. He diedin the latter part of 1825.Repel, (the Honourable GEORGETHOMAS,) fifth son ot the Earl of Albemarle,was born on the 13th of June,1799. He entered the army as alieutenant in the twentieth foot, andhas since risen to the rank of major.In 1824, he appears to have passedsome time at the court of Persia, andreturned to England with a fondnessfor travel, which he took an opportunityof gratifying in the .summer of 1829.His own words will best describe hisviews: "The public attention," heobserves, " being drawn to the warbetween the Russians and Turks, andthe ill success which attended the former,a previous intercourse with thelatter having given me a more thanusual interest in the question, I determinedto visit the country, and bringhome a faithful record of all I saw andheard." In the course of his travelshe visited Athens, the plains of Troy,Gallipoli, Constantinople, Adrianople,crossed the Balkan, and thence returningto the Turkish capital, set out, bywayof the Morea, for England, wherehe arrived in March, 1830. His accountof this journey, published under thetitle of A Journey across the Balkan,&c., is highly interesting, and in particularfor the information it containsrelative to the war between Turkey andRussia.SCIENCE.COWARD, vWitLAM,) was born atWinchester, in the year 1656 or 1657,He completed his education at theUniversity of Oxford, where he graduatedB.'A. in 1677 ; and, in 1680, waschosen probationer fellow of MertonCollege. He graduated M. A. in 1683 ;and commencing upon the study ofphysic, took his degrees of bachelor anddoctor in that faculty, in 1685 and1687, successively. He practised hisprofession first at Oxford, Northampton,Ipswich, and London ; but it is in thecharacter of a metaphysician alone, thathe has become celebrated. His chiefmetaphysical work appeared in 1702,under the title of* Second Thoughtsconcerning the Human Soul; demonstratingthe nature of the human soul, asbelieved to be a spiritual, immortal substance,united to a human body, to be aplain heathenish invention, and notconsonant to the principles of philosophy,reason, or religion ; but the groundonly of many absurd and superstitiousopinions, abominable to the reformedchurches, and derogatory, in general,to true Christianity. This gave rise toa controversy between Dr. Coward andvarious writers, of whom Mr. Boughtonand Mr. Turner appear to have been themost formidable. He answered themboth in separate pamphlets, and afterwardsrepeated his doctrines in a workentitled The Grand Essay, or a Vindicationof Reason and Religion against theImpostures of Philosophy. He was nowconsidered an avowed enemy of revelation,and his works contained so muchthat was at variance with the generalopinion, that they were presented tothe house of commons, a committee ofwhich was directed to examine intotheir contents, and to discover theauthor, printer, and publisher. Dr.Coward, having acknowledged himselflo be the writer, was called before thehouse, when he declared that he neverintended any thing against religion ;that there was nothing contained in hisbooks, either contrary to morality orreligion ; and that if there were, he washeartily sorry, and ready to recant thesame. The house, however, came tothe resolution, that Dr. Coward's bookscontained doctrines and positions contraryto the doctrine of the church ofEngland, and tending to the subversionof the Christian religion, and orderedthem to be burnt by the common hangman.This proceeding, as might beexpected, only excited a greater interestwith respect to his doctrines ;and he, in consequence, published a newedition of his Second Thoughts, whichwas followed by a treatise, entitled TheJust Scrutiny, or a Serious Inquiry intothe Modern" Notions of the Soul. Dr.Coward's other publications are, a tract,entitled Opthalmiatria, in which thetheory of vision is treated of by him inavery scientific manner ; The Lives ofAbraham, Isaac, and Jacob, an heroicpoem ; Licentia Poetica ; and CriticalObservations on the Principal Ancientand Modern Poets. He died some timein the year 1725, at Ipswich.DALE, (SAMUEL,) was born in 1C60,and practised as an apothecary atBraintree, in Essex, until about the year1730, when he became a licentiate ofthe College of Physicians, and a fellowof the Royal Society. He attainedmuch celebrity as a medical and botanicalwriter, and died in June, 1739. Hisprincipal work was published in 1693,under the sanction of the College ofPhysicians, and entitled Pharmacologia,seuManuductio ad Material Medical.It went through several editions inLondon, and four on the continent, andprocured for the author a very high reputation." This work," says'Pulteney,may be said to have been one of tileearliest rational books on the subject;and between the first and last editions,an interval of forty years, much of thatcredulity which had obtained respectingthe powers of simples, had abated."He also edited Silas Taylor's Antiquitiesof Harwich and Dover Court, andAPPENDIX.was the author often papers, principallyrelating to natural history and pharmacy,in the Philosophical Transactions.HARRIS, (JOHN,) was born aboutthe year 1670, and received his educationat St. John's College, Cambridge,where he graduated B. A. in 1687, andM. A. in 1691. He took orders in thechurch, and obtained some considerablepreferments, the last of which was aprebend of Rochester. He took hisdoctor's degree in 1699, and, about thesame time, became a fellow of the RoyalSociety, of which he became secretaryand vice-president The chief worksby which he distinguished himself are,A Treatise on the Theory of the Earth ;A Treatise on Algebra ; A Translationof Partie's Geometry into English ;Astronomical Dialogues, which wentthrough three editions ; and his LexiconTechnical, or an Universal Dictionaryof Arts and Sciences, in two volumes,folio. This work entitles the author tohonourable notice, as the one on whichall subsequent dictionaries of science,and encyclopaedia, have been based. Dr.Harris also printed several sermons, andleft unfinished A History of Kent, whichwas published after his death. Thistook place on the 7th of September,1719, after a life more distinguished bythe brightness of his intellectual, thanthe excellence of his moral, qualities.Dr. Harris," says Mr. Gough, in hisBritish Topography, " died an absolutepauper, at Norton Court, and wasburied in Norton Church, at the expenseof John Godfrey, Esq., who hadbeen his very good friend and benefactor."GRAHAM, (GEORGE,) was born atGratwick, in Cumberland, in 1675, and,in 1688, was apprenticed to a watchmaker,in London. Before the expirationof his apprenticeship, he was takeninto the family of the celebrated Tompion,who treated him with parentalaffection as long as he lived. Mr.Graham soon became the most eminentamong his profession ; his time-pieceswere the most accurate that had everbefore been invented ; and several astronomicalinstruments, which he improvedand contrived, contributedgreatly to the advancement of thatscience. The mural arch, which hemade for the Observatory at Greenwich,was the original from which thebest foreign instruments were constructedby English artists. Dr. Bradley'ssector, by which he discovered twonew motions in the stars, was of Graham'sinvention and make ; and ourmodern orreries are all founded on themodel of one constructed by the subjectof our memoir. He died "in 1751 ; atwhich time he was a fellow of theRoyal Society, to whose Transactionshe communicated several ingenious andimportant discoveries, relating chieflyto astronomical and philosophical subjects.THRELKELD, (CALEB,) was bornat Kirkwall, in Cumberland, on the31st of May, 1676. In 1698, he graduatedM. A. in the University of Glasgow;and, shortly afterwards, settledat Low Hiiddlesceugh, in the characterof a dissenting minister. Having, however,acquired, while at the former place,a taste for physic and botany, he turnedhis attention to the study of them ; tookhis degree of M.D. at Edinburgh, in1712; and removed to Dublin, whereforabout a year, he acted both as divineand physician. Finding his practiceincrease, he dropped his character ofthe former ; sent for his family to joinhim ; and occupied, with much success,his whole time as a practitioner in medicine,till the period of his death,which occurred on the 28th of April,1728. The only work he publishedappeared the year previous to his decease,under the title of Synopsis Stir-piusHibernicarum, alphabetical disposition; sive, Commendation de Plan tisIndigent, praesertim DubliniensibusInstitute, with an appendix, by Dr.Molyneux. He dedicated it to theArchbishop of Armagh, and described itas " the first essay of the kind in thekingdom of Ireland." The preface isremarkable for the quaint style in whichit is written, but proves him to havebeen a man of some erudition in thescience of botany ; although, accordingto Dr. Pulteney, he was " better acquaintedwith the history of plants,than with plants themselves." Amongother curious observations in the work,he says, " The Irish grammarians remark,that all the names of the Irishletters, are names of trees." He intro-scienceduce, also, into the work, some severe,and rather coarse, strictures on Dillwho, however, thought them toocontemptible to answer; and only noticedthem in a letter, wherein he observesof Threlkeld, that "there wasbut one plant recited in the book whichwas not known before as a native ofIreland." He appears to have been anamiable man, and very popular amongthe poor, to whom he was a great benefactor,both in his professional andmoral relation to them.HALES, (STEPHEN,) was born atBeckesbourn, in Kent, in 1677, andeducated at Bennet College, Cambridge,of which, he became a fellow, in 1702.During his residence at the university,he studied, besides divinity, variousbranches of science and natural philosophy,and constructed a planetariumupon the Newtonian system of astronomy.Having graduated M.A., andentered into holy orders, he was, in1710, presented to the perpetual curacyof Teddington, in Middlesex ; and, notlong after, he vacated his fellowship byaccepting the living of Forelock, inSomersetshire, which he exchanged forthat of Abingdon, in Hampshire. In1717, he was elected a fellow of theRoyal Society; and, in the followingyear, communicated to that body anaccount of some experiments concerningthe effect of the sun's heat in raisingthe sap in vegetables. On this subject,he published a work, in 1727, underthe title of Vegetable Statics, &c., whichis esteemed a model of experimentalinvestigation, and has been very highlypraised by Haller. A second editionappeared of it in 1731 ; and, in 1733,the author published a kind of sequelto it, under the title of Statical Essays,containing Hydrostatics, or an accountof some Hydraulic and HydrostaticalExperiments made on the Blood andBlood-vessels of Animals, &c. He had,in the meantime, been appointed oneof the trustees for settling a colony inGeorgia, and presented by the Universityof Oxford with the degree ofD.D. In 1739, he obtained the goldmedal of the Royal Society, for a papercontaining An Account of some Experimentson Sea Water, &c., and on theSolution of the Stone in the Bladder.In 1741, he communicated his inventionof ventilators for renewing the air inmines, prisons, hospitals, and the holdsof ships; a plan which he subsequentlyapplied to the cleansing and preservationof corn. In 1753, he was electeda foreign member of the French Academyof Sciences ; and, on the death ofFrederick, Prince of Wales, he wasmade clerk of the closet to the princessdowager. A canonry of Windsor wasalso offered him ; but he refused it onaccount of its probable interferencewith his usual plan of spending histime. He died at Teddington, in January,1761, having passed through lifewithout an enemy ; " and, perhaps,"says Dr. Aikin, " the records of biographycannot produce a character moremarked by the union of blamelessnesswith active benevolence." Pope mentions" plain parson Hale," as a modelof sincere piety ; and Haller calls himpious, modest, indefatigable, and bornfor the discovery of truth." He communicatedseveral papers, besides thosealready mentioned, to the Transactionsof the Royal Society ; and published,anonymously, A Friendly Admonitionto the Drinkers of Gin, Brandy, andother Spiritous Liquors, which hasbeen several times reprinted, and distributedgratis.LONG, (ROGER,) was born in the year1679, and educated at the University ofCambridge, where he became masterof Pembroke Hall, and Ounces's professorof astronomy. He is known tothe scientific world, by a valuable treatiseon this science, and also as theinventor of a curious astronomical machine.This was a hollow sphere, ofeighteen feet diameter, in which morethan thirty persons might sit conveniently; and within side the surface,which represented the heavens, werepainted the stars and constellations,with the zodiac, meridians, and axisparallel to the axis of the world, uponwhich it was easily turned round by awinch. He died on the 16th of December,1770, having previously graduatedD. D., and been twice chosenvice-chancellor of the university. Heis said to have been a very ingeniousand facetious person ; but his pretensionsto the latter character are scarcelysupported by the following anecdote :As he was walking, one dusky even-appendix.ing, with a Mr. Boufoy, through thestreets of Cambridge, that gentleman,on coming to a short post fixed in thepavement, took it for a boy, saying, inahurry, " Get out of my way, boy."That' boy, sir," said the doctor, " isa post-boy, who turns out of his wayfor nobody." The relator of this anecdoteadds, " Of late years, he has leftoff eating flesh-meats ; in the roomthereof, puddings, vegetables, &c. ;sometimes a glass or two of wine."HADLEY, (JOHN,) was born aboutthe year 1680, and was elected a fellowof the Royal Society, in 1717. He contributedvarious papers to the PhilosophicalTransactions ; but he is chieflycelebrated for his account of the reflectinginstrument for taking angles, commonlycalled Hadley's quadrant, orsextant. The first idea of this excellentinstrument was suggested by Mr.Hooke, and Sir Isaac Newton is said tohave brought it to completion. It consistsof an octant, or the eighth part ofa circle ; an index, speculum, two horizontalglasses, four screens, and twosight vanes. Two sorts of observationsmay be made with it: the back observation,when the back of the observeris turned towards the object ;and the fore observation, when the faceof the observer is turned towards theobject. Navigation is much indebtedto this instrument for the very greatand rapid advances, which it has madeof late years. Angles may be taken byit, with equal facility at the mast headas upon deck ; and, supposing manyislands to be visible from the former,and only one from the latter, no usefulobservation can be made by any otherinstrument. One of its most invaluableproperties, in making marine observations,is, that it is not affected by theship's motion ; for, provided the marinercan see distinctly the two objects in thefield of his instrument, no motion noroscillation of the ship will injure hisobservation. Mr. Hadley, to whom weareindebted for the first description,but not for the invention of the quadrantthat bears his name, died on the 15thof February, 1744.Cates, (MARK,) was born about1680, and early imbibed a taste for thestudy of natural history, which inducedhim, in 1712, to make a voyage toVirginia, where he remained sevenyears, occupied in collecting its variousproductions. He returned to Englandin 1719, but, at the suggestion of SirHans Sloane, and other eminent naturalists,almost immediately remarkedfor America, with the professed purposeof describing, delineating, and collectingthe most curious natural objects in thatcountry. He resided chiefly in Carolina,whence he made excursions to Georgia,Florida, and the Bahama islands ; and,on his return to England, in 1726, hebegan to prepare for publication theresult of his researches, which appearedin two volumes, folio, under the title ofThe Natural History of Canada, Florida,and the Bahama Islands. The workcame out, originally, in numbers, andwas considered by far the most splendidthat had been then executed in England.A reprint of it took place in 1754and 1771 ; and, to the last edition, aLinnaean index has been added. Mr.Catesbyby died in 1749, having been previouslyelected a fellow of the RoyalSociety, to whose Transactions he contributeda paper assertive of the migrationof birds on his own observation.A plant of the extraneous class hasbeen called, after him, Catesbea, byGronovius.COTES, (ROGER,) was born atBurbage, in Leicestershire, of whichplace his father was rector, on the 10thof July, 1682. He received the rudimentsof his education at LeicesterSchool, where he displayed such abilityfor the mathematics, that his uncle, theRev. Mr. Smith, requested him, as apupil, in his own house. He was afterwardssent to St. Paul's School, andfrom thence, in 1699, to Trinity College,Cambridge, of which he was chosen afellow in 1705, being at the time tutorto the sons of the Marquess (afterwardsDuke) of Kent, to whose family he wasrelated. In January, 1706, he was appointedPlumier professor of astronomyand experimental philosophy, being thefirst upon that foundation. In the sameyear, he graduated M. A. ; took ordersin 1713; and, shortly afterwards, publishedthe second edition of Sir IsaacNewton's Principia, with an admirablepreface, in which he expressed the truemethod of philosophizing, shewed theSCIENCE,foundation on which the Newtonianphilosophy was built, and refuted theobjections of the Cartesian and all otherphilosophers against it. The author didnot long survive the high reputationwhich this work obtained for him: hedied, regretted as an irreparable loss toscience, on the 5th of June, 1716.Newton is recorded to have said, " IfCotes had lived, we had known something."He left several valuable worksbehind him, which were published byhis relation, and successor in the professorship,Dr. Robert Smith. Theyare entitled, Harmonia Menstruum;Hydrostatical and enigmatical Lectures;and A Compendium of Arithmetic,Of Dioptrics, and the Nature ofCurves. In the Philosophical Transactions,are published his Logometria,and An Account of the great Meteor,which was seen in 1715.Aston, (CHARLES,) a native ofScotland, was born some time in theyear 1683 ; and, having procured thepatronage of the Duchess of Hamilton,while pursuing his studies at Glasgow,was enabled, with her assistance, togratify his inclination for following theprofession of physic. About 1716, heaccompanied his friend, the celebratedAlexander Monro, to Leyden, whence,after studying for three years underBoerhaave, he proceeded to Edinburgh,and gave lectures on botany and materiamedica. His talents, in conjunctionwith those of Rutherford, Monro,Sinclair, and Plummer, laid the foundationof the school of physic at Edinburgh,where he died, on the 22nd ofNovember, 1760. Dr. Aston is principallyheld in estimation as a botanicalwriter, in which character he published,besides an Index Plantarum, andIndex Medicamentorum, for the use ofhis pupils, a work called TyrociniumBotanical Eiiinburghense, 1753. Itwas written in opposition to the systemof Linnaeus, whose arguments on thesexes of plants he strove hard to invaliddate ; and, " if the Swede's doctrine,"said Dr. Pulteney, " could have beeneasily shaken, the learning and abilitiesof Aston were sufficient to have effectedhis purpose." Dr. Aston's medical papersappear in The Edinburgh MedicalEssays, entitled A Dissertation on Tinas an Anthelmentic ; A Dissertation onOpium; and A Case of ExtravasatedBlood in the Pericardium. But hismost popular and valuable work waspublished ten years after his death,containing an account of his Lectureson the Materia Medica, which must beconsidered, however, more as a historyof its past, than an account of its present,state. In 1743, he communicated to theRoyal Society what he then called AParadoxical Discovery, respecting thepower of quick-lime, in which he fanciedhe had discovered a property that wouldpreserve it from exhaustion underrepeated effusions of water. This opinionwas contested by his friend andcolleague, Dr. Whytt ; during his controversywith whom, he published ADissertation on Quick-lime and Limewater;which, however, tended moreto confirm his adversary's opinions thanto support his own. Astoria, in botany,a genus of plants of the classpolynesia, and order monomania, iscalled after his name.Collins, (PETER,) was bornin 1694, and brought up, by his father,who was a Quaker, to the business of awholesale man's mercer. He carriedon this business in London, in partnershipwith a brother, devoting all hisleisure to the pursuit of natural history,to which his attention had been turnedat an early age. He communicatedseveral papers to the PhilosophicalTransactions, and was made a memberof the Royal Society in 1728; he wasalso a member of the Society of Antiquaries.On the establishment of thesubscription library at Philadelphia, heundertook the direction of its purchasesin London for more than thirty years ;and it was through his means "that thecelebrated Dr. Franklin was first incitedto the pursuit of electrical experiments.He maintained a correspondencewith scientific men in almostevery part of the world; and few learnedforeigners came to London withoutpaying him a visit. Horticulture washis favourite pursuit, and his botanicalcollection at Mill Hill, near Enfield,was, at the time, one of the most considerablein England. Linnaeus, withwhom he formed an intimacy, has perpetuatedhis name among botanists, bygiving it to an American plant of thediandrous class, under the title of Col-appendix.livonia. Mr. Collinsonon died, highlyrespected, in August, 1768, whilst hewas on a visit to Lord Petre, in Essex.Peering, (CHARLES,) was born inSaxony, about 1695 ; and, after havingtaken his degrees in physic, at Leyden,came to England in the train of a foreignambassador, some time in the year1720, and commenced practice, as anaccoucheur. Being skilled in botany,he soon after became a member of thesociety established by Dillenuis and Mr.Martyn. In 1736, he married, and, onthe recommendation of Sir Hans Sloane,removed to Nottingham, where, by hissuccessful treatment of the small-pox,he brought himself into some reputationj " but incurred," says Dr. Pul-tenet," the censure of the faculty, byhis pretensions to a nostrum." In theyear after his arrival in the town, hepublished, in a letter to Sir ThomasPerkins, Bart., An Account of an improvedMethod of treating the Smallpox; by which it appeared that hissuccess was owing to his use of antiphlogisticmedicines, and prescriptionsof cool regimen, which, at that time,few ventured to recommend. Hisreputation, as a physician, suddenlydeclining, he turned his attention tobotany ; and, in 1738, published a work,entitled A Catalogue of Plants naturallygrowing and commonly cultivated indivers parts of England, more especiallyabout Nottingham, &c. The numberof plants arranged by him is about eighthundred and fifty, of which he treatstwenty-seven as nondescript, andmentions ten not to be met with in thethird edition of Hay's Synopsis. Someof his discoveries were considered asnew, by that celebrated botanist, whocorresponded with him from Oxford,and had a high opinion of his knowledgeand assiduity. Dillenius, also, in hishistory of Musca, mentions him withhonour. " After his failure in physic,"says the authority before quoted, " hisfriends attempted several schemes toalleviate his necessities." He first becamean officer in the regiment raisedat Nottingham on account of the rebellion; but this bringing him morehonour than profit, he commencedwriting A History of Nottingham, frommaterials furnished him by John Plum-tree,Esq., and others; and which, onits completion, he dedicated to theDuke of Newcastle. He had scarcelyfinished it. when he was attacked by anasthma, which, in conjunction with hispoverty and dependence, brought on acomplicated state of distress and disease,and put an end to his existence on the12th of April, 1749. He was buried atthe expense of two of his principal creditors,who administered to his effects,and published, in 1751, his posthumouswork, entitled Nottingham Vetus etNova. He left, in manuscript, Anhortus siccus, consisting of upwards ofsix hundred species of plants, in eightquarto volumes ; and a Latin treatise onmidwifery. He seems to have been aman born to misfortune, and usedhimself often to speak of the adversefatality which always attended him.By some means, however, he mademany friends ; and, but for the violenceof his temper and want of prudence inhis conduct, would probably have risento high eminence and esteem in hisprofession.STILLINGFLEET, (BENJAMIN.)was born in the county of Norfolk, in1702, and received his education at thegrammar-school of Norwich, and atTrinity College, Cambridge ; on leavingwhich, with the degree of 1>. A., he becametutor to the son of Ashe Windham,Esq., and, in 1737, accompanied hispupil on a tour to the continent. In743, he returned to England, and,being allowed a pension of 100 perannum, by Mr. Windham, he devotedhis time to literary pursuits, and to thestudy of natural history, of which hewas passionately fond. In 1760, hewas appointed, through the influence ofLord Barrington, then secretary at war,barrack-master at Kensington ; and, inthe following year, he appears to havereceived a visit from Gray, the poet,who thus speaks of him in a letter ofthat .date : " I have lately made acquaintancewith this philosopher, wholives in a garret in the winter, that hemay support some near relations whodepend upon him. He is always employed,consequently, according to myold maxim, always happy, alwayscheerful, and seems to me a worthyhonest man. His present scheme is tosend some persons, properly qualified,to reside a year or two in Attica, toSCIENCE.make themselves acquainted with theclimate, productions, and natural historyof the country, that we may understandAristotle, Theophrastus, &c.,who have been heathen Greek to us somany ages ; and this he has got proposedto Lord Bute, no unlikely personto put it into execution, as he himselfis a botanist." He died on the 15th ofDecember, in this year, at his lodgingsin Piccadilly, and" was buried in St.James's Church. He appears to havebeen a man of the most virtuous habits,extensive acquirements, and great andvaried talents. His proficiency, bothin classics and mathematics, as well asin the art of music, is acknowledged tohave been very considerable ; whilsthis few productions in verse, justly, itis said, entitle him to a place besidesome of the most admired of our poets.It is, however, as a naturalist and abotanist that he is chiefly distinguished.Besides an octavo volume of travels,and some poetical pieces, he publishedThe Calendar of Flora; MiscellaneousTracts on Natural History ; and On thePrinciples and Power of Harmony. Hislife has been written by the Rev. VV.Coxe.MARTIN, (BENJAMIN,) said to havebeen the son of a farmer, was born atWorplesdon, Surrey, in 1704. Afterhaving acted as a schoolmaster, atChichester, he commenced lectures inexperimental philosophy, which he deliveredin the metropolis and variousparts of England. He filially settled,as an optician and globe-maker, inFleet Street, but becoming bankrupt,made an ineffectual attempt to destroyhimself, though his death shortly followed,in February, 1782. He distinguishedhimself by no remarkable inventionsor discoveries, but wrote usefulbooks on almost all of the mathematicaland philosophical sciences. They aretoo numerous to be all particularizedhere, but among the principal are. ThePhilosophical Grammar; Descriptionand Use of both the Globes, &c. ; TheYoung Trigonometry's Guide; Systemof the Newtonian Philosophy ; NaturalHistory of England ; Mathematical Institutions; Biographia Philosophical ;The Young Gentleman and Lady'sPhilosophy, &c. &c. He ako conducted,for several years, a scientificmagazine, which was given up afterfourteen volumes had been completed.HARRIS, (JAMES,) was born atSalisbury, in 1709, and received hiseducation at the grammar-school ofthat city, and at Wadham College, Oxford.He came into an independentfortune, by the death of his father, inhis twenty-fourth year, and thenceforthdevoted himself to scientific and antiquarianstudies. In 1744, he publisheda volume containing three treatises OnArt, On Music and Painting, and OnHappiness, which displayed great extentof reading and a closeness of thinking,well adapted to the illustration ofabstract and speculative topics. Themost celebrated of his works appearedin 1751, under the title of Hermes, oraPhilosophical Inquiry concerningUniversal Grammar, and at once placedthe author, in general opinion, in thefirst rank of profound and eruditedialectitians. In 1761, he entered parliamentas member for the borough ofChristchurch ; and, in the course of thenext two years, was made, successively,one of the lords of the admiralty, and alord of the treasury. He went out ofoffice in 1765; but, in 1774, was appointedsecretary and comptroller to thequeen, a place which, together with hisseat in parliament, he held till his death.In 1775, he published PhilosophicalArrangements, part of a plan which hehad formed for the illustration of thePeripatetic logic. His last work appearedin 1780, entitled PhilologicalInquiries, a short time before his decease,which took place at the close ofthat year. His character, as a writer,says Dr. Aikin, is so identified with thecredit of the Grecian learning andphilosophy, that it must share the samefate. Those to whom the names ofAristotle, and the other ancient dale c-titian, are still the highest authorities,will continue to prize the efforts ofHarris, Monbodilo, and others, torevive and elucidate their doctrines ;while those \%ho have formed themselvesupo ) later models of thinkingand reasoning, will probably considersuch exertions as laborious trifling.Two quarto volumes of Mr. Harris'sworks were published in 1801, by hisonly son, the Earl of Salisbury, whopaints the private character of his father482APPENDIX.in the most pleasing colours. Thereputation of Hermes has been muchlessened by Home Tooke's subsequentinquiries respecting language ; and itmust be confessed that the ignorance ofMr. Harris in the oriental and northerntongues, and his prejudices in favour ofthe Greeks, rendered his view of thesubject partial and circumscribed.BLAIR, (PATRICK,) a medical practitionerat Dundee, in Scotland, becameof note about the year 1710, by his accountof the anatomy of an elephant,which appeared in the PhilosophicalTransactions. Having had an opportunityof dissecting that animal, he wasenabled to give a most accurate descriptionof its various parts, particularly ofthe proboscis and its muscles ; and, accordingto Haller, he confirmed theopinion formerly held, that the elephanthas no gall-bladder. In one of thevolumes of the publication abovementioned,he also gave a description of theossicula adieus, accompanied with explanatoryengravings. At the time ofthe rebellion in 1715, he was suspectedof disaffection to government, and was,for a short time, confined in prison. Onhis release, he proceeded to London,where he published, in quarto, hisAnatomy of the Elephant ; and, in1718, produced a volume of MiscellaneousObservations on the Practice ofPhysic, Anatomy, Surgery, and Botany.In 1720, he increased his reputationby the publication of a work, entitledBotanical Essays ; in which, says oneof his biographers, " he treats of thesexes of plants, confirming the argumentsadduced in proof of them bysound reasoning, and some new experimentsof the manner of fecundation,of the circulation of the sap," &c.About 1722, he removed to Boston,and, in the following year, published apart of his work, entitled Pharmacyor an alphabetical andclassical dL-station on all the Britishindigenous and garden plants of theLondon Dispensary, introducing somenew plants discovered by himself.Another part appeared in 1728, but thework did not proceed beyond the letterH, its continuance being prevented bythe death of the author.SHORT, (JAMES,) was born at Edinburgh,in 1710 : and, in consequence of hisindigence and loss of both parents, wasadmitted, at the age of ten. into Heriot'sHospital, where he shewed proofs of amechanical genius, in the unassistedconstruction of various articles. On hisremoval to the high school, he madesuch proficiency in the classics, that hewas destined for the church ; but afterhaving attended a few theological lectures,he gave up divinity for mathematicalpursuits, and became a pupil ofthe celebrated Maclaurin. In 1732, heimproved the Gregorian telescope, bygiving larger apertures to the specula";and, in 1736, his fame procured him aninvitation from the queen, to becomethe mathematical instructor of William,Duke of Cumberland. He was, at thesame time, elected a fellow of the RoyalSociety ; and, shortly afterwards, accompaniedthe Earl of Morton, in asurvey of the Orkney Islands. Havingestablished himself as an optician, inLondon, he was, in 1743, commissioned,by Lord Spencer, to make a reflectorof twelve feet focus, for which he receivedsix hundred guineas. He madeseveral others of the same focal distance,with higher magnifiers ; that forthe King of Spain, completed in 1732,and for which he received 1,200, hasonly been surpassed by the reflectorsof Herschel. Mr. Short, who wasequally eminent as an artist and amiableas a man, died at New ing tun Butts,in 1766.ELLIS, (JOHN,) was born in London,in 1710, and brought up to commercialpursuits, which, however, ataste for natural history soon inducedhim to abandon. His principal discoveriesrelate to the nature of corallines,which he suspected to belong tothe animal kingdom, as had been suggestedby Jussieu. To ascertain thisfact, he visited the isle of Sleepy, in1752, and afterwards Brighton, assistedby the celebrated artist, Egret. Hepublished the result of his observations,in 1755, under the title of An Essaytowards a Natural History of the Corallines,&c., a very exact and curiouswork, which was received with greatapplause, and translated into severalforeign languages. Mr. Ellis madeseveral communications on the samesubject to the loyal Society, of whichSCIENCE.body he was a member; besides a varietyof papers relative to the barnacle, thecochineal, the polypes, &c. His botanicalinquiries were also extensive ;and, in a letter to Linnaeus, he printedaccounts of two new American generaof plants, and other discoveries. In1768, he received the Royal Society'sgold medal for two papers, one On theAnimal Nature of the Genus of Zoophytes,called Coralline ; the other, onthe Actinia Society. As a compensationfor his renunciation of trade, he wasmade agent for West Florida and Dominica,some time before his death,which occurred in 1776. A posthumouswork, published by his daughter, in1786, entitled Natural History of manycurious and uncommon Zoophytes, isesteemed the best systematic account ofthat class which has appeared.NEEDHAM, (JOHN TURBKRVILLE,)was born in London, in 1713, and educatedin the Roman catholic religion,at Douay. After having taken priest'sorders, he travelled about for severalyears, in the capacity of tutor. He issaid to have been the first catholicpriest who was admitted a member ofthe Royal Society, to which his philosophicalreputation procured his admission,as well as to the FrenchAcademy of Sciences. He died atBrussels, in 1781, at which time he wasrector of the Academy of Sciences andBelles Lettres of that city. He is principallycelebrated for his experimentallabours and speculations concerning theformation of organized bodies. Hispapers containing an account of these,have been published, both in Frenchand English. He supports Buffon'snotion of spontaneous generation byorganical particles, in opposition to thedoctrine of evolution ; and is said to haveassisted that philosopher in the compositionof his Natural History. Mr.Needham also published a tract, entitledDe Inscription quondam egyptianTurin inventa, in which "heattempted to prove that the Chinesewere descended from the egyptians.Voltaire having represented his opinionsas favourable to materialism, the subjectof our memoir published a declarationof his orthodoxy ; indeed, he appearsto have been almost superstitiousin his religious opinions. He is spokenof, by Haller, as a valuable contributorto physiological science.STANHOPE, (PHILIP, Earl of,) sonof James, Earl of Stanhope, was bornon the 15th of August, 1714, and succeededto his title, on his father's death,in 1721. He was educated by hisguardian, the celebrated Earl of Chesterfield,who prohibited him from thepursuit of mathematical studies, towhich, from his infancy almost, he hadmanifested a strong partiality. These,however, he continued to pursue withsuch indefatigable ardour, that he issaid to have become one of the firstmathematicians of the age. At thesame time, he made such progress inthe classics, that he could, without thesmallest hesitation, repeat the whole ofthe Iliad and the Odyssey of Homer inthe original language; whilst his proficiencyin the modern languages enabledhim to maintain a conversationin many of them with as much fluencyas if they had been his vernacular tongue.His attention, however, continued tobe principally occupied by his investigationof theorems in the higher and moresublime branches of geometry ; but it isto be regretted that he never found timeto publish the result of his researches.Earl Stanhope resided, for many years,at Geneva, whence he came to Londonto give his vote, on important occasions,in the house of lords. He always advocatedliberal measures, and was consideredone of the most patriotic andindependent noblemen in parliament.He died on the 7th of March, 1786,leaving behind him one son and awidow, to whom he had been unitedforty-one years. This lady died atthe advanced age of ninety-six ; and itis recorded of her, that a year or twoprevious to her death, she cut a set ofnew teeth, and had her hair renewed.Earl Stanhope was a most munificentpatron of learning and science ; andthough he published no works himself,we are indebted to him for the mostcomplete and magnificent edition of theworks of Archimedes, the posthumousworks of Dr. Simson, &c. Amongother works dedicated to him wereDodson's Logarithms, and the thirdvolume of Priestley's Experiments onAir. The following anecdote is told ofhim by his biographer : His lordship,APPENDIXwhose dress always corresponded tothe simplicity of his manners, was oncerather rudely prevented from going intothe house of peers by a door-keeperwho was unacquainted with his person.Lord Stanhope persisted in endeavouringto get into the house, without stoppingto explain who he was, and thedoor-keeper, determined also on hispart, made use of these words, " Honestman, you have no business here :honest man, you can have no businessin this place."LEWIS, (WILLIAM,) was born sometimeafter the commencement of thelast century ; and, after having takenhis medical degree, practised at Kingston,in Surrey. He became a fellow ofthe Royal Society, and a member of theRoyal 'Academy of Stockholm, and distinguishedhimself by several valuableworks on pharmacy and chemistry.His celebrity in the latter science occasionedhis being engaged to read acourse of lectures, before the Prince ofWales, at Kew, and the Duke andDuchess of Gloucester, at Kingston ;the manuscripts of which were soldafter his death, which occurred inJanuary, 1781. He was the first whocommunicated to the English reader,the chemical knowledge of the Germanchemists and metallurgists, in his Translationof the Chemical Works of GasperNeuman, with large additions, containingthe latter discoveries and improvementsmade in chemistry and the artsdepending thereon. He was also oneof the first promoters of the Society forthe Improvement of Arts ; from which,in 1767, he obtained the gold medal, forAn Essay on Pot-ashes. In addition tothe work before mentioned, he publishedA Course of Practical Chemistry;Experimental History of the MateriaMedica, a work of a comprehensivescientific knowledge, and of great utility,and of which a third edition was publishedby Dr. Aikin, and a translationappeared in German. He also wroteCommercial Philosophico-technicum,or the Philosophical Commerce of theArts; A System of the Practice ofMedicine, from the Latin of FredericHoffman, besides a few others ; and wasthe author of two papers published inthe Philosophical Transactions.Dissent, (CHARLES,) was born inPerthshire, in Scotland, in 1717; and,after having completed his medical educationat Edinburgh, went out, in 1740,as second surgeon to the military hospitalat Jamaica. Here he acquired aKnowledge of the different diseases prevalentin the torrid zone, and remainedtill 1745, when ill health compelled himto resign his situation and return toEngland. In the following year, hisenterprising spirit induced him to purchasean ensigncy in the army, whichhe accompanied to Flanders, and theredistinguished himself as an officer in theengineer brigade, till the terminationof the war, in 1748. The skill he hadevinced in that capacity, during differentsieges, encouraged him to cultivate thestudy of fortification ; the result ofwhich was a work published by him in1751, entitled An Essay on the Theoryand Construction of Fortifications. In1752, he resumed the medical profession,and commenced practice at Skelton,in Yorkshire ; obtained, in 1765,his diploma of M. D. from the Universityof St. Andrews ; and, after distinguishinghimself by a few medical publications,died at Clayton, near Thirst,on the 14th of June, 1791. In additionto the work already mentioned, hewrote A Treatise on the Scurvy; AnEssay on the Medical Constitution ofGreat Britain ; and a volume of MedicalEssays and Observations, a secondvolume of which he deposited, in manuscript,a few years before his death, atthe infirmary in Leeds. He also publisheda few political papers ; a smalltract on the naval art of war ; and presentedto the Prince of Wales, a treatiseon fortification.ROEBUCK, (JOHN,) was born atSheffield, in 1718, and engaged in thepractice of a physician at Birmingham,after having taken his degree of M. D.,at Leyden. Chemical researches, however,occupied more of his time thanthe practice of his profession, which heatlength relinquished for the exclusivepursuit of science. A manufactory ofsulphuric acid, which he established atPreston Pans, proved very profitable tohimself and his partner, a Mr. Garret,in conjunction with whom he alsoinstituted the iron foundry of Carron.The property he acquired by these spesrelations was, unfortunately, lost in anattempt to work coal and salt mines atMarrowbones, on the Duke of Hamilton'sestate. He passed the last twentyyears of his life wholly dependent on asmall annuity granted him by his creditors,and died on the 17th of July,1794. He was a fellow of the RoyalSociety, to whose Transactions he communicatedseveral philosophical papers,besides being the author of two politicalpamphlets.Judge, (JOHN.) son of the celebratedRev. Zachariah Judge, was bornin Devonshire, in 1720, and practisedas a physician, for many years, at Plymouth,where he died of the gout, onthe 26ih of April, 1793. He becamevery celebrated in his profession, bothas a practitioner and writer, and was afellow of the Royal Society, whoseTransactions he enriched by an accountof a mode he had discovered for improvingthe formation of reflectingtelescopes. As a medical writer, hedistinguished himself by the followingpublications : Dissertation on the InoculatedSmall Pox, &c. ; A Radicaland Expeditious Cure for a Recent andCatarrhous Cough, &c., which reacheda third edition ; a paper On Removingthe only Defect in the Lateral Operationfor the Stone, inserted in thePhilosophical Transactions ; and AnExperienced and Successful Method ofTreating the Fistula in Ano, insertedin,, the fourth volume of The MedicalMemoirs.Wellesley, (CHARLES,) wasborn in 1722, and educated for theRoman catholic church, in which hearrived at the dignity of bishop in histhirty-fifth year. He was also vicarapostolic of the western district, and adoctor of theology in the Sorbonne.He is entitled to notice, in this work, asthe last survivor of those eminent mathematicianswhose regulations of thechronological style in England, produceda change of the style in the year1752. He was a fellow of the RoyalSociety, and contributed to the PhilosophicalTransactions some ingeniousastronomical essays. He also publishedseveral separate works, both on mathematicsand theology ; among which arehis Analyse des Mesures des Rapportset des Angles, being an extension andexplanation of Cotes's Harmonia Men-stratum; There du Mouvement desAspires; De Inaequalitatibus MortuumLunarium ; and An Explanation of theApocalypse. He died at Bath, wherehe had the misfortune to lose severalvaluable manuscripts during the time ofthe riots, in the year 1797.RUSSELL, (PATRICK,) was born atEdinburgh, in February, 1726 ; andafter having received both his classicaland medical education in that city,joined his brother at the English factoryin Aleppo, and succeeded him as physicianthere, in 1755. During his residencethere, he was much respected,both for his abilities and behaviour, andwas allowed, by the Bashaw of Aleppo,to wear a turban, a mark of distinctionseldom conferred upon an European.In 1759, he wrote several letters respectingsome remarkable shocks of anearthquake, at that time felt in Syria,which were published in the PhilosophicalTransactions for the followingyear. About 1772, he returned toEngland, and settled, as a physician, inLondon, where he remained till 1781,when he accompanied a younger brotherto Vizagapatam, in the East Indies;and, in 1785, was appointed, by thegovernor of Madras, naturalist to theEast India Company. In this capacity,he wrote a small work, illustrated withfigures, on the serpent, in order toenable persons to distinguish betweenthe poisonous and harmless species ofthat animal, copies of which were transmittedto all the subordinate settlementsand military stations. In 1789,he returned to England ; and, two yearsafterwards, published his Treatise onthe Plague, in two volumes, quarto ; awork which had been the result of hisobservations of that disease at Aleppoduring the years 1760, 1761, and 1762.In 1794, he published a second editionof The Natural History of Aleppo, byAlexander Russell, to which he hadmade so many important additions, thatit was looked upon almost as a newwork. In 1/96, the East India directorspublished, at their own expense, ibiswork on Snakes ; and also, in 1803, hiswork, in two volumes, folio, entitledDescriptions and Figures of Two HundredFishes, collected on the coast ofAPPENDIXCoromandel. He was also the authorof some papers in the PhilosophicalTransactions, in addition to those alreadymentioned, and of a paper On the SmallPox and Measles, in the Medical andChirurgical Transactions. He died, unmarried,on the 2nd of July, 1805,making it a request that he might notbe buried within the walls of a church,as he thought dead bodies, depositedthere, were prejudicial to the living.Mitchell, (GEORGE,) was bornin 1728, and so early as his fourteenthyear, appears to have made some progressin the science of astronomy, as atthat time he communicated a paper onthe subject to The Gentleman'* Diary.the passage of the moon's shadow overEngland in the great solar eclipse thattook place on the 1st of April ; theexact correspondence of which to theobservations gained him great reputation.In the following year, he communicated,to the commissioners oflongitude, a plan for calculating theeffects of refraction and parallax, on themoon's distance from the sun or a star,to facilitate the discovery of the longitudeat sea. He was, for many years,one of the most eminent mathematicalteachers in London ; and, in 1767, wasappointed head master of the RoyalAcademy at Portsmouth. He had beenelected a fellow of the Royal Societysome years previous to his death, whichoccurred in 1785. Several of his communicationswill be found both in TheLady's and Gentleman's Diary, and atew, also, in The Gentleman's Magazine.Ingenious, (JOHN,) born atBreda, in 1730, came to England, in1767, for the purpose of obtaining informationrespecting the Suttonian methodof inoculation for the small pox.In the following year he went out, onthe recommendation of Sir John Pringle,to inoculate the royal family at Vienna,for which he was made body physicianand counsellor of state to the emperorand empress, and received a pensionfor life of 600 per annum. After inoculatingthe Grand Duke of Tuscany,he returned to England in 1779, inwhich year he was elected a fellow ofthe Royal Society, and published awork, entitled Experiments on Vegetables,discovering their great power ofpurifying the common air in sunshine,but injuring it in the shade, or night.It was highly esteemed by all the experimentalphilosophers of the time,and was translated into the French andGerman languages. His other publicationsare to be found in the sixty-fifth,sixty-sixth, sixty-eighth, sixty-ninth,seventieth, and" seventy-secondvolumes of the Philosophical Transactions,and relate entirely to scientificsubjects : the most important of whichare, Experiments on the Torpedo; onthe Electrophorus : New Methods ofSuspending Magnetic Needles ; andConsiderations on the Influence of theVegetable Kingdom on the AnimalCreation. He died on the 7th of September,1799, at Wood, the seat ofthe Marquess of Lansdowne, where hewas on a visit. He was very fond ofexhibiting his scientific experiments tohis friends, particularly to young people ;and is said to have been a man of greatkindness and simplicity of manners,though he disgusted Jenner, by thearrogant and supercilious tone in whichhe opposed him in the vaccine question.HUDSON, (WILLIAM,) born inWestmoreland, about the year 1730,was apprenticed to an apothecary inPanton Street, Hay market, where hepractised that profession after the deathof his master, and continued to resideduring the greater part of his life. Hewas principally distinguished for hisbotanical knowledge, and, as being oneof the earliest English disciples of Linnaeus,the study of whose writings, probably,gave his mind " that correct andscientific turn, which," in the words ofhis biographer, "caused him to take thelead as a classical English botanist" In1762, he published, with an elegantLatin preface by Stillingfleet, his FloraAnglica, to which he added a secondedition in 1778 ; the first one havingthen become so scarce, that twentytimes its original price was demandedand given for a copy. In this work,taking Ray's Synopsis as a groundworkfor his plan, he adopts the Linnaeansystem and nomenclature, towhich are superadded descriptions ofnew or rare plants, and the synonymsof the principal authors subsequent toSCIENCE.Ray and Dillenius. By this publicationhe gained considerable reputation,both in his own country and onthe continent. It was considered, inevery way, superior to the Flora Scotiaof Mr. Lightfoot, and derived no smalladvantage from a comparison with Mr.Hill's attempt of the same kind. In1783, his house being burnt down, helost not only a considerable quantity ofproperty, in default of insurance, butalso all his collection of manuscripts,which he had intended to publish underthe title of Fauna Britannica. He borehis misfortune with singular equanimityof mind ; and, having removed toJermyn Street, gave up practice, anddevoted himself to his favourite subjectof botany, to the time of his death,which occurred on the 23rd of May,1793. He was, in 1761, admitted afellow of the Royal Society, and of theLinnaean Society, in 1791 ; he also, forsome time, took the lead in the affairsof the Apothecaries' Company, and was,for many years, their botanical demonstratorin the Chelsea garden. He correspondedfrequently with Linnaeus andHaller, who were both of much serviceto him iu his studies, which were extended" not only to botany, in all itscryptogamic minutiae, but to insects,shells, and other branches of Britishzoology."WEDGEWOOD,(JosiAH ? ) was bornin July, 1730. He was the youngerson of a Staffordshire potter; and, beingdestined for the same business, learntnothing more in the way of educationthan reading, writing, and arithmetic.But the great powers of mind which hepossessed, gave him ideas superior tohis station, and enabled him to makesuch improvements in that branch ofbusiness, to which he was brought upasnot only gained him a handsomefortune, but considerable reputation,also, in the scientific world. The Staffordshirepotteries had produced noarticle superior to common earthenware,until the introduction of glazing, by twoDutchmen of the name of Euler, andthe subsequent discovery, by a Mr.Astbury, of mixing calcined flint withthe clay of Devonshire. A mechanic,of the name of Alsace, afterwards improvedthe construction of the potter'swheel, yet the Staffordshire was consideredmuch inferior in beauty to aFrench article, which, about, 1760, wasimported into this country, in considerablequantity. A turn, however, wasgiven to the market, in 1763, by Mr.Wedgewood's invention of a species ofware, which united so many excellenciesfor the table, that it was patronised bythe queen and nobility, and, under thename of queen's ware, came into verygeneral use. Its materials consisted ofthe whitest clays from Devonshire andDorsetshire, mixed with ground flint,and coated with a vitreous glaze. Avariety of subsequent experimentsenabled the inventor to produce severalother species of earthenware and porcelain,to which his own taste, and thatof his partner, Mr. Bentley, imparted aclassical elegance, that not only furnishedmodels for a variety of articlesin other materials, but exercised a considerableinfluence over the nationaltaste. Nor was the fame of his potteriesconfined to England 1 : services ofqueen's ware were to be seen on thetables of the remotest countries inEurope. Mr. Wedgewood also carriedon the pursuits of science with success ;and chemistry is indebted to him lorthe invention of a very useful hydrometer,adapted to the mensuration ofhigh degrees of heat. Its principle isthe property of very pure clays, whenthoroughly dried, of undergoing contractionon exposure to fire, which continuesin regular progression up to thehighest heat procurable by furnaces.He wrote several papers on this subject,which were published in the PhilosophicalTransactions for 1782, 1784,and 1786. Mr. Wedgewood died, at hishouse in Staffordshire, to which he hadgiven the name of Etruria, in January,795. His death excited universalregret in the neighbourhood, the populationand wealth of which had beenprodigiously increased by the fame ofhis potteries, and his own liberal promotionof all improvements which couldtend to the advantage of the country.Good roads were constructed, throughhis means, in several parts of the potteries; and he had the chief share inthe measure for carrying through parliamentthe act for the grand Trunkcanal, connecting the Trent and theMersey, in opposition to a powerfullanded interest. For his private chasdacier, no eulogy seems too high, whilsthis dealings with mankind, and hismanners in society, were such as tobespeak him the gentleman, in themost dignified and estimable sense ofthe word.BERKENHOUT, (JOHN,) was bornat Leeds, in 1730; and, after havingreceived the rudiments of education,went to Germany, for the purpose ofstudying the continental languages. Heafterwards made the tour of Europe;and, on his return to Berlin, instead ofgoing into trade, as his father had intended,became a cadet in the Prussianservice. In 1756, on the breaking out ofthe war with France, he was appointedcaptain in an English regiment, in whichhe served till the peace of 1760 ; when,being of an active disposition of mind,and finding his half pay insufficientfor his comfortable support, he went toEdinburgh, and commenced the studyof medicine. While at the university,he published his Clovis Anglica LinguaeBotanical ; " a book," says Hutchinson,of singular utility ; being the onlybotanical lexicon in our language, andparticularly expletive of the Linnaeansystem." About 1764, he removed toLeyden, and took there his degree ofM.D. in the following year. On hisreturn to England, he settled at Isle-worth,in Middlesex; and, shortly afterwards,published his PharmacopoeiaMedici, which reached a third editionin 1782. In 1778, he was sent, bygovernment, with the commissioners,to America, and was, for some time,imprisoned at Philadelphia, on suspicionof having been sent as a spy byLord North. For the dangers he hadincurred, he was rewarded, on hisarrival in England, with a pension, tillthe period of his death, which occurredin 1791. In addition to the worksabove-mentioned, he published Outlinesof the Natural History of Great Britainand Ireland, a work which establishedhis reputation as a naturalist, and was,for some time, out of print ; An Essayon the Bite of a Mad Dog; Symptomatology," a book," says Hutchinson,which is too universally known torequire any recommendation ;" FirstLines of the Theory and Practice ofPhilosophical Chemistry ; A Continuationof Campbell's Lives of Admirals ;and Biographia Literaria, of which onevolume only was published. He is said,also, to have been the author of severalmetrical and prose witticisms, and of atranslation of Count Tessin's letters tothe King of Sweden.Measures, (FRANCIS, Baron,) descendedfrom a French family, whichsettled in England on the revocation ofthe edict of Nantes, was born on the15th of December, 1731, in BroadStreet, Soho, where his father practisedas a physician. Having been educatedat Kingston-upon-Thames, he removedto Clare Hall, Cambridge, wherehe graduated B.A. in 1752, M. A. in1755, and obtained a fellowship. In1758, he published A Dissertation onthe Negative Sign in Algebra, containinga demonstration of the rules concerningit, in which he argued stronglyagainst the received doctrine of negative?quantities. Having removed to theinner Temple, he was, in due time,called to the bar, and went the westerncircuit, where his practice was extremelylimited. He was, however, inashort time, appointed attorney-generalof Quebec, where he performed hisduties with a strict regard to the interestsof the province; and, on hisreturn, he, in August, 1773, receivedthe appointment, which he held till hisdeath, of curator baron of the Exchequer.He also became agent to the protestantsettlers in Quebec; and, in1779, deputy-recorder of London. Inthe following year, he was elected seniorjudge of the sheriff's court in the samecity, where he presided till 1822, whenhe resigned the office. In 1784, whenDr. Mutton was displaced from theRoyal Society, he warmly espoused hiscause ; and, with a few others of thesame party, retired with him from theinstitution, when he was deprived ofhis office of foreign secretary. In 1800,he published Tracts on the Resolutionsof Affected Algebraic Equations, byDr. Halley, Mr. Raison, and SirIsaac Newton ; and continued to publishvarious works, till the period of hisdeath, which took place at Relate,Surrey, on the 19th of May, 1824. Themost celebrated of the baron's writingsis his Scriptures Logarithms, whichappeared at intervals, in six quartovolumes, between the years 1791 andSCIENCE.1807. His other works relate principallyto subjects connected with law,politics, or history. He also wrote numerousarticles in the PhilosophicalTransactions, and A View of the AncientConstitution of the English Parliament,for the second volume of The Archaeological.His character was highly estimable,though marked by a few peculiarities.He would live, sometimes the yearround, at his chambers in the Temple ;and, though he dined at RationePlace, where he had an establishment,he never slept there. He patronised literaturewith great liberality ; and, onone occasion, advanced 1,500 to bringout some particular work. He washeld in groat esteem by the scientificworld, and round his table were frequentlyto be found the first mathematiciansof the day. He was of such aneven temper, that a celebrated chesslayer declared he was the only manehad seen whose countenance did notindicate whether he was winning orlosing, at that game ; and so averse washe to a stigmatising spirit, that, afterseeing Dr. Johnson, he expressed a wishthat " he might never be again in thatman's company."WALKER, (ADAM,) the son of awoollen manufacturer, was born inWestmoreland, in 1731. Almost beforehe could read, he was put to hisfather's business, but this did not hinderhim from indulging his taste for mechanics.During his leisure hours, heconstructed models of corn mills, papermills, fulling mills, &c., which he erected,in miniature, on a small brook near hishome, and he is said to have built himselfa hut in the neighbouring thicket, wherehe used to retire for the purpose ofreading. At the age of fifteen, he becameusher to a school at Ledsham, inthe West Riding of Yorkshire ; and,three years afterwards, was appointedmathematical tutor to the free school atMacclesfield, Here, also, he engagedin trade ; but so unskilfully, or unsuccessfully,that he became bankrupt. Aromantic notion now entered into hishead of passing the remainder of hislife as an anchorite, in one of the islandsof Lake Windermere ; and the ridiculeof his friends alone deterred him fromcarrying his scheme into effect. Removingto Manchester, he establishedthere an extensive seminary; but thegreat success with which a lecture deliveredby him, on astronomy, in thattown, had been attended, induced himto give up his school. His reputation,as an astronomical lecturer, was soonextended, by his visits, in that capacity,to the principal cities and towns ; andat length, in 1778, by the advice of Dr.Priestley, he took the HaymarketTheatre, in London, for the display ofhis abilities. His success was such asto induce him to settle in the metropolis; and, having taken a house inGeorge Street, Hanover Square, hecontinued to read a course of lecturesevery winter ; attending, at intervals,Westminster, Eton, Winchester, andother great foundation schools. Hislectures were accompanied by the exhibitionof an eidouranian, or transparentorrery, in which, as in many others ofhis own invention, he displayed considerablemechanical skill. Severalworks also came from his pen, whichamply sustained his reputation as aman of science, up to the period of hisdeath, which took place on the llth ofFebruary, 1821. His scientific writingsare, A Treatise on the Cause and Cureof Smoky Chimnies; Philosophical Estimateof the Causes, Effects, and Cure ofUnwholesome Air in Cities; A Systemof Familiar Philosophy in Lectures ; ATreatise on Geography and the Use ofthe Globes; besides various papers inthe magazines, Philosophical Transactions,Young's Annals of Agriculture,&c. Mr. Walker was abo theauthor of Ideas suggested in an Excursionthrough Flanders, Germany,Italy, and France ; and Remarks madein a Tour to the Lakes of Westmorelandand Cumberland, in the Summerof 1791, to which is annexed a Sketchof the Police, Religion, Arts, and Agricultureof France, made in an excursionto Paris, in 1785.WALES, (WILLIAM,) was born in1734, and, in 1769, visited Hudson'sBay, for the purpose of making observationson the transit of Venus, anaccount of which he published, Hewas, in consequence, appointed to accompanyCaptain Cook in his two firstvoyages of discovery, of which he kepta journal, afterwards printed under thetitle of Astronomical Observations inAPPENDIX.the Southern Hemisphere. He was appointedmathematical master at Christ'sHospital, and secretary to the board oflongitude, some time previously to hisdecease, which took place in 1798.Besides the works above noticed, hewas the author of a treatise On theChronical Rising of the ConstellationPleiades, inserted, by Dr. Vincent, inhis Searches; On the Discovery ofthe Longitude by means of Time-pieces; Remarks on Forster's Accountof Cook's Last Voyage ; Inquiry intothe Population of England and vales ;Robertson's Elements of NavigationImproved ; and, Restoration of a workof Apollonius. He also communicatedseven papers to the Transactions ofthe Royal Society, of which body hewas a member.Hornby, (THOMAS,) was born in1734, and educated for the church, butdistinguished himself only as a mathematicianand astronomer. After havingtaken his degree of M. A., he was appointedSavilian professor of astronomyat Oxford, where he was also keeper ofthe Radcliffe library, and gave lectureson natural and on experimental philosophy.He took the degree of D. D.some time previous to his death, whichoccurred on the llth of April, 1810.Dr. Hornby's papers, in the PhilosophicalTransactions, are, On the Parallaxof the Sun; Observations on theSolar Eclipse ; Account of the Improvementsto be made by Observations ofthe transit of Venus, in 1769; Observationson the Transit of Venus, andEclipse of the Sun, on the 3rd of June,1769 ; The Quantity of the Sun's Parallax,as deduced from Observations ofthe Transit of Venus, on the 3rd ofJune, 1769 ; and, Inquiry into the Quantityand Direction of the proper Motionof Arcturus, with some Remarks on theDiminution of the Obliquity of theEcliptic. He also edited the astronomicalobservations made by Dr. Bradley,at Greenwich, and obtained muchreputation by the manner in which heperformed his task, though his delay inthe production of the work excited observationand censure.WALKER, (GEORGE,) was born in1734, at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, wherehis father was a respectable tradesmanof the dissenting persuasion. Beingsent to the University of Edinburgh, hethere studied mathematics under Dr.Matthew Stewart, and from him derivedhis taste for pure and elegant demonstration.He completed his educationat the University of Glasgow; and, afterhaving gone through the usual courseof preparation, commenced dissentingminister at Durham, in 1756. lie afterwardsaccepted the charge of a congregationat Yarmouth, where he married;and, in 1772, removed to Warrington,on being appointed mathematical tutorto the dissenting academy of that place.In 1775, appeared his Doctrine of theSphere, containing many plates for thedemonstration of propositions, of a peculiarconstruction. This work hasbeen highly praised by mathematicians,and, by some, is considered as an exampleof the purest method of geometricaldemonstration. In the same year,he was chosen one of the ministers ofthe High Pavement Meeting at Nottingham,where, engaging in the politicsof the day, he became an eloquentspeaker at public meetings, and drewup, among other papers, a petition toparliament, recommending the recognitionof American independence; ofwhich Mr. Burke declared that he hadrather have been the author, than of allhis own compositions on the same subject.After he had passed twenty-fouryears at Nottingham, Mr. Walker wasprevailed upon to undertake the officeof theological tutor, and superintendentof a dissenting academy, in Manchester;but soon resigned it, in consequence ofhis advanced years, and retired to theneighbourhood of Liverpool. In 1807,he came to London, for the purpose ofsuperintending the publication of twovolumes of his Sermons, and two volumesof Philosophical Essays, when he wasseized with an illness, and died in thesame year, at the age of seventy-three.He had published several sermons, inaddition to those just mentioned; AnAppeal to the People of England uponthe Test Laws, much admired by Mr.Fox ; and the first part of a Treatiseon Conic Sections, which added greatlyto his mathematical reputation. Mr.Walker's private character was highlyestimable: "such," says his biographer,was the kindness of his heart, andthe ease and cheerfulness of hisSCIENCE.social conversation, that they who hatedhis principles, could not hate the man."COVENTRY, (JOHN,) was born inSouthwark, in the year 1735. He wasmore than fifty years painter to theItoyal Mint, in the Tower of London,but is principally celebrated for his mechanicalpowers of invention. He assistedDr. Franklin, when he came toEngland, in his electrical experiments ;invented an hygrometer upon a newPrinciple ; and contrived a method ofdiscovering, by the microscope, thecurious structure of the air vessels, andthe minute capillary tubes for the circulationof the sap in wood. He arrivedat such perfection in the art of drawingoptical instruments, on ivory and glass,as to be able to draw parallel lines, onglass, the thousandth part of an inchonly asunder. He also made twochamber organs, and telescopes of considerablepower ; and terminated hisingenious career of invention with theconstruction of several curious staticalbalances for the assaying of gold, whichwould weigh to the thousandth part ofa grain. He died in December, 1812.STARK, (William,) was born atManchester, in July, 1740. Havingreceived the rudiments of education,under his uncle, at Cecrops, in Perth-shire,he entered the University ofGlasgow, where he studied under Smithand Black, and " acquired," says hisbiographer, in The Encyclopaedia Britannica," that logical precision, andthat contempt of hypotheses, with whichhe prosecuted all his future studies."From Glasgow he proceeded to Edinburgh,and attended the lectures ofMonro and Cullen, whose friendshiphe obtained through his superior abilities.In 1765, he came to London, andpassed two years in the constant studyof physic, surgery, and anatomy, in thelast of which he" attained to great proficiency.Whilst at St. George's Hospital,he made several experiments onthe blood, and other animal fluids,together with a few in chemical pharmacy,an account of which he left behindhim in manuscript. In 1767, hewent to Leyden, and took his degreeof M. D. ; and, shortly after his return,commenced, partly at the suggestion ofSir John Pringle and Dr. Franklin, aseries of experiments on diet, which hetried, to such an extent, upon his ownperson, that he died, principally ofdebility, on the 23rd of February, 1770.An account of these experiments, whichare as whimsical as they proved to bepernicious, is to be found in the quartovolume of his works, published in 1788,by Dr. Carmichael Smith, entitled,Works, consisting of Clinical and AnatomicalObservations, with Experiments,Heretical and Statical, revised and publishedfrom his original manuscripts.It displays great medical knowledge,and an eccentricity of genius, much resemblingthat of the celebrated Napier,the inventor of the logarithms, who issaid to have been Stark's ancestor byboth parents.PRICE, (JAMES,) a physician ofGuildford, where he was born aboutthe year 1740, distinguished himself byhis chemical talents ; his pretensions towhich, however, in a greater degreethan he was able to support, led to thedestruction of his reputation and hislife. He professed to have discoveredthe secret of making gold, or, at least,of a metal equal to it ; some of whichhe sent to the king, and to the RoyalSociety, of which he was a fellow. Inrelation to his experiments on this subject,he published two pamphlets, inwhich he pretended to have effected histransmutations by means of a red andwhite powder, but the composition ofwhich he kept secret. The RoyalSociety, however, insisted that he shouldrepeat his experiments before two oftheir body, on pain of dismissal; andafter having failed in several, he requestedto be allowed delay for anotherexhibition. His dread of exposurewould not suffer him to wait for theappointed time, a few day previous towhich he destroyed himself, by, as it issaid, drinking laurel water. He wasa man of considerable talents, and waspossessed of a large fortune, bequeathedto him by a relation, in conformity withwhose will he had exchanged his originalname of Higginbotham, for thatof Price.WITHERING, (WILLIAM,) the sonof an apothecary at Wellington, inShropshire, was born there some timein the year 1741 ; and after studyingAPPENDIX.pharmacy under his father, proceeded,for the completion of his medical education,to Edinburgh, where he took hisdegree of M. D., in 1766. He thensettled, and married, at Stafford; butfinding himself little encouraged there,removed to Birmingham, where he soonrose to extensive practice, and distinguishedhimself by his scientific as wellas medical abilities. In 1776, he published,in two volumes, octavo, a work,entitled A Botanical Arrangement ofBritish Plants, being an Account of theIndigenous Plants of Great Britain,classed according to the Linnsean system.It was very favourably received,and went through two more editions,one in 1787, in three volumes ; andanother, in 1796, in four volumes ; inboth of which he made several improvementsand additions, " that renderedit," says Dr. Aikjn, "an excellent nationalFlora." In 1779, he publishedAn Account of the Scarlet Fever andSore Throat, as it appeared in Birmingham,in the year 1778; and, in 1783, hetranslated Bergman's Biographia RegniMinerals. In 1785, he wrote An Accountof the Foxglove, and some of itsmedical uses; with Practical Remarkson the Dropsy, and other Diseases, inwhich he was the first who gave satisfactoryproof to the public of the diureticvirtues of the foxglove in dropsies. Healso contributed many important paperson chemistry and mineralogy, to theRoyal Society, of which he was madea fellow. He" died at Birmingham, inthe latter part of 1799. A genus ofAmerican plants was called Withering,after his name ; and the native carbonateof barytes, which he first discoveredand described, bears the appellationof Withering, in honour of him,REYNELL, (JOHN,) was born alChudleigh, in Devonshire, about theyear 1742. At the age of fifteen heentered the navy, which, in his twenty -fourth year, he quitted for the army,and was immediately sent upon activeservice to India, as an officer of engineers.He did not attain a higherrank than that of major, but received avery lucrative appointment as surveyor-generalof Bengal, On his return toEngland, he was elected a fellow of theRoyal Society, and became intimatewith the most eminent scientific men ofhis day. In the meantime, his namehad become known through the mediumof several publications, as a most iable and accurate geographer. Besides jhis account of the Ganges and Burram-porter rivers, which was inserted inthe Philosophical Transactions, he publishedA Chart of the Bank and Currentof Cape Lagullas ; Bengal Atlas; Mapof Hindostan ; Observations on the Topographyof the plain of Troy ; andhis greatest and best performance,his Geographical System of Herodotus.He also assisted Mungo Park, in thearrangement of his African Travels ;Dr. Vincent, in his Commentary onArran's Voyage of Searches ; and SirWilliam Jones, in his Oriental Collections,He was also a fellow of theEdinburgh Royal Society, a memberof the Royal Institute of France, ofthe Imperial Academy of St. Peters-burgh,and of the Koyal Society ofGroningen, at the time of his death,which took place on the 29th of March,1830.CURTIS, (WILLIAM,) was born atAlton, in Hampshire, in 1746, andbrought up under his grandfather, anapothecary of that place. He commencedthe practice of this profession,on his own account, in London ; but adecided bent for botanical pursuits inducedhim, at length, to relinquish hisproper business for that of a lecturer innatural history, and a demonstrator ofplants, from peregrinations, and thespecimens cultivated by him in a botanicalgarden. He kept gardens successivelyat Bermondsey, Lambeth Marsh,and Brompton, which he cultivated withgreat assiduity and success. In 1771,he obtained some reputation, as anentomologist, by the publication of apamphlet, entitled Instructions for Collectingand Preserving Insects, particularlyMoths and Butterflies, illustratedwith a copper-plate ; and, in the followingyear, he published a translationof The Fundamental Entomologist ofLinnaeus, entitled An Introduction tothe Knowledge of Insects, containingsome valuable additions to the original.In 1777, appeared the first number ofhis Flora Londinensis, a work whichwas extended to six fasciculi, each containingseventy-two plates. This is hisprincipal production, and one whichSCIENCE.has contributed much to the promotionof a taste for botanical studies in thiskingdom. The great accuracy of thedelineations, taken by means of acamera, and the excellence of the accompanyingdescriptions, cannot be toohighly eulogized, and have deservedlygiven the work a very high rank amonglocal Floras. Mr. Curtis's next publicationwas The Botanical Magazine,the plan of which was to render it ageneral repository of garden plants,whether already delineated or not. In1782, he published A History of theBrown-tailed Moth, with a view ofallaying the extraordinary and almostsuperstitious alarm, which had spreadthrough the country, in consequence ofthe appearance of an unusual numberof caterpillars. Another of his usefulproductions was Practical Observationson the British Grasses, the object ofwhich was to direct the choice of thefarmer to the most valuable kinds forcultivation. Mr. Curtis, who bore thecharacter of an honest, friendly man, andan entertaining companion, died in 1799.Besides the works before-mentioned,he was the author of two excellent entomologicalpapers in the Transactions ofthe Linnaean Society, of which he wasan original member. After his deathwere published his Lectures on Botany,illustrated by coloured plates.ATWOOD, (GEORGE,) was born in1746, and educated at WestminsterSchool, and Trinity College, Cambridge,where he graduated B.A. in 17G9, withthe rank of third wrangler. He subsequentlyobtained a fellowship, becameM A. in 1772, and was electeda fellow of the Royal Society in 1776.At the university, he delivered, forseveral successive years, a course of lectureson mechanical and experimentalphilosophy, which obtained for himgreat reputation. The celebrated Mr.Pitt often employed him in financialcalculations, and bestowed on him apatent office, which required but littleof his attendance, that he might havethe full benefit of his services. He diedin his sixty-second year, having distinguishedhimself, as an author, by avariety of papers, published in the PhilosophicalTransactions ; the principalof which are, A General Theory for theMensuration of the Angle, subtendedby two objects, &c. ; A Treatise on theRectilinear Motion and Rotation ofBodies ; Investigations founded on theTheory .of Motion, for determining theTimes of Vibration of Watch Balances ;A Dissertation on the Stability of Ships;and A Dissertation on the Constructionand Properties of Arches. Many ofthese works have materially contributedto the progress of science, bymultiplying the modes of illustrationwhich experimental displays afford forthe assistance of the instructor; but Mr.Atwood can scarcely be said to haveextended, very considerably, the boundsof human knowledge ; or to have possessedthat extraordinary talent, orenergy of mind, by which great difficultiesare overcome, or new methodsof reasoning invented.Grander, (JONAS,) the son ofa clergyman, was born in Sweden, in1748, and received his education at theUniversities of Gothenburg and Upsal.He visited England some time previousto 1782, in which year he succeeded toDr. Solander's place in the BritishMuseum. He also held the offices oflibrarian to the Royal and LinnaeanSocieties ; of the latter lie was one ofthe first founders, and, on its incorporationby royal charter, in 1801, he drewup its laws and regulations. His deathtook place in October, 1810, at whichtime he was vice-president of the LinnseanSociety. Mr. Dryander communicatedfour papers on the subject ofbotany, to the Transactions of the Linnaean,and one to those of the RoyalSi city. He also superintended thepublication of Mr. Anton's Hortus Kew-mensis,and Dr. Roxburgh's Plants ofthe Coast of Coromandel, in which thecritical learning and accuracy of Mr.Dryander are most usefully displayed.His Catalogus Bibliotheca HistoricalJoseph Banks " is a model,"says his biographer, " for all futurewriters in this line ; but a model rathercalculated to check than to excite imitation.A work so ingenious in design,and so perfect in execution, can scarcelybe produced in any science ; so faultlessa specimen of typography we have neverelsewhere seen." In private life, hewas respected, though somewhat impatientof contradiction, and too apt totreat misconception with a severity due41)4APPENDIX,only to misrepresentation. On beingsasked what share Dr. Smith had in thecomposition of The Flora Graeca, he issaid to have replied, with a vehemencethat startled the inquirer, " Everyword." The versatility of his conversationwas equal to that of his genius :whether the subject, says his biographer,was a question in science or apoint of history ; the politics of Europeor the tittle-tattle of an obscure Germancourt ; the literary talents and performancesof any distinguished man, orhis private transactions ; the intriguesfor a place in court, a professorship, ora.domestic establishment, he was sureto throw some light upon it.CRAWFORD, (ADAiR,) was bornin 1749 ; and, after taking his degree ofM. D., practised, with great success, inLondon, where he became physician toSt. Thomas's Hospital, and Yellow ofthe Royal Society, and other scientificbodies. He was also, for some time,professor of chemistry at Woolwich, anddistinguished himself in that science byhis Experiments and Observations onAnimal Heat, of which he published anaccount that reached a second editionin 1784. It was translated into theGerman and Italian languages, andgave rise to a publication by Mr. Morgan,in which he examined the theoryof Crawford. He also made some experimentson the matter of cancer, andis said to have been the first who recommendedmuriate of barytes as a curefor scrofula. He died at Lymington, inJuly, 1795. Some years alter his death,a tract, written by him, was published,entitled, An Experimental Inquiry intothe effect of Tonics, and other MedicinalSubstances, on the cohesion of theAnimal Fibres.BRAMAH, (JOSEPH,) was born atScarborough, in Yorkshire, on the 13thof April, 1749. His father rented afarm under Lord Strafford, and he washimself brought up to agricultural pursuits,but was prevented from followingthem after his sixteenth year, in consequenceof an accidental lameness inhis ankle. He was then apprenticed toa carpenter, as being the most suitabletrade to the capacities which he had displayedalmost from his infancy. Itseems that, when quite a boy, he hadsucceeded in cutting a single block ofwood into a violin, and in making twovioloncellos, which were found to bevery tolerable instruments. On theexpiration of his apprenticeship, heobtained employment with a cabinetmaker,in London, and soon aftercommenced that business on his ownaccount. His mechanical abilities soondisplayed themselves in a variety ofuseful inventions, for the manufactureof which he took some premises inDenmark Street, Soho, which, on hissubsequent removal to Piccadilly, lierelinquished for some more extensiveones at Publico. In 1783, a patent wasgranted him for a water-cock, intendedto allow the fluid a more uninterruptedpassage than had hitherto been practicable; and, in the following year, heobtained one for his improvement inlocks. Their peculiar character dependson the arrangement of a numberof levers or sliders, in such a manneras to preserve, when at rest, a uniformsituation, and to be only pressed downby the key to certain unequal depths,which nothing but the key can ascertain; the levers not having any stop toretain them in their required situation,except that which forms a part of thekey. A report appears to have beenspread abroad for the purpose of operatingagainst the inventor's applicationfor an extension of his patent, that oneof these locks had been readily openedbefore a committee of the house of commons,by means of a common quill ;but this, says one of his biographers,was a gross misrepresentation of thefact, the quill having, in reality, beenpreviously cut into the required shapefrom the true key. Mr. rJramah procuredthree patents for different modificationsof pumps and fire-engines ; thetwo first being dated in 1790, and thelast in 1798. Between those years, heobtained a patent for his practical applicationto the purpose of a press, thewell-known principle of the hydrostaticparadox, by which, as by a lever witharms capable of infinite variations, thesmallest conceivable weight is enabledto hold in equilibrium a force incomparablygreater. For the contrivance ofa retainer, which he added to it, a subsequentpatent was granted to him.The beer-machine, so generally usedin public houses, was also an inventionSCIENCE.of the subject of our memoir: and hemade several improvements in the constructionof steam-engines, for whichhe obtained a patent in 1801. In 1802,one was granted to him for a very elaborateand accurate machine for producingsmooth and parallel surfaces onwood and other materials : this hasbeen tried, with success, on a very largescale, in the arsenal at Woolwich. Hisnext inventions were, an improvementin the process of making paper ; in theprocess of printing, by a mode whichenabled the Bank to perform the labourof one hundred and twenty clerks withtwenty ; in the construction of main-pipes; in wheel carriages ; and a methodfor the prevention of the dry rot ;for all of which he obtained patents.He died, highly respected for his scientificacquirements and private worth,on the 9th of December, 1814. '' It issurely," says Dr. Brown, Mr. Branch'sbiographer, " on the characters of suchindividuals that the wealth and prosperityof the British empire most essentiallydepend; an inventive imaginationcontrolled by a sound judgment, anincessant activity of mind and body, ahead that can direct, and a heart thatcan feel, are the genuine sources of thatpractical superiority which is well knownto distinguish the productions of ournational industry."Cavalry, (TIBERIUS,) the son ofa Neapolitan physician, was born atNaples, in 1749, and came to Englandin 1771, for the purpose of qualifyinghimself for a merchant. Science andphilosophy, however, formed the chiefobjects of his pursuit, and soon inducedhim to quit commercial occupations altogether.He was a fellow of the RoyalSociety, and contributed several valuablepapers to the Philosophical Transactions.His separate publications are,A Complete Treatise on Electricity inTheory and Practice, with Original Experiments; An Essay on the Theoryand Practice of Medical Electricity ; ATreatise on the Nature and Propertiesof-sir, and other permanently ElasticFluids, with an Introduction to Chemistry; The History and Practice ofAerostation; Mineralogical Tables; ATreatise on Magnetism in Theory andPractice, with Original Experiments ;Description and Use of the TelescopicMother-of-pearl Micrometer; An Essayon the Mechanical Properties of FactitiousAirs, with an appendix on theNature of the Blood ; and Elements ofNatural or Experimental Philosophy.These works are distinguished byperspicuity of style, proper selection ofmaterials, and clearness of arrangement,and may be justly classed amongthe best elementary books in the Englishlanguage. Mr. Cavalry died inLondon, in 1810.BRAITHWAITE, (JoHN,) deservesnotice as the inventor of a diving machine,with which, in 1783, he descendedinto the Royal George, at Spithead,and brought up the sheet anchor, andseveral of the guns. In 1788, he descendedinto the Farewell, East India-man,lost near one of the Cape de Verdislands, and saved from the wreck,besides other property, dollars to thevalue of 38,000. From the Aberga-penny, East I indiamen, wrecked off theisle of Attain, he is said to have broughtup property worth 105,000. He diedin 1818. 'MILNE R, (ISAAC, Dean of Carlisle,)a native of Leeds, in Yorkshire, andthe son of a poor weaver, was born onthe llth of January, 1751. His elderbrother, Joseph, who, by some generousindividuals, was placed at the grammar-school of Leeds, taught him the elementsof Latin and Greek, for whichlanguages the future dean felt so greata predilection, that, being brought uptohis father's trade, while working inthe loom, he contrived to study Tacitusand Euripides. His brother, on becomingmaster of the grammar-school atHull, appointed him junior assistant atthat establishment, and in 1769, he becamea sizar at Queen's College, Cambridge,where, on taking his degree ofB. A., in 1774, he was not only seniorwrangler, but complimented as beingincomparable. Shortly afterwards, heobtained the first mathematical prize ;and, becoming tutor, had for his pupilsMr. Pitt and Mr. wilberforce, withwhom he travelled abroad. In 1777,he proceeded to the degree of M. A. ;in 1780, he served the office of juniormoderator; and, in 1783, he had thehonour of being appointed first Jacksonianprofessor of natural and expertsmental philosophy. In 1788, he proceededto the degree of B. D. ; and, in1789, he became master of his college.In 1792, he proceeded to the degreeof D. D. ; during the same year, he obtainedthe deanery of Carlisle ; and, in1798, he succeeded Barrow in the Lu-caspianprofessorship of mathematics,worth about j350 a-year. He died atthe house of Mr. Wilberforce, on the1st of March, 1820. " The literary productionsof Dr. Miller," says one of hisfriends, " are but few ; yet, as theybear the stamp of genius, they procuredhim much reputation, and a fellowshipin the Royal Society." Theyconsist chiefly of some learned and ingeniouscommunications to that body,and a vindication of his brother's Historyof the Christian Church, of whichhe published a new edition. He alsowrote in favour of the Bible Society,against Marsh, and produced a posthumouscollection of sermons by hisbrother, with a memoir of the authorprefixed. As master of his college, heabolished the custom of shears standingbehind the chairs of the fellows at dinner.On his frequent visit to Leeds, henever failed, it is said, to call on the obscurefriends of his boyish days, amongwhom he often 'delivered the poorand the fatherless, and caused many awidow's heart to sing for joy." Hefound manual labour a great source ofhappiness, and passed much of hisleisure time at a turning lathe, which,with its appendages, had cost him onehundred and forty guineas.STANHOPE, (CHARLES, Earl of,)son of the second earl of that name,was born on the 3rd of August, 1753.He was educated at Eton and Geneva,and displayed, at the latter place, agenius for mathematics, which he cultivatedwith such success, that he obtaineda prize, from the Society ofStockholm, for a memoir on the pendulum.In 1774, he was an unsuccessfulcandidate for Westminster, but cameinto parliament, in the same year, asmember for the borough of Combe,which he represented until the death ofhis father, in 1786. As a speaker, hewas distinguished by a strong vein ofsense and humour : he was an advocateof the French revolution, and not onlyavowed republican sentiments, but evidencedhis zeal in the cause by relinquishingthe external ornaments ofthe peerage. As a man of science, heheld a high rank, and invented, amongother things, a method for securingbuildings from fire, an arithmetical machine,a new printing press, a monochordfor tuning musical instruments,and a vessel to sail against wind andtide. He died on the 14th of December,1816, having been twice married ;first, to Lady Hester Pitt, daughter ofthe first Earl of Chatham, by whom hehad three daughters ; and, secondly, toMiss Grenville, by whom he had threesons. He was the author of severalphilosophical and a few political tracts.NICHOLSON, (WILLIAM,) was bornin London, in 1758, and passed theearly part of his life in the maritimeservice. On his return from India, hewas engaged by Mr. Wedgewood, themanufacturer of Staffordshire ware, ashis agent on the continent ; and shortlyafterwards settled in London, as a mathematicalteacher. He also opened aschool, but failed, and became bankrupt;nor did he derive more profit fromvarious inventions for which he tookout patents. The appointment of engineerto the Ports Water-worksCompany, relieved his necessities, foratime ; but he ultimately lost this situation,and died, in poverty, in 1815. Asan author, he is principally known byThe Journal, which bears his name, ofNatural Philosophy, Chemistry, and theArts; An Introduction to Natural Philosophy; The First Principles of Chemistry; and A Dictionary of Chemistry.These are chiefly compilations ; but thejudgment with which they are executedrenders them extremely useful : in theencyclopaedia, published under his name,he is said to have had but little concern.Pares, (SAMUEL,) was born atStourbridge, in Worcestershire, in theyear 1759. He became eminent as anexperimental chemist, and the reputationhe acquired by his various workscaused him to be elected a fellow ofthe Society of Arts, and of various otherliterary and philosophical associations.He died in Mecklenburg Square, London,on the 23rd of December, 1825.His principal works are, A ChemicalCatechism, a most interesting and vain-scienceable treatise, which has gone throughmany editions ; Essay on the Utility ofChemistry in the Arts and Manufactures;Rudiments of Chemistry, illustratedby examples ; An Abridgmentof his First Treatise ; and ChemicalEssays, principally relating to the Artsand Manufacturers the British Dominions,in eight volumes, octavo.THORNTON, (JOHN ROBERT,) ason of the celebrated Bonnet Thornton,was born in London, some time previousto the year 1760. He received the firstpart of his education at a public, butthe latter at a private, school ; and wasremarkable for passing the whole of hisholidays in making collections in naturalhistory. He also devoted his play-hoursat school to the same pursuit, andestablished there a small garden andmenagerie, in which he kept a largeassortment of pigeons, besides havingevery species of the English hawk. Atan early period of his life, he wasnearly killed, by drinking, in mistake,a phial full of eau-deuce, the effectsof which, for a time, almost drove himmad. At the age of sixteen, he wassent to Cambridge, where, though destinedfor the church, he gratified hisinclination for the study of physic, byattending the anatomical and chemicallectures at the university, as well asthose on botany and natural history.He also appears to have attended acourse on optics; and being asked bythe lecturer in that science, to describethe anatomy of the eye, he proceededto give such a minute and masterlyaccount of it, that the lecturer, findinghimself puzzled, exclaimed, amid thesuppressed laughter of the students,That will do, sir ; that will do, sir."Shortly after this, having acquired alarge fortune by the death of his brother,he resolved on making medicinehis sole pursuit ; and, going to London,he became a pupil at Guy's Hospital,attending also the lectures of Mr. Cline,and of Dr. Barrington, under whom heattained to great proficiency in chemistry.On taking his degree of B. M.,at Cambridge, he gave a proof of this,by proposing for his thesis a discoveryhe had himself made, contrary to thereceived opinions. " That the animalheat arose from the oxygen air imbibedby the blood flowing through thelungs, and taken from the atmospherereceived into them, and that in its circuitthrough the body it became decomposed."Having studied threeyears at Guy's Hospital, he visited thecontinent ; and, on his return, madesome experiments relative to the causeof animal heat, which, with his knowledgeof medicine, enabled him to effectseveral cures, in cases that had beengiven up by the first physicians andsurgeons in London. His success,which went very far to establish thesoundness of the Brimonian system,then deemed by many empirical, inducedhim to publish a work in supportof it, entitled The Philosophy of Medicine,or Medical Extracts on theNature of Health and Disease, includingthe Laws of the Animal Economy,and the Doctrines of Pneumatic Medicine,five volumes, octavo. " Never,"says his biographer in The EuropeanMagazine, " was work more eagerlyread, or generally approved of; it soonwent through five editions, and stampedinstantly for the author a reputationthat can never be effaced." 1 1 appearedin 1798; and. in the following year, Kpublished, upon the same plan, a system'of modern politics, entitled, The Philosophyof Politics, or Political Extractson the Nature of Governments andtheir Administration, three volumes,octavo. His next most importantwork appeared in 1 808, under the title ofBotanical Places of the New Illustrationof the Sexual System of Linnaeus, folio,30, which was pronounced, and continuesto be, the most splendid botanicalwork extant. " Whatever ideas," saysthe author of Literary Sketches, "mighthave been excited when this work wasfirst announced, the mind of man wasinadequate to conceive the splendourand magnificence of the execution whenpublished. It was, indeed, a trophy ofnational taste, which the surroundingnations may look upon with envy andastonishment." Dr. Darwin, also, speakingof the work, observes, " that thebotanical picturesque plates of the newillustration excite'wonder in every beholder,and have no equal." As a furtherproof of his admiration of the work,he sat for his portrait, about a weekbefore his death, to be placed in it, declaringto his friends that his features,in Dr. Thornton's work, would possessAPPENDIX.immortality. In the meantime, Mr.Thornton took his degree of M. D.,and rose to great eminence in the metropolis,both as a practitioner andwriter, in medicine. He was a greatadvocate for vaccination, and publishedseveral tracts in defence of it, againstthe attacks of Dr. Rowley. His practicaltalents procured him the appointmentof physician to the MaryleboneDispensary ; and whilst holding thatoffice, he added to his fame, by discovering,in the virtues of the foxglove, almosta certain cure for the scarlet fever. Hecontinued his situation at the dispensaryfor four years ; and became, afterwards,lecturer on medical botany, atGuy's Hospital, in which science he hassubsequently published several veryvaluable works ; among which may bementioned, The Plants of Great Britainarranged after the reformed SexualSystem, &c. ; An Easy Introduction tothe Science of Botany ; and severalothers.GARNETT, (THOMAS,) was bornat Kirby-Lonsdale, in Westmoreland,on the 21st of April, 1767. Afterhaving received the rudiments of educationin his native town, and laid thefoundation of his medical and philosophicalknowledge, under Mr. Dawson,at Jedburgh, he studied physic atEdinburgh, and took there his degreeof M. D. in 1788. He then attendedthe London hospitals, and afterwardssettled at Harrowgate, where he married,and soon acquired an extensive practice.In 1795, he proceeded to Liverpool,with the intention of emigratingto America ; but being requested, byDr. Currie, to give a course of chemicallectures, he met with so much success,that he was induced to defer his departure.He also delivered a course onexperimental philosophy, which, togetherwith that on chemistry, he repeated,by invitation, at Manchester.He was also invited to Dublin, but wasprevented from going there in consequenceof his election to the philosophicalprofessorship of Anderson'sInstitution, at Glasgow. This situationhe relinquished for that of professor ofnatural philosophy and chemistry tothe New Royal Institution of London,where he settled in 1800. Being desirous,however, to get into generalpractice, he gave up this appointmentalso, at the expiration of a twelvemonth,and took a house in Great MarlboroughStreet. Here he began to give regularlectures on experimental philosophyand chemistry, and also a newcourse on zoonomia, according to theBrunonian system, of which he was astrong advocate and admirer. He alsocommenced two courses on botany ;one at his own house, and the other atBrompton. In the midst of these pursuits,he was engaged in an extensivepractice, in the gratuitous exercise ofwhich, he received, by infection froma poor patient, a fever which provedfatal to him, on the 28th of July, 1802.His works are, Outlines of a Course ofLectures on Chemistry ; Lecture onthe Preservation of Health ; A Tourthrough the Highlands, two volumes,quarto, with map and fifty-two plates;a volume of Annals of Philosophy,Natural History, Chemistry, &c., forthe Year 1800; besides three treatiseson the Harrowgate waters, four papersin The Medical Commentaries an*Transactions, and Zoonomia, whicwas published by subscription, after hisdeath, for the benefit of his children.WOLLASTON, (WILLIAM HYDE,)descended from a respectable family inStaffordshire, and the son of FrancisWollaston, Esq., was born on the 6thof August, 1766, in Charter-houseSquare, London. He was sent tocomplete his education at Caius College,Cambridge, where he studiedmedicine, and took his degrees of M. B.and M. D., successively, in 1787 and1793. In the latter year, he was electeda fellow of the Royal Society, to theTransactions of which he communicatedhis first paper, in 1797, entitled, On theGout and Urinary Concretions. Hissubsequent communications almost allrelate to "experimental chemistry. Tothis science he began to devote his timesoon after he had commenced the practiceof his profession, which, however,he was induced to relinquish, in consequenceof an unsuccessful attempt toobtain the appointment of physician toSt George's Hospital. In 1806, he. waselected second secretary to the RoyalSociety; and, in 1812, he was elected amember of the Geological Society. Hismost important papers in the Philosphial Transactions are, Experiments onthe Chemical Production and Agency ofElectricity; A Method of ExaminingRefractive and Dispersive Powers byPrismatic Reflection; On a New Metalfound in Crude Platina; On the Discoveryof Palladium ; On the non-existence ofSugar in the Blood of Persons labouringunder Diabetes Melius ; On thePrimitive Crystals of Carbonate ofLime, Bitter Spar, and Iron Spar; Ona Telescopic Camera Obscura and Microscope; and On a Method of renderingPlatina malleable, for which lie wasawarded, by the Society, one of theroyal medals. He also communicatedseveral papers to Dr. Thomson's Annalsof Philosophy, who says, in speaking ofmodern British chemistry, that a distinctschool has been established by thesubject of our memoir. ." Dr. Wollaston,"he adds, " possesses an uncommonneatness of hand, and has invented avery ingenious method of determiningthe properties and constituents of veryminute quantities of matter. This isattended with several great advantages ;it requires but very little apparatus,and therefore the experiments may beperformed in almost any situation ; itsaves a great deal of time and a greatdeal of expense ; while the numerousdiscoveries of Dr. Wollaston demonstratethe precision of which his methodis susceptible." Among other instruments,he constructed a sliding rule ofchemical equivalents, highly useful tothe practical chemist : and he made agalvanic battery of such small dimensionsthat it was contained in a thimble.By a very ingenious process, he wasenabled to, make wire of platina muchfiner than any hair, and almost imperceptibleto the naked eye. The operationswhich he carried on in his labortory brought him considerable profit as.veil as fame : his discovery of themalleable of platinum, it has beenasserted, alone produced about 30,000.Geologists are much indebted to himfor his camera lucida ; and his inventionof the goniometer has introchucked into the department of crystal-geographya certainty and precisionwhich the most skilful observers werei before unable to obtain. This eminentman died, unmarried, on the 22nd ofI December, 1828; having, a short time jI previously, presented, to the Royal So jcity, stock to the amount of 1,000,the interest of which was to be annuallyemployed towards the encouragementof experiments. His character stoodhigh in every respect, and his merit hasbeen appreciated and distinguished bymost of the principal scientific establishmentsof Europe. At the annualmee ing of the Geological Society, in1829, Dr. Fitted, the president, in thecourse of his eulogium upon Dr. Wollaston,said : " It would be difficult toname a man who so well combined thequalities of an English gentleman anda philosopher." Among other anecdotesrespecting the manner in which Dr.Wollaston resented an intrusion intohis workroom, is related the following :Finding a gentleman in his laboratory,one day, who had walked inwhilst waiting to see him, he took himby the arm, and, pointing to the furnace,said, " Do you see that, sir ?" " I do."Then make a profound bow. to it; foras this is the first, it will also be thelast time of your seeing it."LESLIE, (JOHN,) was born at Largo,in Cheshire, in April, 1766. His fatherwas a small farmer, and had destinedhis son for the same occupation ; butthe extraordinary genius which he beganto evince with respect to calculationand geometrical exercises, induced himto seek for him some more suitableemployment. Young Leslie was earlyintroduced to Professor Robinson, andby him to Professors Play fair andStewart, who strongly recommendedthat he should receive an education atoneof the universities. The patronageof the Earl of Kinnoul being about thesame time obtained for him, his parentswere induced to enter him as a student atthe University of St. Andrew's, whencehe removed to that of Edinburgh. Herehe was employed, by the celebratedAdam Smith, to assist the studies of hisnephew, Mr. Douglas (afterwards LordWeston), and displayed considerableabilities in the academical course whichhe himself went through. Not beinginclined to enter the church, he cameto London, and obtained employmentfrom Dr. Thompson, in writing andcorrecting the notes of his new editionof The Bible. In 1793, he published,in nine octavo volumes, A Translationof Burton's Natural History of Birds,APPENDIX.for which he obtained a sum that laidthe foundation of his pecuniary independence.He soon after proceeded tothe United States, in the quality oftutor to one of the family of the randolph;and, after his return, made atour to the continent, in company withMr. Thomas Wedgewood. We are notinformed at what precise period Mr.Leslie struck out his discoveries respectingradiant heat, and the connexionbetween light and heat ; but his differentialthermometer must have beeninvented some time previous to 1800,in which year it was described inNicholson's Journal. The results ofthe inquiries, in which he was somuch aided by this instrument, whichhas been justly pronounced one of themost beautiful and delicate that indicativegenius ever contrived as a help toexperimental inquiry, were publishedin bis celebrated Essay on the Natureand Propagation of Heat. This appearedin 1804, and was rewarded, in1805, by the Rumford medal. In thesame year, he was appointed mathematicalprofessor in the University ofEdinburgh ; but had some difficulty inretaining the chair, in consequence ofthe strenuous opposition of the strictpresbyterian clergy, on the ground ofhis supposed scepticism. In 1809, hepublished his Elements of Geometry,Geometrical Analysis, and Plane Trigonometry; and, in the following year,he arrived, through the assistance ofhis hygrometer, (another of his owncontrivances,) at the discovery of aprocess which enabled him to convertwater and mercury into ice. In 1813,he published An Account of Experimentsand Instruments depending onthe relations of Air to Heat andMoisture. In 1819, he succeeded ProfessorPlayfair, in the chair of naturalphilosophy, a situation for which hewas eminently qualified. He madesuch an improvement in the apparatusbelonging to this class, that the numberof instruments was, on the whole, increasedtenfold, some of the most delicateand beautiful being constructed byhis own hands. Of all his great andvaried gifts, says one of his biographers,none was more remarkable than thedelicacy and success with which heperformed the most difficult experiments,excepting, perhaps, his intuitivesagacity in instantly detecting the causeof accidental failures. Besides theworks before-mentioned, he wrote somevery valuable treatises on differentbranches of physics, in the supplementto The Encyclopaedia Britannica, andsome admirable articles in The EdinburghReview. Mr. Leslie is distinguishedfor his inventive genius andvigorous powers, a most retentive memory,and a stock of knowledge whichhis various reading and active curiosityhave rendered very extensive. In thatcreative faculty, which leads to discovery,few scientific men have excelledhim ; but in profundity of understanding,in philosophical caution, and inlogical accuracy, he has many superiors.Yet however transient may be his fameas a speculative philosopher, his exquisiteinstruments, and his originaland beautiful experimental combinations,have secured to him lasting reputation.Market, (ALEXANDER,) was bornat Geneva, in the year 1770. At anearly age, he shewed a great inclinationto studious pursuits ; but, on thedeath of his father, who entreated himto adopt a mercantile life, he, for somelime, turned his attention to commerce,which, however, he soon relinquished,and applied himself to the study of thelaw. On the breaking out of the Frenchrevolution, he was thrown into prison,and with much difficulty saved his life,by submitting to banish himself for thespace of five years. Accordingly, in1794, he repaired to Edinburgh, wherehe became a medical student ; and, inthe latter part of 1797, took his degreeof M.D. Shortly after, he commencedpractising, as a physician, in London,where he was successively appointedassistant-physician to the Carey StreetDispensary, and physician to the CityDispensary. In 1799, he married aMiss Haldimand, the daughter of amerchant ; in the following year hewas naturalized, by a special act of parliament;and, in 1802, succeeded Dr.Harvey, as one of the physicians toGuy's Hospital. Although he strictlyperformed the duties attached to hispublic situation, and took notes of theprincipal points which occurred to him.both in hospital and private cases, hefound time to render himself eminentSCIENCE.as a chemist, particularly for " his skillin analytical researches, and his extremeprecision in the mode of conductingthem." His talents procured for himthe office of chemical lecturer, in conjunctionwith Mr. Allen, at Guy's Hospital,the reputation of which he helpedgreatly to establish in that department.In 1809, at the time of the Walcherenfever, having volunteered his servicesto the infected troops, he was appointedsuperintendent of the General MilitaryHospital at Portsmouth, where, after azealous performance of his hazardousduties, he was himself taken ill, and,with difficulty recovered. A short whileafterwards, a large fortune being lefthim by his father-in-law, he retiredfrom practice, continuing, however, hischemical lectures at Guy's Hospital, ayear after he had resigned his officeof physician. In 1815, on the cessationof political troubles at Geneva,he visited that city, with his family,and remained there till 1821, having,in the meantime, been appointed amember of the Representative Councilof Geneva, and professor of chemistryto its university. On his reachingEngland, he made a tour into Scotland;and, after returning to London, wasmaking preparations to remove with hisfamily to Geneva, when he was attackedwith gout in the stomach, anddied on the 9th of October, 1822. Dr.Market possessed a high reputation atthe time of his death, both here and onthe continent ; and the indefatigableexertions he used in the promotion ofscience, and all objects of public utility,made him much esteemed and lamented.He rendered material service to themedical school at Guy's Hospital; procuredfor the patients there an ameliorationof their diet, and introduced theplan of clinical lectures. In conjunctionwith Dr. Yellow, he established theMedical and Chirurgical Society of London; materially promoted the objectsof the Royal Society, Geological Society,Royal Institution, and NorthernDispensary ; and was chiefly instrumentalin obtaining, from parliament, afront for the support of the Londonever Hospital. From 1799, up to theyear in which he died, he continued tocontribute to the various periodic al journals,and Transactions of learned societies,a number of papers on chemicaland medical subjects. They amount tonearly forty, and have been consideredas valuable additions to science, andafford, at the same time, a proof of therectitude of his judgment, and thevariety of his talents. He was a mostfortunate man, both in his professionand circumstances: "It was his lot,'says his biographer, ' to be placed in asituation peculiarly calculated to insurehappiness." He was cheerful, benevolent,and had a keen relish for theenjoyments of life, which he was able,as well as desirous, to procure ; and wasendeared, by the excellence of his heart,the warnuh of his affection, and highsense of honour, to a wide circle offriends, in whose society, it was ob-seivet, " his death left a mournful andirreparable chasm."BIRKBECK, (GEORGE,) was bornabout the year 1770. and educated forthe medical profession ; but is chieflyeminent as the founder of the Mechanics'Institute, an establishmenthaving for its object the diffusion ofscientific knowledge among the lowerorders. This laudable design had beenentertained by Dr. Birkbeck as early asthe year 1800, when he announced, atGlasgow, where he was professor in theAnderson College, a course of lectureson natural philosophy, and its applicationto the arts, for the instruction ofmechanics. The extraordinary perspicuityof his method of teaching, thejudicious selection of his experiments,and the natural attractions of the subject,combined to draw together verynumerous audiences, composed, chiefly,of men who now, for the first time, weremade acquainted with the principlesof those operations, in directing or witnessingwhich, they had spent thegreater period of their lives. Notwithstanding,however, the success withwhich these lectures met, it was twentyyears before the experiment was repeatedin any other town ; a fact whichis attributed, by a writer in The EdinburghReview, to " the founder of thesystem having somewhat gone before theage." However, in 1821, lectures, uponthe mode of Dr. Birkbeck's plan wereestablished in Edinburgh, and with somematerial improvements. Upon this planof the institution, the London one and allothers have been founded ; and a shortAPPENDIX.account of it may not. therefore, be onand the terns of admission to the whole,ha* beta* *nd library, n:te*K shillings.Atthesaaetime,theestahtish-m which the subscribersciendT numerous to enableto open it, on the Inch of October. Ofthis institution, the report stated thereatobject was to supply. at suchan expense as the wrung tradesmenDM d aiToni. ::w:ruoaon in t'.e variousbranches of science which are of practicalapificatMm m mechanics, in theirHMMl-irate*. so that rien n::x^: Severeowprcbrwl the reason feTeach inbVof what ther May have see* done byanother. The access of the paw was:v *: :nu:r^hjir::. and the MH*% ofwith an add.m by Dr.tUrkbecfc. and a k-cmK by Prdfeaor\i . .- .->. :. ::-,- : i-,. >: . v M -*. N- > : t -.-=:-.hundred workmenpaying l each;E Uwdspeedily entered,aid others MOOnirirgreat distances, in 'the wont weather,and after the took of the day wereto slave ti it thirst of kr.o'wlsc^.to throw allinto theare the results to beanticipated from the exertions of Dr.Btrkoeck, to whom the country willvVrr j ^ c .-. *.*cri or cr.ii. t-fiji r, ?.? ii.ivir.jCNfcr. :he nr>t M procure. for :he u<* ofthe working daises, the knowledge ofatieucea d mi aha* deemed the:v a| the Iduhd nr.ofaaciety.VINCE,oMnagedbrMr.TBney,who awarded bh theRears t>{ er.:erir. i< i st^^cc: ofgenii 1775. Ke mainNamed ou* of SudthNlions; m 1790, A Treatise on Practicaltomb : :- I7S8, Hai afaf^Mof Lectures on Natural Philosophy;and, hi 17*5, in twoThe Prindnle* of Fluxions. In 173C.at which tiiaTlw TO a fellow of Sidneyrector of Kirkbythe Tkarageof South CraNorfolk. lie died in Iste His <A . -. . .; . . : \ .:.-.- >and Use Logarithms, fee.; AOou-APPENDIX.and Hume. It reached a third editiona short time previous to the author'sdeath, with so many additions andalterations, as almost to constitute anew work, under the title of An Inquiryinto the Relation of Cause and Effect.In 1806, Dr. Brown entered into partnershipwith Dr. Gregory; but his philosophicalpursuits continued to occupymuch more of his time than he devotedto the practice of his profession. In1808-9, he appeared, as Mr. Stewart'ssubstitute, in the chair of moral philosophy; and filled it with such reputation,that, in the following year, he was appointedjoint professor in that class. In1814, he published a poem called TheParadise of Coquettes ; and, subsequently,several other poetical effusions,for the most part, anonymously, thoughthey generally met with a favourablereception. His health beginning todecline in the autumn of 1819, he foundsome difficulty in delivering his lecturesin the following winter, on the conclusionof which he went to London, andfrom thence to Brompton, where hedied, on the 2nd of April, 1820. Afterhis death, were published his Lectures,which have gone through numerouseditions, and upon which his fame, as aphilosopher, chiefly rests. He was possessed,in an eminent degree, of thatcomprehensive energy, which, to usehis own words, " sees, through a longtrain of thought, a distant conclusion ;and separating, at every stage, theessential from the accessory circumstances,and gathering and combininganalogies as it proceeds, arrives, atlength, at a system of harmonioustruth."BRANDE, (WILLIAM THOMAS,)was born about the year 1780, and has,of late years, rendered himself veryeminent by his experiments in chemistry,of which science he is professorat the Royal Institution. He succeededSir Humphrey Davy in thai situation,having acted as assistant to that eminentman. Mr. Brande is an able experimentalist,but hag made no brilliantdiscoveries, nor is his elocution, as alecturer, equal to that of his predecessor.He has, however, acquired a high andmerited reputation, and science is indebtedto him for some very accurateand useful elementary books on chemistryand mineralogy. He also edited,for many years, a quarterly scientificjournal, with great ability. His worksare, Outlines of Geology ; A Manual ofChemistry ; Observations on an AstringentVegetable Substance from China ;A Dissertation, exhibiting a generalview of the progress of Chemical Philosophy; and A Descriptive Catalogueof the British Specimens deposited inthe Geological Collections of the RoyalInstitution.DODD, (GEORGE,) son of RalphDodd, whose memoir we have previouslygiven, was born about the year1783. He was the original designer ofWaterloo Bridge, to which he was appointedresident engineer, with a salaryof 1,000 a-year ; which situation he,however, thought proper to resign. Hethen engaged in the building of steamboatsand other speculations ; the failureof which is supposed to have affectedhis intellect. Being found, one night,intoxicated in the streets, he was placedin Giltspur Street Compter, where liedied, about a week after, on the 25:hof September, 1827.SADLER, (WILLIAM Bingham,)born in 1796, possessed no mean abilitiesas a chemist and engineer, but ischiefly celebrated for his aerostaticalexperiments, to which he at length fellavictim. After having made thirtyaerial voyages, in one of which hecrossed the Irish channel, he ascendedfrom the neighbourhood of Blackburn,in Lancashire, on the 30th of September,1824, when the balloon, in its descent,striking against a chimney, he wasthrown out of the car, from a very considerableheight, and so severely injured,that his death soon followed. Atthe period of his death, he was residentat Liverpool, in the employ of the firstgas company established there, and hehad also opened an establishment forthe use of warm, medicated, and vapourbaths.LITERATURE.Hicks, (GEORGE,) the son of afanner, was born at Needham, inYorkshire, on the 20th of June, 1642.Having received the rudiments ofeducation at a grammar-school in thecounty, he was sent to Oxford, wherelie became, successively, a member ofSt. John's and Magdalen's, and, in1664, a fellow of Lincoln College. Inthe following year, he graduated M.A.;and, after taking holy orders, in 1666,he remained some years at the university,in discharge of his duties as collegetutor. In 1673, he proceeded, with oneof his pupils, Sir John Wheeler, toParis, where he became acquainted withHenry Justly, who intrusted him withthe care of the original Greek manuscriptof the Canons Ecclesiae Universals,which had been published by hisfather, as a present to the University ofOxford. After his return, in May,1675, he took his degree of B. D., andwas presented to the rectory of St.Ebbed, Oxford ; and, in 1677, he accompaniedto Scotland, in the capacityof his chaplain, the Duke of Lauderdale,the lord high commissioner; shortlyafter which, he was presented, by theUniversity of St. Andrews, with thedegree of D. D. In 1679, he receivedthe same honour at Oxford ; and, in1680, he was made a prebend of Worcester,and presented, by the Archbishopof Canterbury, to the vicarageof Allhallows, Barking, when he resignedhis fellowship. In December,1681, he was made chaplain in ordinaryto the king ; and, in August, 1683,Dean of Worcester, but he obtained nofurther advancement during the reignof James the Second, owing to his determinedopposition to popery. At therevolution of 1688, however, he becamea non-juror; and, refusing to take theoaths to William the Third and his consort,he was suspended, in August,1689, and deprived of his benefices, inthe February following. On the appointmentothissuccessor to the deanery,he immediately drew up a protest ; and,in 1691, affixed it over the entranceinto the choir of the cathedral, in consequenceof which, he was obliged toremain, for some time, in concealment,to avoid prosecution. In 1693, he wassent, by the non-juring clergymen, onthe dangerous mission of conferring, atSt. Germains, with the exiled James,respecting the appointments of Englishbishops from their party ; and, on hisreturn, in 1694, he was consecratedBishop of Thetford. He continued tolive in London, in secret, till May,1699, when Lord-chancellor Somers,out of regard to his uncommon abilities,procured an act of council in his favour,by which the attorney-general wasdirected to drop all proceedings pendingagainst him. He now seems to havedevoted himself entirely to literary pursuits;and, after being grievously tormentedwith the stone, for severalyears, he died, of that disease, on the15th of December, 1715. Dr. Hickes wasa man of profound learning, both as adivine and antiquary ; he was deeplyread in the primitive fathers of thechurch, and no one understood betterthe doctrine, worship, constitution, anddiscipline of the catholic church, in theearly ages of Christianity, to which heconstantly endeavoured to prove thechurch of England to be conformable.In his controversial writings, he hasproved himself a sound and acute reasoner; but the violence of his prejudicesseems, occasionally, to haveobscured his judgment, and party spiritto have driven him to the use of unjustand offensive epithets against his opponents.His theological works, however,consisting of three volumes ofsermons, and a multitude of tractsagainst popery, and in defence of thenon-jurors, sink into insignificance,compared with the treasury of Gothicliterature which he has left behind him.Indeed, perhaps, it is only as a Saxonscholar that Dr. Hickes has attained>of>A P P E N D 1 X .permanent celebrity ; but, in that character,he stands unrivalled. Theworks which have so deservedly renderedhis name famous are, InstitutionsGrammatical Anglo-Saxonicae etMaeso-Gothicae, and Thesaurus et Archaeological Veterum Septentrioiialium, Oxford,1705, two volumes, folio. Thissplendid and laborious work, as it hasbeen justly called, was admired andsought after by the most learned of allcountries, and is now not to be purchasedunder five times the original cost.SETTLE, (ELKANAH,) was born atDunstable, in Bedfordshire, in 1648.In 1666, he was entered a commonerof Trinity College, Oxford, but left theuniversity without taking a degree ; and,coming to London, wrote a pamphletin favour of the exclusion bill, entitledThe Character of a Popish Successor.It produced a reply from Sir RogerL' Estrange and others, and inducedSettle to publish another pamphlet,called The Character of a Popish SuccessorComplete, which was consideredthe cleverest piece that had been writtenupon the subject. Both his pamphlets,however, together with the ExclusionBill, were burnt, on the accession of Jamesthe Second; about two years previousto which, Settle is said to have changedsides, and turned Tory, with as muchviolence as he had formerly displayedin espousing the interests of the Whigs.This is, in some measure, confirmed byhis Narrative, a work written againstTitus Gates; and he is also reputedto have been the author of some animadversionson the last speech and confessionof William Lord russel ; and ofRemarks on Algerian Sydney's Paper,delivered to the Sheriffs at his Execution.He also wrote a poem on theCoronation of James the Second, commenceda journalist for the court, andpublished, weekly, an essay, in behalfof the administration ; and is even saidto have entered himself a trooper in theking's army, when encamped at Hounslow.The revolution of 1688, broughtwith it a great change in his fortune ;and, though he obtained a pension fromthe city, for writing an annual panegyricin celebration of lord mayor's day, hebecame so poor, that he was not onlyobliged to write rolls for Bartholomewfair, but to act in them himself. In afarce called St. George and the Dragon,he played the dragon : a circumstanceto which Dr. Young refers, in hisEpistle to Pope, in the following lines :Poor Elkanah, all other changes past.Tor bread, in Smithfield, dragon* hiss'd at last.Spit stream) of tire, to make the butchers gape,And found his manners suited to bin shape.He at length, however, obtained admissionon the charitable foundation ofthe Charter-House, provided for decayedgentlemen, where he died, onthe 12th of February, 1723-4. In additionto the works before-mentioned,Settle wrote ten tragedies, three operas,a comedy, and a pastoral, all of whichare now forgotten, though they obtainedtemporary reputation, and were,some of them, acted with applause.Settle was a man of wit and learning ;and Dryden, with whom he had someliterary controversies, did not think hima contemptible opponent.PRIDEAUX, (HUMPHREY,) born atPastor, in Cornwall, in 1648, receivedhis education at Westminster, andChristchurch, Oxford, where his publicationof the inscription, from theArundel Marbles, under the title ofMarmot Oxoniensia, procured him thepatronage of Lord-chancellor Finch ;who, after Prideaux had taken orders,gave him a living, and a prebend inNorwich Cathedral. He subsequentlybecame D. D., and obtained, amongother preferments, that of the deaneryof Norwich, in 1702, being the highestto which lie was raised. Physical infirmity,however, brought on by anunskilful operation for the stone, aloneprevented him from being promoted toa bishopric; and, at the same time, inducedhim to resign all his livings, andto devote the remainder of his days toliterature. He died on the 1st of November,1724, leaving behind him,besides other theological works, hiscelebrated and oft reprinted one, entitledThe Old and New Testamentconnected in the History of the Jewsand neighbouring Nations. Prideauxwas no less respected for his virtue thanhis learning ; he was often consulted onthe affairs of the church ; and the worklast-mentioned justifies any deferencethat might have been paid to the opinionof its author.LITERATURESHEFFIELD, (JOHN, Duke ofBuckingham.) the son of Edmund, Earlof Margrave, to whose title he succeeded,in 1658, was born in 1649, andwas early distinguished for 'his braveryand accomplishments. The inefficiencyof his tutor induced him, at twelve yearsof age, to educate himself ; and, beforehe was eighteen, lie engaged as a volunteerin the Dutch war, and was intrustedwith important commands bothin the army and navy. He also enteredthe French service, for the purpose ofstudying the art of war under Turenne;previous to which, in 1674, he had beeninstalled knight of the Garter, and madeone of the lords of the bedchamber toCharles the Second, with whom he wasa great favourite. He afterwards lostthe favour of that monarch, who, in1680, sent him out to Tangier, intentionally,it is said, in a leaky ship,hoping that he would either perish atsea, or in battle with the Moors,on land. He, however, returned insafety, and was well received by theking, whose anger had been previouslyaroused by the earl's seduction of someof his mistresses ; whilst others affirm,that he was sent on the above expeditionfor the purpose of removing himfrom the lady (afterwards Queen) Anne,who it is said, encouraged the addresseswhich he had the boldness to makeher. On the accession of James theSecond, he was admitted into the privycouncil, and made lord-chamberlain ;accepted a place in the ecclesiasticalcommission ; and attended the king tomass. He was, however, no papist ;for, on the priest's attempting to converthim, he replied, that he had takenmuch pains to believe in God, who hadmade the world, and all men in it ; butthat he should not be easily persuadedthat man was quits, and made Godagain ;" an expression that had beenused by Anne Askew, in the reign ofHenry the Eighth. Being much attachedto James t he Second, he lamented,though he acquiesced in, the revolution ;voted for the conjunctive sovereigntyof William and Mary ; was made Marquessof Normandy, in 1694; and,shortly before the accession of QueenAnne, was received into the cabinetcouncil, with a pension of .3,000. In1702, he was made lord privy seal, andwas afterwards, successively, named acommissioner for treating with the Scotsabout the union, created Duke of normandy,and then of Buckingham.Jealousy of the Duke of Marlboroughinduced him to resign the privy seal,and he refused to return to office, thoughthe queen courted him back with anoffer of the chancellorship, till 1710,when he was made lord-chamberlain ofthe household. After the accession ofGeorge the Second, he became a constantopponent of the court party, anddied on the 24th of February, 1720,leaving a son by his third wife, a naturaldaughter of King James, by the Countessof Dorchester. He was buried, withgreat pomp, in Westminster Abbey,where a monument is erected to hismemory, bearing an inscription of hisown composition, beginning, Dubious sednon impious vii. Inserts morior,sed inturbatus. (In doubt, but notin wickedness, I lived. In doubt,but not in fear, I die.) He wroteThe Vision, and other poems; twotragedies, called Julius Caesar, andBrutus ; and several prose works, consisting,chiefly, of historical memoirs,speeches in parliament, characters,dialogues, essays, &c. As a poet, hescarcely exceeds mediocrity ; thoughPope and others were sufficiently influencedby his rank and patronage,to place him high among the votariesof the muse. His best performancesare, his Essay on Satire, and Essayon Poetry ; in the former of which,however, he is said to have receivedgreat assistance from Dryden. Hisstyle in history is praised by Johnson,who awards him the merit of perspicuityand elegance ; but, as a poet,thinks him deficient, both in fire andfancy. The same authority describeshis character somewhat harshly ; hewas, undoubtedly, in the early part ofhis life, immoral and unprincipled; and,to the last, haughty and passionate,though always ready to atone for hisviolence by acts of kindness and beneficence.He was accused of covetousness;and "has been defended," saysJohnson, " by an instance of inattentionto his affairs; as if a man might notat once be corrupted by avarice andidleness."D'URFEY, (THOMAS,) the son of aFrench refugee, was born at Exeter,f>08APPENDIX.about the year 1650. He was bred tothe law, but soon forsook that profession,and passed the remainder of hislife as an author, being distinguishedfor the humour and variety of hiswritings. Both as a dramatist and poethe obtained some fame in his time ; buthis reputation has scarcely survived himin the former character ; for, althoughhe produced no less than thirty-oneplays upon the stage, they are all nowbanished from the boards. He appears,also, to have survived the benefit ofwhat emolument his performances mayhave produced him, which inducedAddison to draw the attention of thepublic towards him, in the sixty-seventhnumber of The Guardian, in a paperadvertising his distresses, and a playabout to be performed for his benefit.I myself," says Addison, " rememberKing Charles the Second's leaning onTom D'Urfey's shoulder, more thanonce, and humming over a song withhim. It is certain, that monarch wasnot a little supported, by Joy to GreatCaesar ; which gave the Whigs such ablow, as they were not able to recoverthat whole reign. My friend afterwardsattacked popery, with the same success,having exposed Bellarmine, and Pprto-carero, more than once, in short, satiricalcompositions, which have been in everybody'smouth. He made use of Italiantunes and sonatas for promoting theprotestant interest ; and turned a considerablepart of the pope's musicagainst himself. In short, he hasobliged the court with political sonnets ;the country, with dialogues and pastorals; the city, with descriptions of alord mayor's feast ; not to mention hislittle Ode upon Stool-ball, with manyothers of the like nature." In thismiscellaneous kind of authorship, hecontinued to employ himself, with hisusual spirit and humour, until his death,which took place on the 26th of February,1723. His best dramatic performances,of which a list will be found in Gibber'sLives of the Poets, are The PlottingSisters, and Cynthia and Endymion ;and it is probable that many of hisplays would still have kept possessionof the stage, but for the licentiousness,so common to that age, which pervadesthem. As a poet, his reputation is preservedby a collection of sonnets, published,in six volumes, duodecimo, underthe title of Laugh and be Fat, or Pills topurge Melancholy ; of which Addisonsays, in a humorous panegyric uponthe author, " It is my opinion that theabove pills would be extremely properto be taken with asses' milk, and mightcontribute towards the renewing andrestoring decayed lungs."KING, (WILLIAM,) was born atAntrim, in 1650, and studied, for thechurch, at Trinity College, Dublin,where he graduated B. A., in 1670, andM. A., in 1673. He obtained severalpreferments, and was ultimately, in1702, made Archbishop of Dublin ; butit is as the author of a treatise, entitledDe Origine Mali, that the subject of ourmemoir is now principally known. Thiswork was written to prove that the presenceof natural and moral evil is notincompatible with the power and goodnessof the Deity, and was translatedinto English by Bishop Law, who answeredthe animadversions of Bayle,Leibnitz, and other opponents of theoriginal author. Archbishop King diedon the 8th of May, 1729, highly distinguishedfor his wit and learning. Thefollowing anecdote is told of him : Onreceiving a visit from Dr. Boulter, whohad just been appointed Archbishop ofTeam, an elevation to which King natnot been called, in consequence of hisadvanced age, he saluted him, sitting ;apologizing, by saying, " I am sureyour grace will forgive me, because,you know, I am too old to rise."ASG1LL, (JOHN,) born about theyear 1650, was, by profession, a lawyer,but attained more eminence as a writer,though, in the former capacity, heamassed wealth enough to purchase anestate, and obtain a seat in the Irishparliament. From this, however, aprevious publication, which was consideredblasphemous, caused him to beexpelled, when he went back to England,and found means to obtain a return tothe British house of commons, forChamber, in Sussex, in 1705. Here,also, he lost his seat, in 1707, in consequenceof his arrest during an intervalof privilege, though the publicationbefore mentioned was made the groundof his expulsion. This work, entitledAn Argument, proving that, accordingto the Covenant of Eternal Life, re-LITERATURE.f>09sealed in the Scriptures, Man may betranslated from hence without passingthrough Death, &c.; has been described,by Dr. Aikin, as rather absurd thanimpious ; and the author, he adds, deservedrather to be pitied or ridiculedas an enthusiast, than to be condemnedas a blasphemer. Asgill passed the lastthirty years of his life in the rules of theKing's Bench Prison, and died therein1738, as some say, at the age of neara hundred. Besides the work before-mentioned,he wrote Several AssertionsProved, in order to create anotherspecies of Money than Gold and Silver ;An Essay on a Registry for Tithes ofLands ; and a variety of pamphletsagainst the Pretender.TATE, (NAHUM,) was born at Dublin,about the year 1655. He receivedhis education at the university of hisnative city ; and, afterwards, coming toLondon, fell into pecuniary difficulties,from which he was relieved by the patronageof the Earl of Dorset. In 1692,he succeeded Shadwell as poet laureateto King William the Third. He heldthat situation till the accession of Georgethe First, whose birth-day ode he wrote,which is considered his best compositionof the kind. He died about threemonths afterwards, on the 12th of August,1715, leaving behind him ninedramatic pieces, all of which were actedbut two, and a variety of miscellaneouspoems, now deservedly forgotten. Healso assisted Dr. Brady in his versionof the Psalms, generally affixed to theLiturgy of the Church of England, andby which his name is now principallyknown. His dramatic works are, thetragedies of Brutus of Alba; The LoyalGeneral ; Richard the Second, alteredfrom Shakspeare; The Fall of Coriolanus; Lear, King of England, alteredfrom Shakspeare ; and, Injured Love,or the Cruel Husband : two farces,called The Cuckold's Haven, and ADuke and no Duke ; and a tragicomedy,altered from Fletcher, entitledThe Island Princess.DENNIS, (JOHN,) the son of asaddler, was born in London, in 1657.He was educated at Harrow and Cambridge; but after having taken hisbachelor's degree, was expelled hiscollege, though, it seems, he subsequentlyprocured his admission totrinity Hall, where he graduated M. A.He then went abroad, and, on his return,the Duke of Marlborough gavehim a place in the Custom-house, worth120 a-year ; but this, together with afortune left him by his uncle, was insufficientto keep him out of pecuniarydifficulties ; to remedy which, he soldhis situation. Lord Halifax, who hadendeavoured to dissuade him from thesale of it, insisted that it should be withsome reversion to himself for the spaceof forty years ; a term which Dennisoutlived. His earliest productions werepieces, both in prose and verse, in favourof the Whigs; and, in particular,he write several letters and pamphlets,for the administration of the Earl ofGodolphin ; in which he inveighedagainst the French with all the virulencewhich fear, aided by conceit, could inspire.Carried away by the idea of hisown importance, he, in the anticipationof being demanded as a hostage by theFrench, called upon the Duke of Marlborough,and begged he might not besacrificed to them, as he had alwaysbeen their enemy. The duke gravelyassured him he should not be given uptothe French, adding, " I have beena greater enemy to them than you, and,you see, I am not afraid of being sacrificed."This absurd notion, however, didnot forsake him ; for, afterwards, whilston a visit to a friend, who resided nearthe sea-shore, seeing a ship approach,which his imagination portrayed to himas a French one, he left Ins friend'shouse precipitately, declaring that hewas in league with that nation to carryhim off. Some time after the death ofDryden, our author took it into his headto abuse Pope, out of mere zeal for thefame of the former. Pope, in return,lashed him in The Dunciad, and heldhim up to further ridicule by publishing,in conjunction with Swift, a sarcasticpiece, entitled A Narrative of theDeplorable Frenzy of Mr. John Dennis.Pope, however, was a generous antagonist;for when Dennis, in the latterpart of his life, was reduced to indigence,he assisted in procuring a playto be acted for his benefit, and himselfwrote the prologue. He died, as hisbiographer in Gibber's Lives of thePoets observes, after a life exposed tovicissitudes, habituated to disappointsA P P li N D I X .ments, and embroiled in unsuccessfulquarrels, on the 6th of January, 1733.His works are, a comedy, called A Plotand no Plot : three tragedies, respectivelyentitled, Rinaldo and Armada ;Iphigenia ; and Asserted Liberty : twoplays, altered from Coriolanus, andMerry Wives of Windsor, of Shakspeare; The Spanish Adventurer, acomedy ; and The Masque of Orpheusand Eurydice. He also published twovolumes of letters, besides several criticalessays and poems, chiefly in thePindaric style. Dennis was a man ofparts and a shrewd critic, but his arrogantconceit deservedly covered himwith ridicule in his own time ; and, inthe present age, it is rather the reputationof Pope, which he so vulgarly attacked,than that of his own writings,which rescue him from oblivion. Thefollowing ludicrous anecdote is told ofhim whilst he was at the theatre: atragedy being acted in which the machineryof thunder was introduced accordingto a plan of his own that he hadformerly communicated to the managers,he cried out, in a transport of rage,"death! that is my thunder! thevillains will play my thunder, but notmy plays."Misgave, (WILLIAM,) was bornat Charlton Musgrave, Somersetshire,in 1657 ; and became, in 1675, a probationerfellow of New College, Oxford.After having taken his degreeofLL. B., in 1682, he commenced thestudy of physic. Soon after, he becamea fellow, and, in 1684, secretary, of theRoyal Society ; in which capacity heedited The Philosophical Transactions,from Numbers One Hundred and Sixty-sevento One Hundred and Seventy-eight,inclusive. In 1685, he took hisbachelor's, and, in 1689, his doctor's,degree in physic; and, in the latteryear, was admitted a fellow of the Collegeof Physicians in London. Hepractised in the metropolis from thisperiod until 1691, when he removed toExeter, and died there, on the 23rdof December, 1721. Dr. Musgrave'smedical works are two Latin treatise-eson the gout ; one entitled De Arthri-;ide Symptomatic ; and the other, DeArtlnitide Anomaly sive Interna. Hewas, however, less distinguished as aphysician than an antiquary ; in whichcharacter he published several learned jtracts, the principal of which are, GetBritannica, &c., or Observations upona Fragment of an Equestrian StoneStatue, found near Bath, which Mus-gravebelieves to have been set up inhonour of Get, after his arrival inBritain ; together with a chronologicalsynopsis of the family of Severus ; andA Dissertation upon a piece of SaxonAntiquity found at Athelney, in Somersbeing King Alfred the Great'sAmulet : Belgium Britannica, inwhich he treats of the history andtopography of Hampshire, Wiltshire,and Somersetshire ; and endeavours toprove, in the dissertation prefixed, thatBritain was formerly a peninsula, andjoined to France, about Calais. Thework is illustrated with several curiouslyengraved copper-plates; and, accordingto Mr. Moyle, has been the means ofpreserving from oblivion many valuablemonuments of antiquity.BRADY, (NICHOLAS,) the son of anofficer in the army, was born at Brandon,in Cork, Ireland, on the 28th of October,1659. He was educated at WestminsterSchool, and Christchurch, Oxford ; butstudied divinity at the University ofDublin, where he graduated B. A., andby which he was subsequently presentedwith his doctor's degree. Hewas chaplain to King William andQueen Anne ; and, after holding severalprevious preferments, was collatedto the rectory of Clapham, in Surrey,which he retained, together with that ofRichmond, in the same county, till hisdeath, in May, 1726. He was'an activepromoter of the revolution, and by hisinterest with the general of King James,thrice prevented the burning of thetown of Brandon ; by the inhabitants ofwhich, he was sent to England to petitionparliament for a redress of thegrievances they had suffered whilstthat monarch was in Ireland. As anauthor, he is chiefly distinguished byhis version, in conjunction with NahumTate, of the Psalms of David ; but healso published a translation of theaeneid of Virgil ; a tragedy called TheRape; and three volumes of Sermons.Little can be said in praise of theseproductions ; and, as a matter of taste,his version of the Psalms, though stilltolerated by authority, is scarcely moreLITERATURE.endurable than that of Sternhold andHopkins.GILDON, (CHARLES,) was born atGillingham, in Dorsetshire, in 1665 ;and was sent, by his parents, who wereRoman catholics, to fit himself for apriest of that persuasion, at the Collegeof Douay, in Hainault. Popery, however,was neither consonant to hisreason, nor priesthood to his inclination; and, on his return to England,in 1679, he plunged into dissipationand extravagance, and added to thedisarrangement of his affairs by an imprudentmarriage in his twenty-thirdyear. Necessity, at length, induced himto turn author, when he produced, insuccession, a variety of pieces in proseand verse, of which the principal are,The Post Boy robbed of his Mail, orthe Packet broke open ; Canons, orthe Vision ; The Laws of Poetry ; TheDeist's Manual ; and, his best work,The Complete Art of Poetry. He alsocomposed three tragedies, entitled, respectively,The Roman Bride's Revenge; Phaeton, or the Royal Divorce ;and Love's Victim, or the Queen ofWales : all of which were acted, butsoon forgotten. According to Boyer,he also wrote an English Grammar;and the same authority, in recordinghis death, which occurred on the 12thof January, 1723-4, speaks of him as aperson of great literature, but a meangenius, which is, perhaps, the onlypraise that can be accorded to him.Pope gave him a place in his Dunciad,in revenge for some remarks made bythe subject of our memoir upon TheRape of the Lock.SOUTHERN, (THOMAS,) was born inDublin, in 1660 ; and, after having completedhis education at the university ofthat city, studied, in London, for thebar ; but, devoting himself to dramaticcomposition, did not follow his profession.In 1685, he entered the army,and rose to the rank of captain, in theregiment raised by Lord Ferrets againstthe Duke of Monmouth. He died onthe 26th of May, 1746 ; having enjoyedthe longest life, and died the richest,with a very few exceptions, of the poetsof that time. His dramatic productionsare, The Persian Prince, or The LoyalBrother, intended as a compliment toJames the Second, when Duke of York,who rewarded him handsomely ; TheSpartan Dame; Oroonoko ; and TheFatal Marriage ; or, Innocent Adultery,of which the chief feature is the characterof Isabella. He also wrote TheWife's Excuse, and some other comedies,but none have kept possession ofthe stage, or added to the reputation ofthe author. Southern is said to havedrawn " all imaginable profits from hispoetical labours," and to have demeanedhimself by a drudgery of solicitation inprocuring the sale of his tickets, muchbeneath the dignity of a poet He wasonce asked, by Dryden, how much hehad got by one of his tragedies, and,after replying that " he was reallyashamed to inform him," told him that,he had cleared 700 ; which astonishedthe former, who had never been ableto acquire more than a seventh part ofthat sum for any of his most successfulpieces. For The Spartan Dame, inwhich the whole of the last scene of thethird act was written by the HonourableJohn Stafford, he received 150; at thattime a very extraordinary price ; andhe was the first who raised the advantageof play-writing to a second andthird night ; in allusion to which, Popesays,Southern, born to raiseThe price of prologues and at plays.His reputation, as a dramatic poet, isbest sustained by his tragedy of Oroo-novo, in which there are sentiments andtouches of passion not unworthy thepen of Shakspeare. It is only the latterpart of The Fatal Marriage that is interestingto the audience, though itwholly depends upon the actress, whetherIsabella be made sublimely harrowing,or disgustingly extravagant.Dryden called Southern " such anotherpoet as Otway ;" and was so confidentof his dramatic abilities, that he employedhim to write half of the last actof his tragedy of Clements.GRANVILLE, (GEORGE, LordLansdown,) descended from an illustriousfamily in Devonshire, was bornabout the year 1666 ; and after havingstudied in France, under the tuition ofSir William Ellis, was sent to Cambridge,in his eleventh year, and graduatedM. A., in 1679. When theAPPEN DIX.Duchess of York visited the university,he addressed to her a copy of his ownverses ; and, on the accession of KingJames the Second, wrote three piecesin honour of that monarch. In thecommotions which preceded the revolution,he was exceedingly anxious totake arms under the king against thePrince of Orange; and wrote to hisfather that celebrated letter quoted byJohnson, and other of his biographers.You say I am too young to behazarded," runs one of the passages;but give me leave to say, it is gloriousat any age to die for one's country ; andthe sooner, the nobler the sacrifice."During the reign of King William,Granville lived in literary retirement ;but, on the accession of Queen Anne,Hue became a member of the house ofcommons ; and, in 1710, was madesecretary at war. In the followingyear, he was created Lord Lansdown,Baron Bedford; in 1712, was appointedcomptroller of the household, and aprivy-counsellor; and, in 1713, treasurerof the household. These situationshe lost, on the accession of Georgethe First ; and, having protested againstthe bill for attainting Ormond andBolingbroke, he was, after the insurrectionin Scotland, confined to theTower, from September, 1715, tillFebruary, 1717. In 1722, he wentabroad, when he wrote his Vindicationof General Monk from the aspersionsof Burnet, and of Sir Richard Greenvillefrom those of Clarendon ; and,after his return to England, published,in 1732, a splendid edition of the wholeof his works. He died on the 30th ofJanuary, 1735, a few days after thedeath of his wife, who was a daughterof the Earl of Jersey, and by whom hehad four daughters. His chief performancesare two plays, called Once aLover and always a Lover ; and TheJew of Venice, altered from Shakspeare; Heroic Love, a tragedy ; andThe British Enchanter, a dramaticpoem, which Johnson calls the best ofhis works. His prologues and epiloguesdeserve praise ; but his plays have littlemerit, and in the first of them abovementioned,there are some gross andindecent passages. In The Jew ofVenice, as Howe remarks, the characterof Shylock is made comic, and we areprompted to laughter, instead of detestation.The lustre of his station, andthe compliments of Pope and others,obtained Granville the reputation of apoet, during his own age ; but he hasleft but few verses to warrant the name,and those are in close imitation ofWaller.CENTLIVRE, (SUSANNA,) whosemaiden name was Freeman, was bornin Ireland, in 1667. Losing both herparents before she was twelve years ofage, and being unkindly treated bythose who subsequently had the care ofher, she set out, alone, for London ;but being met in her way by a Mr.Hammond, he took her into keeping atCambridge. She afterwards proceededto the metropolis ; and, whilst only inher sixteenth year, married a nephewof Sir Stephen Fox. His death soontaking place, she gave her hand toCaptain Carrol, but again became awidow in about a year after the marriage.The distress which this occasioned,induced her to try her talentsboth as a dramatic writer and an actress;and, in 1706, she married Mr. Centlivre,yeoman of the mouth to Queen Anne.She enjoyed the friendship of Rowe,Farquhar, and other wits of the day,and died on the 1st of December, 1723.She wrote fifteen plays, the principalof which are, The Perjured Husband;The Busy Body ; The Wonder ; andA Bold Stroke for a Wife; besidesthree farces, and several poems, which,together with some of her letters, werecollected and published by Bowyer.Her dramatic works were published, inthree volumes, duodecimo, in 1763. Shewas of an agreeable person, sprightlyand intelligent in conversation, and ofa friendly and benevolent disposition.Her plays above-mentioned, with theexception of The Perjured Husband,still retain possession of the stage ; andare extremely diverting, and full ofhumour and incident.ASTELL, (MARY,) the daughter ofa merchant, at Newcastle-upon-Tyne,was born about 1668. She received,from her uncle, who was a clergyman,a very liberal education, and was, at anearly age. mistress of Italian and French,logic, philosophy, and the mathematics.She published several works, whichprocured her considerable reputation ;LITERATURE.was courted by the fashionable world,but led a pious and abstemious life; anddied, of a cancer in her breast, on the24th of May, 1731. Among her worksare, Letters concerning the Love ofGod ; An Essay in Defence of theFemale Sex; and A Serious Proposalto the Ladies, for the Advancement oftheir true and greatest Interest, &c.,wherein she proposed a scheme, in furtheranceof which, a lady, supposed to bethequeen, offered to give 10,000, forbuilding a college for females, but whowas dissuaded from doing so by BishopBurnet's representation, that such anestablishment would be reputed a nunnery.She also wrote Reflections onMarriage ; Moderation truly stated ; AFair Way with Dissenters; and TheChristian Religion, as practised by aDaughter of the Church of England ;which last was supposed to be the workof Atterbury. This prelate, togetherwith Hickes, Dwell, and others, spokevery highly of Mrs. Astell's powers asawriter; but hint that a little moreurbanity of manner would not havedetracted from the force of her arguments.MANLEY, (Mrs. DE LA River,)the daughter of Sir Roger Manley,governor of Guernsey, whose fortunewas ruined by his adherence to Charlesthe First, was born in Hampshire,about the year 1670. Losing herparents early, she was left under theguardianship of a male cousin, whowas base enough to seduce her bymeans of a fictitious marriage, his ownwife being still alive. After she hadgiven birth to a child, and he hadspent great part of her property, herbetrayer confessed the deception hehad practised upon her, and shortlyafter deserted her. Thus destitute, sheaccepted the protection of the Duchessof Cleveland ; but a quarrel with thatdisreputable shoot of nobility, throwingher again upon her own resources, sheattempted to write for the stage ; andproduced, in 1696, her tragedy of TheRoyal Mistress, which was acted withgreat applause. She subsequentlywrote, though not with equal success,two other plays, entitled, respectively,The Lover, and Lucius ; but the performancewhich produced her thegreatest share of reputation, was TheNew Atlantis, an attack, under feignednames, upon the character of the Whigs,and especially of those who had assistedin effecting the revolution of 1688. Thework being considered a libel, she voluntarilycame forward as the authoress, toprevent the confinement of the printerand publisher ; and on being examinedbefore the secretary of state, she declared,that as she had unintentionallyidentified particular characters, shemust have written by inspiration. Thesecretary, Lord Sunderland, observing,that inspiration used to be upon agood account, and her writings werestark naught;" she replied, "that hislordship's observation might be true,but that there were evil angels as wellas good ; so that, nevertheless, whatshe had wrote, might still be by inspiration."After being committed to thecustody of a messenger, she was admittedto bail, and the prosecutionagainst her was ultimately dropped. Inthe meantime, she had become no lessnotorious as a woman of intrigue thanof wit ; and she sustained her reputationfor both up to the period of herdeath, which took place at the house ofAlderman Barber, on the llth of July,1724. In addition to the works before-mentioned,she wrote Letters from asupposed Nun in Portugal ; Memoirsof Europe towards the close of theEighteenth Century ; Court Intrigues ;Adventures of Ruelle ; The Powers ofLove ; and some miscellaneous poems,which display great sweetness and harmonyof versification.Walden, (THOMAS,) born inExeter, in 1671, was educated at agrammar-school in that city, and atMagdalen Hall, Oxford, where he obtaineda fellowship, in 1700; and, enteringinto orders next year, was presentedto the vicarage of Willoughby, in Warwickshire,and chosen lecturer of moralphilosophy. In 1707, he took the degreeof D. D. ; and, not long after, wasmade rector of Charlton and Glanville,in Hertfordshire, and had the prebendsor sinecures of Deans, Rains, andGentles, in Devonshire. Jn 1713, hesucceeded the celebrated Atterbury aspreacher of Bridewell Hospital; andwhen that prelate was cent to theTower, Dr. Walden was also taken intocustody, on suspicion of hoping a tre<i-APPENDIX.enable correspondence with his secretary,Kelly, but was soon discharged.He died on the 10th of July, 1736. Heis the author of several poetical pieces,the principal of which are, The Conquestof Naniur ; The Temple of Fame;A Hymn to the Morning in praise ofLight ; and A Hymn to Darkness, besidessome others published in Jonson'sMiscellanies ; and The Medicine, a tale,inserted in The Taller. The best ofhis poems is the Hymn to Darkness, aproduction conceived with vigour, andexpressed with propriety : Johnson callsthe tenth stanza exquisitely beautiful.PHILLIPS, (AMBROSE,) was bornabout the year 1672, and received hisacademical education at St. John'sCollege, Cambridge, where he graduatedB. A. in 1696, and A. M. in 1700.In the latter year, he published AnEpitome of Racket's Life of ArchbishopWake, in order to promote the principlesof the Whig party, to which heearly belonged. Some time previouslyto 1708, appeared bis Pastorals; and,in 1709, he addressed A Poetical Letterfrom Copenhagen to the Duke of Dorset,which Pope styled " the production ofa man who could write very nobly."In 1712, was acted his play of TheDistrest Mother, almost a translation ofRacine's Andromache, with an admirableepilogue by Addison, who praisedthe tragedy with great real in TheSpectator, where several of Phillips'stranslations from Sappho bad a place.In 1717, he was made a commissionerof the lottery, and a justice of the peace;and, in 1722, he produced his tragedyof The Briton, which, though now forgotten,has some spirited and highlydramatic scenes, In 1723, he producedanother tragedy, entitled Humphrey,Duke of Gloucester, which met withtemporary success ; but, like its predecessor,was soon banished from thestage. Some time afterwards, he as >sister Dr. Boulter in the composition ofa paper, called The Free-thinker ; and iwhen the doctor was made Archbishop ;of Armagh, Phillips accompanied himto Ireland, as his secretary ; became jmember of parliament for Armagh ;was made secretary to the lord-chancel jlor, in 1726; and, 'in 1733, judge of the iPrerogative court. In 1748, he returned |to London, and died of palsy, in theJune of the following year. The pastoralsof Phillips have great merit, notwithstandingthe ridicule cast uponthem by Pope ; in our memoir of whom,we have alluded to the artifice headopted to decry them in favour of hisown. Phillips was so exasperated atPope's conduct, that he charged himwith disaffection to government, andhung up a rod at Button's, with whichhe threatened to chastise him; whilstPope retaliated by calling Phillips arascal, and taxing him with detainingthe subscriptions for Homer, deliveredto him by the Hanover Club. Thepoems, written by the subject of ourmemoir, to which Harry Gary first gavethe name of Namby Namby, Johnsonmentions with approbation ; and observesthat they would have hadadmirers, had they been written byAddison. Phillips was extremely sensitivewith regard to critical censure ;and a friend mortally offended him, oneday, by saying to him, " Phillips, bowcame thy King of Epirus t.o drive oxen,and to say, ' I'm goaded on by love ?' "In conversation, he is described ashaving been solemn and pompous, andis said to have been eminent for bravery,and skill in the sword.OLDMIXON, (JOHN,) was bornnear Bridgewater, in Somersetshire, in1673, and became a virulent partywriter, in favour of the revolution, forwhich he was rewarded with a post inthe Customs at Liverpool, where hedied some time after 1730. Besidessome dramatic pieces, now forgotten, avolume of Poems, An Essay on Criticism,Drayton's England, HistoricalEpistles, Life of Arthur Maynwarring,and Life of Queen Anne, he wrote a Historyof the Stuart, and a Critical Historyof England ; the former of whichhas been universally condemned for themalevolence he displays towards theStuart family. Being employed byBishop Bennet, in his Complete History,Oldmixon perverted Daniel'sChronicle, in several places, yet had theeffrontery, in a preface, to charge theeditors of Clarendon's History withinterpolation ; an accusation which wasrefuted by Atterbury. He was severelyhandled by Pope, in the Dunciad, andseems to have been an unworthy character,though a forcible and able writer.LITERATURE.ROWE, (ELIZABETH,) the daughterof the Reverend Mr. Singer, a dissentingminister, was born at Rochester, inSomersetshire, on the llth of September.1674. Music, painting, and poetry,she cultivated at an early age; and, in16'./'6, she published a volume of poems,which gained her some reputation,having previously composed a paraphraseon the thirty-eighth chapter ofJob, at the request of Bishop Ken.She afterwards studied French andItalian, under the superintendence ofthe Honourable Mr. Thynne, son toLord Weymouth, who was much captivatedwith her person and abilities,which induced, among others, the poetPrior, to pay his addresses to her. She,however, in 1710, gave her hand to Mr.Thomas Rowe, but becoming a widowin 1715, retired to Frome, in Somerset-shire,where she composed the mostcelebrated of her works, Friendship inDeath, or Twenty Letters from theDead to the Living. This was succeeded,in 1729, by Letters, Moral andEntertaining, in Verse and Prose; and,in 1736, by her History of Joseph apoem ; and, in the February of thefollowing year, she died of apoplexy.Shortly alter her death, Dr. IsaacWatts published her Devout Exercisesof the Heart, with a preface, in whichhe highly commends them, for the sublimesentiments and elevated pietywhich they contain. In 1739, appearedher Miscellaneous Works, in Prose andVerse, in two volumes, octavo, with anaccount of her life and writings prefixed.The poetry of Mrs. Rowe is of aserious cast, and displays feeling, imagination,and taste ; but, upon the whole,it is not deserving of a higher epithetthan respectable. Her character wasexceedingly estimable, and she enjoyedthe friendship of some of the most eminentliterati of her day.RUDDIMAN, (THOMAS,) was bornat Ragged, in Banffshire, in October,1674, and received his education at theparish school of his native place. Onleaving this, he wished to try for abursary at Aberdeen, but his fatherbeing opposed to this step, young Rudeleft home privately with only aguinea in his pocket, for the purposeof proceeding to the above-named city.Though robbed, on his way, of hismoney, coat, stockings, and shoes, hecontrived to reach Aberdeen ; and,without friends, and almost withoutclothes, obtained the object of his ambition.Alter five years' study at theuniversity, he graduated M.A., in 1694;and, in 1700, It-it Laurencekirk, wherehe had been master of the parish school,for Edinburgh. In 1702, he was appointedassistant librarian to the facultyof advocates, but derived so small anincome from his literary undertakings,that, in 1707, he commenced businessas an auctioneer. At length his circumstanceswere bettered, by an increaseof salary, which induced him todecline accepting the rectorship of thegrammar-school of Dundee, on itsbeing offered to him, and enabled himto continue his literary labours withoutinterruption. In 1729, he became jointproprietor, with his brother, of The CaledonianMercury newspaper ; resignedhis situation of librarian in 1752, anddied on the 19th of January, 1757.The works, by which he is chieflyknown, are, his Grammatical Exercises,still used in teaching Latin in Scotland,and his Rudiments of the Latin Tongue,which has superseded all other books ofthe kind in the country of the author,and was even taught in England. Hisother publications are Buchanan OperaOmnia, Critical Observations on Bur-man'sCommentary on Lucan's Phar-salina, a continuation of Anderson'sDiplomatic et Numismata Scotia, Johnston!Antics, an edition of Voluseni deAnimi Tranquillity Dialogue, and alsoof Bishop (irwin Douglas's Translationof the aeneid, for which he wrotethe glossary.TANNER, (THOMAS, Bishop of St.Asaph,) was born in 1674, at MarketLangton, in Wiltshire, of which placehis father was vicar. He completed hiseducation at Oxford, where, in 1707,he accumulated the degrees of B. D.and D.D., having previously been madechaplain to the Bishop of Norwich, andchancellor of his diocese. In 1713, hewas made prebend of Ely ; in 1723, acanon of Christchurch, Oxford; in 1727,prolocutor of the lower house of convocation; and, in 1732, he was raised tothe see of St. Asaph, in the possessionof which he died, at Christchurch,Oxford, on the 13th of December, 1735.APPENDIX.He published Notitia Monastic, anda second edition of Wood's AthenaOxoniensis ; and, in 1748, appeared hiscelebrated posthumous work, BibliothecaBritannico-Hibernica, the fruit,it is said, of forty years' study. It containsalphabetical memoirs of the principalEnglish, Irish and Scotch writers,down to the commencement of theseventeenth century, and displays greatlearning, research, and industry.HUGHES, (JOHN,) was born atMarlborough, in Wiltshire, on the 29thof January, 1677. He received hiseducation in London, at a dissentingacademy, under Dr. Thomas Rowe,and he'early displayed a taste for literature,and the fine arts. At nineteen,he paraphrased, in verse, one of themost difficult odes of Horace ; but hiscultivation of the muse did not hinderhim from pursuing his business at theordnance office, where he held a situation,as well as being secretary to severalcommissions under the great seal, forthe purchase of lands for the dockyardsof Portsmouth, Chatham, andHarwich. Devoting, however, all hisleisure to the belles lettres, he soonmade himself acquainted with the modernlanguages, and, in 1697, he publisheda poem on the treaty of Ryswick,which is said to have met with an approbationrarely bestowed on, and veryrarely deserved by, a young poet oftwenty. He added to his reputation in1699, by the publication of his Court ofNeptune, on the return of King Williamfrom Holland ; and, in 1701, hewrote a piece, entitled Of the Pleasureof being Deceived; the first of thoseessays from his pen, which have beensince considered among the most entertainingand able in our language. In1702, he published, on the death ofKing William, a Pindaric ode, entitledOf the House of Nassau ; and, in 1703,his Ode in Praise of Music was performedat Stationer's Hall, with greatapplause. In 1706, he wrote a mostmasterly preface to Rennet's History ofEngland, and afterwards translatedFontenelle's Dialogues of the Dead, inthree parts, in which he completelycaught the spirit of the original. In1712, he translated the Abbe Vertot'sRevolutions in Portugal ; and, shortlyafterwards, published An Ce to theCreator of the World, composed fromthe fragments of Orpheus, to which thebiographer of Hughes, in the BiographiaBritannica, has, erroneously, applied theconcluding part of Addison's criticismon Milton, in Number Three Hundredand Thirty Nine of The Spectator,which has evident reference to Blackmore'sPoem on the Creation, In1715, he published an accurate editionof the works of Spenser, which Popehighly commended; and, in 1717, iwhich year he was appointed, by EarlCowper, secretary to the commissionersof the peace, appeared a singular piecefrom his pen, entitled Charon, or theFerry Boat, a vision. He died on the17th of February, 1719-20, the veryday on which his celebrated tragedy,The Siege of Damascus, was representedfor the first time. Swift ranksHughes among the mediocrity in proseas well as verse, to which Pope assents,observing, that " what he wanted ingenius, he made up as an honest mann1735, a complete collection of hispoems and dramatic pieces was published,in two volumes, duodecimo, byhis brother-in-law, Mr. Duncombe.SHUTE, (JOHN, Viscount Barrington,)the son of a merchant, was bornat Theobald, in Hertfordshire, in 1678 ;and, after having received the rudimentsof education, was sent to theUniversity of Utrecht. On his returnto England, he became a student of theInner Temple, and was called to thebar; but preferring literary pursuits, hepublished, in 1701 and 1704, two worksin favour of the civil rights of protestantdissenters; of which body he was amember. When about twenty-fouryears of age, he was applied to, by LordSomers, to gain the consent of thepresbyterians to the projected unionbetween Scotland and England ; and,in 1708, his services were rewarded bya commissionership of the Customs ;from which he was removed, by theTories, in 1711. Soon after, he hadthe good fortune to be left heir to theestates of a Mr. Wiseman and of FrancisBarrington, Esq., whose name he, inconsequence,took. On the accessionof George the First, he was chosenmember of parliament for Berwick ; in1717, made master of the Rolls; and,in July, 1820, created a peer by theLITERATUREtitle of Viscount Barrington, of Ard-glass,in the county of Down. In 1722,he was again returned for Berwick ;but in the February of 1722-3, havingbeen appointed sub-governor of theHamburgh Company, and engaged in adisreputable affair called the HamburghLottery, he was dismissed the house.In 1725, he published his great work,Miscellanea Sacra; an admirable defenceof Christianity, in which he hasthe credit of staggering the infidelity ofthe celebrated Anthony Collins. Duringthe same year, he printed An Essay onthe several Dispensations of God toMankind ; resigned his mastership ofthe Rolls in 1731 ; and died on the Thof December, 1734. He married Anne,daughter and co-heir of Sir WilliamDaines, Knight, and left several children;of whom five sons rose to high stations,respectively, in the church, the state,the law, the army, and the navy. LordBarrington is described by Swift, whenspeaking of his principles, as " a moderateman, frequenting the church andthe meeting indifferently." His otherworks, in addition to those mentioned,are, A Discourse of Natural and RevealedReligion, and several lettersand treatises relative to the test acts,and to toleration in general in mattersof religion.Hearse, (THOMAS,) was born atWhite Waltham, in Berkshire, wherehis father was parish cleric and schoolmaster,about 1678. He is said to havereceived considerable instruction fromthe celebrated scholar, Henry Dwell ;and, in 1696, was sent to Edmund College,Oxford, where he was employed,by Drs. Mill and Grace, in the collectionof biblical manuscripts. Afterhaving graduated M. A., he was, in1701, made assistant to Dr. Hudson,the keeper of the Bodleian library ; secondlibrarian in 1712; and, in 1715,architypographer and esquire beadle ofthe civil law. These situations he resigned,on his declining to take the oathof allegiance to George the First ; but,nevertheless, continued to pursue hisliterary labours at the university, anddied there, on the 10th of June, 1735.Hearne, though only an editor, deservesmention as one of the most usefuland industrious antiquarians that theGeorgian ei a has produced ; and he hasbeen justly denominated one of thepioneers of literature. Of his publications,which relate chiefly to monasticand other ancient chronicles of our nationalhistory, the most important arehis editions of Livy, Justin, and Eutro-pius ; and the Acts of the Apostles inGreek and Latin, from a manuscript inthe Bodleian Library.COCKBURN, (CATHERINE,) thedaughter of Captain Trotter, of the navy,was born in London, on the 16th ofAugust. 1679. When a child, she issaid to have recited extemporary verses;and with scarcely any assistance, shetaught herself French, Latin, and logic.At seventeen years of age, she wrote hertragedy of Agnes de Castro, which, aswell as another, called Fatal Friendship,and produced two years afterwards,was acted with applause. In 1702,she published A Defence of Locke'sEssay on the Human Understanding;a performance that was commended byLocke himself, and was, indeed, thebest written treatise that had appearedin behalf of his Essay. In 1707, shebecame a convert from popery to protestantism; and at the same time publishedsome letters, which she hadwritten previous to her conversion,under the title of A Guide to Controversy.In the meantime, she had producedher comedy of Love at a Loss ;and two tragedies, entitled The UnhappyPenitent, and The Revolution ofSweden. In 1708, she married a clergymanof the name of Cockburn, and diedon the llth of May, 1749, having survivedher husband about eight months.Her works, not before mentioned, are,A Letter to Dr. Wordsworth, concerningthe Resurrection of the Body ; A Vindicationof Mr. Locke, against the imputationsof the former ; Remarks uponsome Writers in the Controversy respectingthe Foundation of Moral Virtueand Moral Obligation ; Remarks uponDr. Rutherford's Essay on the Natureand Obligations of Virtue ; besides severalletters, poems, and miscellaneouspieces, chiefly on religious and moralsubjects. An edition of her works appeared,in two volumes, in 1751, withher life, by Dr. Birch.TRAPP, (JOSEPH,) the son of aclergyman, was born in Gloucestershire,APPENDIX,in November, 1679, and educated atWadham College, Oxford, where hegraduated B. A., in 1699 ; M. A., in1702; and. in 1704, was elected a fellow.Having, previously to this time, distinguishedhimself by several smallpoems of merit, he was, in 1708, appointedto the first Birkhead professorshipof poetry, and held that situationfor ten years. In 1709, and in the followingj ear, he acted as manager forDr. Sacheverell on his famous trial; and,in 1711, he was appointed chaplain toSir Constantine Phipps, lord-chancellorof Ireland. In 1715, he printed the firstvolume of his Preservative against UnsettledNotions, of which a second volumewas printed in 1722 ; and in theinterval, in 1717, appeared his ControversialSermon against Bishop Hotly ;his famous translation of Virgil, in blankverse, in two octavo volumes ; and, in1718, his Praelectiones Poetica?, in threevolumes, octavo. In 1720, through theinterest of the Earl of Peterborough, hewas preferred to the rectory of daunted,in Wiltshire, which, in the followingyear, he resigned for the unitedparishes of Christchurch, NewgateStreet, and St. Leonard's, Foster Lane,London. In 1727, appeared his Poperytruly Stated and Confuted ; and hiscelebrated Answer to England's Conversion; of which the University ofOxford marked their approval by conferringupon him the degree of D. D.These were followed by his Sermons onRighteousness overmuch, which gaverise to a paper from the pen of Dr.Johnson, printed in The Gentleman'sMagazine for 1787, on the subject ofliterary property, in consequence ofTrapp having refused Mr. Cave permissionto give an abridgment of theabove seen-ms in his periodical. In1733, he became rector of Harrington,in Middlesex, on the presentation ofthe famous Lord Bolingbroke, who hadpreviously appointed him his chaplain,as a recompense for some papers hehad written in The Examiner, in defenceof that nobleman's administration.In 1734, he was elected a jointlecturer of St. Martin's-in-the-Fields;and, in 1740, appeared, in two volumes,his Milton Paradise Missus, a Latintranslation of Milton's Paradise Lost. In1747, he published three Sermons, withexplanatory notes on the four Gospelsprefixed ; and died on the 22nd of November,in the same year. He hadmarried, in 1712, a daughter of AldermanWhite, of Oxford, and was survivedby one son. Trapp, who, in the earlypart of his life, is said to have been dissipated,was a man of hasty temper, butself command ; possessed wit and discernment; and, according to BishopPearce, studied harder than any manin England. Besides the works alreadymentioned, he published a tragedycalled Bramble, some miscellaneouspoems in English and Latin, and avariety of sermons and pieces on devotionalsubjects. Trapp's translation ofVirgil, on which his fame principallyrests, is an indifferent performance,and not wholly undeserving of thefollowing sarcastic couplet, written bya witty contemporary on the first appearanceof Glover's Leonidas :Equal to Virgil ? 1 1 ma) , perhaps ;But then, by heaven I 'ti Dr. Trapp '.PA KNELL, (THOMAS,) was bornat Dublin, in 1679; and, after havingreceived the rudiments of education ata grammar- school, was sent to TrinityCollege, at the early age of thirteen.In 1700, he graduated M. A., and wasordained deacon ; entered into priest'sorders in 1703 ; and, in 1705, was preferredto the archdeaconry i>f Clothier.About the same time, he married, andafterwards, paying annual visits toEngland, he became a member of theScriblerus Club, formed by Pope, Gay,Swift, and Arbuthnot. Athirst a Whig,but afterwards a Tory, he, towards thelatter end of Queen Anne's reign, inthe anticipation of church preferment,took every opportunity of displayinghis eloquence in the pulpit. The deathof the queen, however, putting an endto his hopes, he abated his zeal, andhaving also lost his wife, he began, saysGoldsmith, to throw himself into everycompany, and to seek from wine, if notrelief, insensibility. By the recommendationof Swift, to ArchbishopKing, he obtained a prebend, and thevicarage of Fingers, in the diocese ofDublin ; a preferment he only enjoyeda year, dying at Chester, in July, 1717,"in some measure," observes Goldsmith,a martyr to conjugal fidelity." A collectionof his poems was publishedafter his death, by Pope, and anotherLITERATURE.posthumous volume was printed atDublin, in 1758 ; but are so inferior tothe former that they may be doubtedto have been from the same pen. Hisbest and most popular performances are,The Hermit, The Allegory on Man,and A Night Piece on Death ; they arecharacterised, as are most of his poems,by easiness and sweetness of diction,sprightliness without effort, and proprietywithout pains. Johnson hasjustly observed of them, that it is impossibleto say whether they are theproductions of nature so excellent asnot to want the help of art, or of artso refined as to resemble nature.EUSDEN, (LAWRENCE,) was bornat Chatsworth, in Yorkshire, about theyear 1680, and educated at TrinityCollege, Cambridge, where he studieddivinity. After entering into holyorders, he became chaplain to Lord Willoughbyde Broke ; was appointed poetlaureate in 1718 ; and, subsequently,rector of Coningsby, in Lincolnshire,where he died, on the27th of September,1730. His poems, which are in severalcollections, consist of miscellaneouspieces, written on particular occasions,and which procured him the patronageof the Duke of Newcastle and LordHalifax, whose poem of The Battle ofthe Boyne he translated into Latinverse. He also left behind, in manuscript,a translation of the works ofTasso, with a life of that poet ; and issaid, but upon doubtful authority, tohave contributed to The Spectator andGuardian. Eusden excited muchjealousy by obtaining the laureateship ;and was satirized, by Pope, in TheDunciad; by Oldmixon, in his Art ofLogic ; and by Sheffield, Duke ofBuckingham, in his Session of thePoets, where he is thus mentioned,In rush'd Eusden, and cry '<! Who shall have itBut I, the true laureate, to alium the King gave it ?Apollo begg'd pardon, and granted disclaim,But vow'd that, till then, be ne'er heard of hisJewel, (George,) was born atWindsor, where Its father held theoffice of treasurer and chapter clerk,about the year 1680. He was educatedat Eton and Cambridge, where, beingintended for the medical profession, hegraduated B. M. ; and, after havingstudied, under Boerhaave, at Leyden,returned to London, and practised as aphysician. In the latter part of hislife, he removed to Hampstead, wherehe died, on the 8th of February, 1726,leaving behind the reputation of aningenious writer, both in poetry andprose, which he had acquired by thepublication of several works, from 1719up to the time of his death. Of thesemay be mentioned his tragedy of SirWalter Raleigh, and Epistles to Mr.Addison on the Death of Lord Halifax ;and, among his prose works, A Life ofJohn Philips ; A Vindication of theEnglish Stage ; and Schism Destructiveof the Government both in Church andState. He was also a contributor to thefifth volume of The Tatler, and theninth of The Spectator ; translated Mr.Addison's Latin poems, and portions ofOvid, Lucan, and Tibullus ; and wrotea variety of political pamphlets, principallydirected against the Bishop ofSalisbury.BROOME, (WILLIAM,) was bornat Cheshire, about the year 1680, andeducated upon the foundation of Eton ;whence he was sent to St. John's College,Cambridge, where he studied forthe church, and went by the name ofthe Poet, in consequence of his addictionto verse. He acquired great reputationby the part he took, with WellandWordsworth, in translating the Iliadinto "prose; and being introduced toPope, he was employed by him to assisthim in his own version both of the Iliadand the Odyssey. In the former, hewas only concerned with reference tothe notes from Eustathius; but of thelatter he wrote the second, sixth, eighth,eleventh, twelfth, sixteenth, eighteenth,and twenty-third books, together withallthe notes. For this performance heonly received 500, and probably complainedto Pope of the smallness of thesum, who, in consequence, inserted hisname in The Dunciad. Broome becameD. D. in 1728, and was, in thesame year, presented to the rectory ofPelham, in Norfolk. This he resignedon being appointed vicar of Eye, whichhe held with Oakley Magna, in Suffolk,both given him by Lord Cornwallis, towhom lie was chaplain. He died, atBath, on the 16th of November, 1745,and was buried in the abbey church.r:APPENDIX.Considering that Broome composednearly one third of what is called Pope'sOdyssey, he is entitled to no mean rankas a poetical translator; and, indeed,his lines will be found to come verynear to those of Pope, both in smoothnessof verse and elegance of diction.The following distich, by Henley, is asomewhat ludicrous compliment toBroome, at the expense of Pope :Pope came off clear with Homer; but they sayBroome went before, and kindly swept the way.Broome published a volume of miscellaneouspoems, and contributed to TheGentleman's Magazine a translation ofthe Odes of Anacreon. His originalpoetry does him little credit, and is fullof plagiarisms.Fronde, (PHILIP,) was born inDevonshire, about the year 1680, andwas educated at Oxford," where he becameintimate with Addison, and wrotesome very elegant Latin poems, whichwere inserted in The Muse Anglican.He also composed two tragedies ofgreat poetical merit, but which did notsucceed on the stage, entitled, respectively,the Fall of Saguntum, andPilots. He died, in Cecil Street,Strand, on the 19th of December, 1738,having gained no ordinary reputationin his lifetime for his genius, and theuniversal respect of all who knew him,for his private virtues.Amherst, (NICHOLAS,) was bornat Marten, in Kent, about the year1C80, and was educated at MerchantTaylor's School, and St. John's, Oxford.He had not been long atcollege before the libertinism of hisprinciples caused his expulsion ; ofwhich he has given a humorous accountin the dedication of his poems,entitled Oculus Britannia and TerraeFilius, a severe satire against the universityand all its members. In thishe tells us he was expelled for lovingforeign turnips and presbyterianbishops ; for believing that steeples andorgans are not necessary to salvation ;for preaching without orders, and prayingwithout a commission ; for lampooningpriestcraft and petticoat craft ;and for not lampooning the governmentand the revolution. On leavingOxford, he settled in London, and commencedthe publication of The Craftsman,one of the most popular and bestwritten political periodicals of the day;and of which, it is said, twelve thousandcopies were daily dispersed. He hadthe occasional assistance of Mr. PulsesLord Bolingbroke, and others ;but his own productions were generallyconsidered superior to those ofeven his' most talented contributors.In 1737, a paper having appeared inThe Craftsman, ridiculing the act forlicensing plays, Mr. Amherst, to savehis printer, gave himself up, and wasobliged to procure his release by habeascorpus, having refused to give bail.His services to the opposition party,however, were soon forgotten ; and hisdisappointment, in consequence, is supposedto have hastened his death, whichtook place on the 27th of April, 1742.He wrote, in addition to the worksbefore-mentioned, some miscellaneouspoems of merit ; and Bolingbroke andPulteney have been justly censured forsuffering so able a promoter of theirmeasures and designs to die in povertyand neglect.FENTON, (ELIJAH,) the son of anattorney, was born at Shelton, nearNewcastle, in Staffordshire, on the 20thof May, 1683. After completing hisschool education, he was entered ofJesus College, Cambridge, where hegraduated B. A., in 1704, with a viewof entering into holy orders ; butwas refused admission in consequenceof his declining to take the requiredoaths. He then became an assistantin the school of a Mr. Berwick, inSurrey ; afterwards kept a school himselfat Seven Oaks, in Kent; and wasfor some time in Flanders, as secretaryand tutor to the son of Charles, Earl oafOrrery. This connexion, together withhis abilities and amiable manners, introducedhim to the notice and friendshipof the great and learned, and Topeemployed him to assist him in theOdyssey, of which he composed thefirst, fourth, nineteenth, and twentiethbooks. Pope also introduced him toCraggs, when secretary of state, about1720, to whom Fenton acted as a sortof tutor ; but the death of the formersuddenly put an end to the pleasingprospects which this association opened.In 1723, his tragedy of Marianne,LITERATURE.after having been rejected, as Johnsonobserves, with " brutal petulance,"by Gibber, was performed, with greatapplause, at Covent Garden Theatre,and is said to have produced the authornearly 1,000. The latter part of hislife was passed at Easthampstead, inBerkshire, the seat of Lady Trumbull,to whose son he had acted as tutor, andwhere he died, on the 13th of July,1730. In addition to the works before-mentioned,he wrote the Lives of Miltonand Waller, with an edition of the poemsof the latter; and Oxford and CambridgeVerses. There is great eleganceand sweetness in all his poetical performances; Pope ranks his Ode toLord Gower next, in the English language,to Dryden's Cecilia; and histranslation of the four books of TheOdyssey, before-mentioned, may betakenfor those of Pope himself. Thecharacter of Fenton, says Johnson, inalluding to the epitaph written on himby the poet just named, " was soamiable, that 1 cannot forbear to wishfor some poet or biographer to displayit more fully, for the advantage of posterity."In his person he is described astall, fat, and bulky; he was of retiredand sedentary habits, and so sluggish,that one of his friends says, " he died ofindolence." His morals and conversationwere blameless, and he is nevermentioned by any of his contemporaries,but with respect and honour. Thefollowing anecdote of him deserves tobe recorded: dining with his brother,at an annual family party, he observedthat one of his sisters, who had marriedunfortunately, was absent ; and found,upon inquiry, that distress had madeher thought unworthy of invitation.As she was at no great distance, he refusedto sit at the table till she wassent for, and when she had taken herplace, was careful to show her particularattention.CROXALL, (SAMUEL,) was born atWalton, in Surrey, about the year 1683.He was educated at Eton and Cambridge,where he studied for the church,and, after having received ordination,was presented to the living of Hampton,in Middlesex, and afterwards to theunited parishes of St. Mary, Somerset,and St. Mary, Mountshaw, in London.He was also chancellor prebend, andcanon residentiary of the church ofHereford ; and, in 1732, was madeArchdeacon of Salop, and chaplain inordinary to the king. His principalwork is a poem, entitled The Fair Circassian,a paraphrase of the Song ofSolomon, which he considered as nothingmore than an amorous effusion ofthe monarch towards some favourite ofhis seraglio, and thus drew great obloquyupon himself as a clergyman.His other works are, a volume of ScripturePolitics ; two poems, called TheVision, and The Royal Manual ; besidesseveral pieces from Ovid, and a translationof the whole of aesop's Fables,and some miscellaneous poems. Mr.Croxall died in 1750. His translationof aesop is still read, but his otherverses have deservedly sunk into oblivion.SHERIDAN, (THOMAS,) a native ofIreland, and grandfather of the celebratedR. B. Sheridan, was born about1GS4. On account of the prodigality ofhis father, who kept a public-house,he would have been destitute of education,but for the kindness of a relative,the deprived Bishop of Gilmore, atwhose expense he was sent to TrinityCollege, Dublin, where he appears tohave proceeded to the degree of D.D.Entering into holy orders, he becamechaplain to the lord-lieutenant. Aboutthe same time he obtained a fellowship,which, however, he soon vacated, bymarrying a woman named ElizabethMacf'adden, who appears to have furnishedno apology for his imprudence,either in person, manners, or intelligence.He now established a school inDublin, which, for some time, producedhim nearly 1,000 per annum. Intoxicatedby his good fortune, andnaturally careless and extravagant, heindulged his inclination for the pleasuresof the table to such an excess,that his duties were neglected, hispupils gradually diminished, and, atlength, his once flourishing academybecame worthless. After capriciouslydeclining an offer of a mastership of thegrammar-school at Armagh, worth 400a-year, he accepted a living, valued atabout 150 per annum, which hadbeen procured for him by Dean Swift.While proceeding to take possession ofhis benefice, he imprudently preachedAPPENDIX,a sermon, on the king's birth-day, fromthe text " Sufficient for the day is theevil thereof." For this his name wasstruck out of the list of vice-regal chaplains,and he was forbidden the castle.Soon after, he exchanged his living foranother, which proving to be worthonly 80 per annum, he gave it up forthe mastership of the free-school ofCavan ; and this he speedily sold for400. He now returned to Dublin,where he died, in great poverty, on the10th of September, 1738. A greatnumber of his letters appear in Swift'sMiscellanies : he was also the author ofa prose translation of Persius, withnotes ; and published a few sermons.A story is told of his seeking anasylum with Dean Swift, to escape hiscreditors, and of his asking the dean,who had retired to bed early, one night,to send him the key of the cellar, thathe might get a bottle of wine. Thedean returned for answer, that " hehad promised to find him a lodging,but not in wine," which so affectedSheridan, that he burst into tears, and,quitting the house, never entered itafterwards.RAMSAY, (ALLAN,) the son of asuperintendent of mines, belonging toEarl Hopetoun, was born in Scotland,on the 13th of October, 1685. He waseducated at his parish school, and wasdesirous of becoming an artist ; but, in1700, at which time he had lost bothhis parents, his step-father apprenticedhim to a barber, at Edinburgh. A passion,however, for poetry, which he hadearly imbibed, induced him to changehis occupation for that of a bookseller ;and, in 1721, he published, by subscription,a volume of poems, whichprocured him both fame and emolument.He next edited a collection of ancientScottish poems, called The Evergreen,in which those of The Vision, and afragment of Hardicanute, are consideredto be his own productions. In 1728, heprinted a second volume of his poems ;and, shortly afterwards, appeared hisGentle Shepherd, and two additionalcantos of Christie's Kirk of the Grene,the first part of which is attributed toJames the First of Scotland. In 1739,Ramsay, having gained a moderatecompetence, retired to a small housenear Edinburgh, where he died, on the7th of January, 1758. Notwithstandinghis early deficiency of education,he made sufficient progress in theFrench and Latin languages, to effectpoetical translations from each. HisGentle Shepherd, which has procuredhim the appellation of the ScottishTheocritus, displays the rural characterin a manner strikingly true to nature,and both in the story and description,cannot fail to charm the reader. It doesnot appear when he was married, buthe left one son, who became an eminentartist.CARTE, (THOMAS,) the son of aclergyman, was born in Warwickshire,on the 23rd of April, 1686. In 1698,he was admitted of University College,Oxford ; and after graduating B. A., in1702, was incorporated of Cambridge,where he proceeded M. A., in 1706.On his return from a continental tour,he took holy orders, and was appointedreader of the Abbey-church, Bath,where, on the 30th of January, 1714,he preached a sermon that gave rise toa controversy between him and Mr.(afterwards Dr.) Chandler, which occasionedhis first publication, entitled TheIrish Massacre set in a clear light, &c.On the accession of George the Firsthe assumed the lay habit, in consequenceof his declining to take the oathsto the house of Hanover ; and, duringthe rebellion of 1715, a warrant wasissued for his arrest, which he evadedby retiring to the residence of a friendat Molehill, in Warwickshire. Becomingafterwards secretary to BishopAtterbury, his connexion with that prelatesubjected him to a charge of hightreason ; and, on the 13th of August,1722, a reward of 1,000 was offeredfor his apprehension. He, however,succeeded in escaping to France, wherehe remained until 1729, when the intercessionof Queen Caroline, procuredpermission for him to return home. Henow engaged in one of his most importantliterary undertakings, The Historyof the Life of James, Duke ofOrmond, which he completed, in threevolumes, in 1736. The success whichthis work met with (in which Swift issaid to have had a hand), encouragedhim to commence a general History ofEngland, with a design of counterbalancingthe tendency of that pub-literature.lished by Rapin. He printed proposalsto this "effect in 1738, and began histask with ardour, being encouraged inthe prosecution of it by very liberalsubscriptions, though, for a short time,interrupted by the suspicions of government,who caused him to be arrestedunder a suspension of the habeas corpusacU The first volume appeared in folio,in 1747, and would have experiencedgeneral applause but for the injudiciousintroduction of a note, containing anaccount of the cure of one ChristopherLovel, said to be touched for the evilby the Pretender. This attempt to substantiatethe right divine of the Stuartfamily, caused the withdrawal of thecity of London's subscription, andcreated a prejudice against the work,which was never removed. Carte,however, completed three additionalvolumes ; the last of which, bringing thehistory down to 1654, was publishedthe year after his death, which tookplace in April, 1754. He wrote someother works, now forgotten, and contributedlargely to Mr. Buckley's editionof the History of Thanks. Thefollowing anecdote is told of him :Walking in a heavy shower of rain,soon after the accession of George theFirst, he was plied with " A coach,your reverence ?" " No, honest friend,"wis his answer ; " this is not a reignfor me to ride in a coach." Mr. Cartewas married, but does not appear tohave had any children.TTCKELL, (THOMAS,) the son of aclergyman, was born at Bridekirk, inCumberland, in 1686, and, in 1701,became a member of Queen's College,Oxford, where he graduated M.A., in1708, and obtained a fellowship, in1710, which he held till his marriage,about sixteen years afterwards. Someverses, written whilst he was at college,in favour of Addison's opera of Rosamond,gained him the notice of thatpoet, and they continued on the mostintimate terms of friendship throughoutthe rest of their lives. When Addisonwas appointed secretary to the lord-lieutenantof Ireland, the subject of ourmemoir accompanied him thither ; and,on his friend's appointment to the secretaryshipof state, in 1717, he was chosenunder secretary. In June, 1724, hewas made secretary to the lords justicesin Ireland ; and held that situationuntil his death, which took place atBath, on the 23rd of April, 1740. Hispoems are entitled, The Prospect ofPeace, The Royal Progress, KensingtonGardens, Description of the Phoenixfrom Claudia, a translation of TheFirst Hook of Homer's Iliad, Letter toAvignon, and several other pieces, whichwill be found in the second volume ofThe Minor Poets. The work, by w whichhe is principally known, is his versificationof Homer, although it is doubtfulwhether, as we have stated, in our lifeof Pope, Addison was not the realauthor. It will bear no comparisonwith the version of Pope, though thereare some of the opening lines not unworthythe genius of that poet. Mr.Tickell's elegy on Addison should notgo unnoticed ; it contains a few paragraphsof exceeding beauty ; and Dr.johnson remarks, that a more sublimeor more elegant funeral poem is not tobe found in the whole compass ofEnglish literature. Tickell is deficientin energy and invention ; but, amongthe minor poets, none display moreharmony of numbers, or a greater degreeof taste and feeling.BAXTER, (ANDREW,) the son of amerchant of Aberdeen, was born in thatcity, in 1686, and there received hiseducation. He obtained a livelihood bythe instruction of private pupils, withone of whom he went abroad, in 1741,and for some years resided at Utrecht.He returned to Scotland in 1747, andremained there till his death, which tookplace at Whittington, in East Lothian,in 1750. As an author, he is principallyknown by his Inquiry into the Natureof the Human Soul ; a work which obtainedthe applause of the most eminentliterati, and particularly of Warburton,who spoke of it as a book containingthe justest and precise notions ofGod and the soul," and as " one of themost finished of its kind." Hume andColin Maclautin, however, have controvertedmany of his arguments ; whilst,on the other hand, many have remainedunanswered, if not unanswerable. Baxter,who was of a cheerful and sociabledisposition, as well as of extensive learningand sincere piety, left behind himseveral manuscripts on philosophicaltopics, and was also the author of Math,APPENDIX.sive Cosmotheoria Puerile, a work inwhich he endeavours to deduce theprinciples of natural religion from thephenomena of the material world.RAMSAY, (ANDREW MICHAEL,)was born at Ayr, in Scotland, in 1686.He was educated at Edinburgh, andthe University of St. Andrew's, wherehe became a sceptic in religion ; butwas converted by Fenton, whom hevisited at Camera, in 1709, to thecatholic faith. Ramsay was recommended,by this prelate, as tutor to thePrince de Turenne, and was made aknight of the order of St. Lazarus, previouslyto his return to England. Healso, for some time, superintended theeducation of the Pretender's children atRome ; and, after receiving the degreeof D. D. from the University of Oxford,paid a second visit to the continent, anddied at St. Germain-ens Laie, on the 6thof May, 1743. He published severalworks, of which his Travels of Cyrus,on the plan of Fenton's Telemachus,is the most popular.STUKELEY, (WILLIAM,) was bornat Holbeach, in Lincolnshire, on the7th of November, 1687 ; and, afterhaving received the rudiments of educationat the grammar-school of thattown, proceeded, in 1703, to the Universityof Cambridge, where he evinceda strong inclination for the art of designing,and the study of antiquities.Fixing, however, on medicine as a profession,he took the degree of M. B.,in 1709, and removed to London, wherehe completed his medical instructionunder Dr. Mead, at St. Thomas's Hospital.He first practised at Boston ;but, in 1717, he came to London, wherehe was elected a fellow of the RoyalSociety ; and becoming one of the re-vivors of the Society of Antiquaries, in1718, he acted as their secretary formany years. In 1719, he graduatedM. D. at Cambridge ; and, in the followingyear, was admitted a fellow ofthe College of Physicians, before whichhe read the Justinian lecture, in 1722.In 1726, he settled, as a physician, atGrantham, in Lincolnshire ; but illhealth preventing him from giving thenecessary attention to his professionalduties, he took holy orders, in July,1730 ; and, in the following October,was presented to the living of All Saints,Stamford. In 1734, he published ATreatise on the Cause and Cure of theGout, from a new Rationale, whichpassed through several editions ; and,in 1736, the first number of Palaeo-graphic Sacra, in which he contendsthat heathen mythology is derivedfrom sacred history, and that Bacchusis Jehovah. In 1739, he wasappointed chaplain to the Duke ofLancaster; and, the year following, presented,by that nobleman, to the livingof Somers, near Grantham. In 1747,he was presented, by the Duke of Montagu,to the rectory of St. George,Queen Square, and died, of a paralyticstroke, on the 3rd of March, 1765. Inaddition to the works before-mentioned,Dr. Stukeley published Itinerary Curious,or an Account of the Antiquitiesand Curiosities of Great Britain; AnAccount of Stonehenge ; The Historyof Carausius ; besides a variety of papersin the Philosophical Transactions, andthe Archaeologia, and a Treatise on theStructure and Uses of the Spleen. Heobtained high reputation as a physician,a philosopher, a divine, and an antiquary; and his great proficiency inevery thing relating to the history ofthe Druids, caused his most intimatefriends to designate him the "Arch-druidof the age." Dr. Stukeley wastwice married : first, in 1728, to a MissWilliamson, by whom he had threedaughters; and, secondly, in 1737, toa daughter of Dr. Gale, Dean of York,by whom he had no issue.Buncombe, (WILLIAM,) was bornin London, in 1690; and, at an earlyage, obtained a situation in the Navy-office,but subsequently renounced it,and devoted himself to literature. Hepublished a translation of Racine'sThalia ; edited, separately, the worksof Mr. Needier, Mr. Hughes, and theRev. Mr. Say ; and, in 1734, produced,at Drury Lane, his tragedy of LuciusJunius Brutus. It met with meritedsuccess ; but the chief work of Mr. Dun-combe,who died in 1769, was a seriesof imitations of the poems of Horace.In this he was assisted by his son John,who became a fellow of Bent College,Cambridge, and was, in 1766, nominated,by Archbishop Seeker, one ofthe six preachers in Canterbury Catchesdeal. In 1770, he was appointed masterof St. John's Hospital, Canterbury, andof that of St. Nicholas, Hartlepool, anddied in 1785. Besides several poemsinserted in the collection of Dodsleyand others, and of which The Femineadis the chief, he wrote several papers inthe Bibliotheca Topographical Britannica,and edited a second impression ofGosling's work about Canterbury,Archbishop Herring's Letters, c. Hiswife, who was the daughter of High-more,the painter, deserves mention asthe authoress of the story of Fidelia,published in The Adventurer.THEOBALD, (LEWIS,) the son ofan attorney, at Sittirigbourne, in Kent,was born there about the year 1690,and was himself brought up to the law,but soon quitted it for literature. Heengaged in a paper called The Censor,published in Mist's Weekly Journal,and exposed himself to the resentmentof the wits, by delivering his opinionsomewhat too freely and acrimoniously.He however, praised Pope's Homer inthe most extravagant terms, but afterwardsthought proper to abuse it, which,with other circumstances, induced Popeto make him the hero of his Dunciad ;and it is not improbable that Theobald'spublication of a translation of the firstbook of the Odyssey, was an additionalinstigation of Pope's virulence. In 1720,he introduced upon the stage a tragedy,entitled The Double Falsehood, thegreatest part of which he affirmed to beshakspeare's, though Dr. Farmer assignsit to Shirley. Pope insinuated that thewhole or greatest part was his own,quoting from it the lineNone but thyself can be thy parallel.In 1726, he published Shakspeare Restored,or Specimens of Blunders committedand unamended in Pope's editionof that author; of which he had the impudenceto aver, " that to expose anyerrors in it was impracticable;" and, thatwhatever care might, for the future, betaken,either by Mr. Pope, or any otherassistants, he would give above five hundredemendations that would escapethem all." Theobald died in September,1744. He appears to have been a vainman, but not without a portion of bothtalent and learning ; though his applicationexceeded both. He was theauthor of several plays, now forgotten,some* miscellaneous poems, and translationsfrom Ovid's Metamorphoses ;but it is chiefly as an editor of Shakspeare,that a permanent place is assignedhim among authors.CAVE, (EDWARD,) the son of a shoemaker,was born at Newton, in Warwickshire,on the 29th of February,1691, but passed his early years atRugby, and was there educated. Onleaving school, he was placed under acollector of Excise, but being employed,by his master's wife, in menial offices,he quitted his situation in disgust ; and,going to London, became apprentice toa printer. Before the expiration of hisapprenticeship, he married a youngwidow, and afterwards was employed asjourneyman, with Mr. Barber, a printerof note, and through whose means hebecame a writer in Mist's Journal. Hesubsequently obtained a situation in thePost-office, as clerk of the franks ; butinconsequence of stopping some letters,which he considered illegally franked,he was cited before the house of commons,and deprived of his place. Henow resolved to carry into effect hislong-cherished scheme of The Gentleman'sMagazine, and the first numberof that periodical was accordingly publishedat St. John's Gate, Smithfield,in January, 1731. The success whichit met with, brought him into immediatereputation ; and, being a greatlover of poetry, he proposed a prize of50 for the best contribution to hismagazine, referring the decision to theuniversities ; no member of which, however,would condescend to arbitrateupon the occasion. The great emolumentswhich he derived from the sale ofhis new periodical, are said to havebeen considerably diminished by avariety of unfortunate speculations ; buthe, nevertheless, left a considerablefortune at his death, which took place onthe 10th of January, 1754. His friendand biographer, Dr. Johnson, in referenceto Cave's intellectual character,observes, " he saw little at a time, butthat little he saw with exactness, andthough he was long in finding the right,he seldom failed to find it at last."SOMERVILLE, (WILLIAM,) theson of a gentleman of family, whoseAPPENDIX.estate was at Edston, in Warwickshire,was born in 1692, and received his educationat Winchester School, and NewCollege, Oxford. He inherited a sufficientpatrimony to enable him to pass alife of ease and pleasure, and as he wasextremely fond of field sports, he residedchiefly in the country, where he actedas a magistrate, and devoted a portionof his time to literary study. Poetrywas his favourite pursuit, and, besideshis celebrated poem of The Chase, andThe Splendid Shilling, he composedverses in praise of Marlborough, Addison,and others of the Whig party ; Tales,and Fables. Convivial and hospitablehabits appear, in the latter part of hislife, to have led him into pecuniaryembarrassments, and consequent intemperance; so that, on his death, in July,1742, his friend, Shenstone, thus writes :I can now excuse all his foibles ; imputethem to age, and to distress ofcircumstances ; the last of these considerationswrings my very soul tothink on'' As Dr. Johnson observes,however, " his distresses need not bemuch pitied," as he had an estate of1,500 a-year, and lived in celibacy.The Chase will always have a certainnumber of admirers in the lovers of thatexercise, which the author describedwith all the enthusiasm of a sportsman,and the imagination of a poet. In thelatter character he must be allowed thepraise of accurate description of nature,in bold and nervous diction, and ofhaving successfully handled, in blankverse, a subject least suited to such ametre.Lille, (GEORGE,) was born inLondon, on the 4th of February, 1693.He was a dissenter, and by trade ajeweller; and all his biographers beartestimony to the excellence of his heart,his great good-nature, sound sense,and " uncommon share of modesty."His first piece brought on the stage wasan opera, called Sylvia, or the CountryBurial; followed by The London Merchant,or The True Story of GeorgeFarewell ; which was acted at DruryLane, in 1731. It met with great success;and the royal family, and many personsof rank, went specially to witness itsperformance. The poet Pope expressedhis approbation of the tragedy, and remarked,if the author had erred throughthe whole play, it was only in a fewplaces, where he had, unawares, ledhimself into a poetical luxuriance,affecting to be too elevated for the simplicityof the subject. Lillo's otherplays are, The Christian Hero, Elmer,Fatal Curiosity, and Arden of Fever-sham; but, with the exception of thetwo last, which are occasionally actedat the minor and provincial theatres,and George Farewell, all his works areforgotten. There is little incident inhis tragedies, and a want of vigour, bothin his diction and characters ; but hemakes up in pathos what is deficient insublimity, and his scenes are at oncenatural and affecting. He died on the3rd of September, 1739, and was buriedin the vault of Shoreditch Church.SPENCE, (JOSEPH,) was born in1698, and educated for the church atNew College, Oxford, of which he becamea fellow. After acting, for sometime,as travelling tutor to Mr. Judge,he was, in 1728, elected professor ofpoetry at the above university ; wassubsequently promoted to the living ofGreat Logwood, in Bucks ; and, in1754, to a prebendal stall in DurhamCathedral, the extent of his preferment.He was found dead, on the20th of August, 1768, in a shallowpiece of water, in the garden of Mr.Judge, into which, it was supposed,he had fallen by accident. Spence obtainedsome literary reputation in histime, by his Essay on Pope's Translationof the Odyssey, and a work entitledPoly metis, or an Inquiry into the Agreementbetween the Works of the RomanPoets, and the Remains of AncientArtists. He patronised Stephen Duck,the poetical thresher, and Blacklock, theblind poet ; and was intimate with Pope,and other eminent persons, as appearsby his Anecdotes, &c., an amusing andoft-quoted work, published in 1819, byMr. Singer, with a life of the author.PITT, (CHRISTOPHER,) the son ofa physician, was born at Blandford, inDorsetshire, in 1699. He was educatedat Winchester, and at New College,Oxford ; and having entered intoholy orders, was presented to the rectoryof Piper, in 1722. On hisentrance to the university, he presentedto the examiners two large folios ofLITERATURE.manuscript poems, one of which containedan entire translation of Lucan.This was, however, never published;a circumstance which Dr. Johnson regrets,though, for what reason, does notappear. In 1724, he graduated M. A.,and shortly afterwards translated Vida'sArt of Poetry, in which he displayedgreat skill and elegance. In 1727, hepublished a volume of MiscellaneousPoems, which was succeeded by his admirabletranslation, in verse, of Theaeneid. He died on the 13th of April,1748 ; and is recorded, on his tombstoneat Blandford, to have been very eminentfor his talents in poetry, and yet morefor the universal candour of his mind,and the primitive simplicity of his manners.In comparing his translation ofVirgil with that of Dryden, Johnson observes,that Dryden leads the readerforward by his general vigour andsprightliness, whilst Pitt often stops himto contemplate the excellence of a singlecouplet : that Dryden's faults are forgotin the hurry of delight, and that Piu'sbeauties are neglected in the languor of acold and listless perusal ; that Pitt pleasesthe critics, and Dryden the people ; thatPitt is quoted, and Dryden read.WHARTON, (Pimp, Duke of,)son of the marquess of that name, wasborn in 1699. He received a privateeducation ; and, at an early age, developedstrong passions and superiorabilities. When scarcely fifteen, hemarried the daughter of Major-generalHolmes, and, shortly afterwards, losthis father, whose death is said to havebeen accelerated by this ill-timed union.In 1716, he travelled, in the companyof his tutor, to Geneva, from whom,however, he soon parted, impatient ofrestraint on his principles, or controlover his conduct. Having picked up abear in the course of his travels, hetold his tutor on quitting him, " he hadleft him the animal, as the best companionthat could be selected for him."Before his return to England, he visitedthe court ot the Pretender, at Avignon,who conferred on him the title of Dukeof Northumberland. Being remonstratedwith, at Paris, for swerving somuch from his father's principles, heanswered, "that he had pawned hisprinciple to the Pretender's banker ; and,till he could repay him, he must be aJacobite." On taking his seat, however,in the Irish house of peers, he defendedgovernment with so much zeal, that hewas soon created a duke ; but his subsequentdefence of Bishop Atterbury,in the English parliament, proved hewas not long to be relied on. To givemore publicity to his sentiments, hepublished a paper called The TrueBriton, in which he attacked theministry with equal wit and virulence.His extravagance having involvedhis estate, it fell into the handsof trustees, who allowed him 1,200 ayear, with which he went abroad asecond time ; and, losing his wife in1726, he shortly afterwards marriedMademoiselle Oberon, one of the maidsof honour to the Queen of Spain. Hethen joined the troops of that country,at the siege of Gibraltar, and took sucha part in foreign politics, as ultimatelysubjected him to an indictment for hightreason in England. An offer of indemnification,however, and of restorationto his estate, was, it is said, madeto him by Sir Robert Walpole ; but, notconsenting to the conditions, the dukereturned to Spain, and, after a series ofadventures, equally subversive of hishealth and reputation, died at a convent,in the mountains of Catalonia, on the31st of May, 1731. In the same year,his poems, speeches, and letters werepublished in two volumes; besideswhich he wrote a tragedy on the storyof Mary, Queen of Scots, and a paperin Mist's Journal, under the title ofAn Account of Mirevais and SultanEzref. The character of Wharton hasbeen admirably described by Pope, whoconcludes his sketch of it in the followinglines :A fool, with more of wit than half mankind,Too rash for thought, for action too refilled ;A tyrant to the wife bis heart approves ;And rebel to the very king he loves ;He dies, sad out-cast of each church and state,And, harder still ! flagitious, yet not great.Ask you why Wharton broke thro' ev'ry rule?'Twas all for fear the knaves should call him fool.DYER, (JOHN,) the son of an attorneyof Aberglasney, in Caernarvonshire,was born in 1700, and received his educationat Westminster School. He wasat first articled to his father, but, on hisdeath, disliking the law, studied paintingunder Richardson, and is said to havewandered about Wales, for some time,APPENDIX.as an itinerant artist, with indifferentsuccess. In 1727, his poem of GrangerHill appeared in Lewis's Miscellany;and, some time afterwards, he travelledto Italy for professional improvement.On his return, he published, in 1740, apoem, called The Ruins of Rome; and,entering into holy orders, he, in 1741,was presented to the living of Calthorp,in Lincolnshire, and, about the sametime, he married a Miss Benson. Hewas subsequently appointed to twoother livings, worth, together, about250 per annum, and died July the24th, 1758. His longest poem had appeared,the preceding year, under thetitle of The Fleece ; " of which," saysJohnson, " I will not suppress a ludicrousstory. Dodsley, the bookseller,was, one day, mentioning it to a criticalvisitor, with more expectation of successthan the other could easily admit. Inthe conversation, the author's age wasasked, and being represented as advancedin life, ' he will,' said the critic,be buried in woollen.' " The subjectof The Fleece admits little scope forpoetry, and is, accordingly, tedious andrepulsive ; yet Akenside is reported tohave said " that he would regulate hisopinion of the reigning taste by the fateof Dyer's Fleece ; for, if that were ill-received,he should not think it anylonger reasonable to expect fame fromexcellence." The merit of GrangerHill is universally allowed; there arefew poems that suggest more pleasingimages to the eye, or more welcomej reflections to the mind.IMALLET, (DAVID,) was born about1700, at Cries, in Perthshire, Scotland ;where his father kept a public-house,under the name of James Matlock.Of his education little is known, but, asJohnson says, " he surmounted thedisadvantages of his birth and fortune ;"for when the Duke of Montrose appliedto the college of Edinburgh for a tutorto his sons, Mallet was recommended.After having made the tour of Europewith his pupils, he returned to England,and published, in 1724, his ballad ofWilliam and Margaret ; of which, saysDr. Johnson, though it contains nothingstriking, " he has been envied the reputation."In 1728, appeared his poemof The Excursion ; and, in 1731, histragedy of Eurydice was produced atDrury Lane, but met with no applauseIn 1733, he published his poem orVerbal Criticisms, a pert and presumptuouseffusion, written, as Whartonsays, to gratify Pope, by abusingBentley. He was shortly 'afterwardsappointed under-secretary to the Princeof Wales, with a salary of 200 a year ;and, in 1734, in recompense for someverses on the visit of the Prince ofOrange to Oxford, he was created M. A.In 1739, he produced, with success, histragedy of Mustapha ; and, in the followingyear, he, in conjunction withThomson, received the commands ofthe prince to write the Masque of Alfred.In 1740, he wrote the life of Bacon, tobe prefixed to a new edition of that greatman's works, and of which, thoughwritten with elegance, Warburton said,when Mallet afterwards undertook thelife of Marlborough, that he mightperhaps forget that Marlborough was ageneral, as he had forgotten that Baconwas a philosopher. In 1747, he publishedhis Hermit, or Mentor and Theodora ;a poem now forgotten, but displayingmany of the highest attributes of poetry,and for which he received 120. Notlong afterwards, he was employed byLord Bolingbroke to blast the memoryof Pope, on his discovering that thelatter had clandestinely printed anunauthorized number of his PatriotKing; in an advertisement to which,Mallet stigmatized the conduct of Popewith merciless severity, in return forwhich Bolingbroke bequeathed him thewhole of his manuscripts. The legacy,however, involved him in a suit withFranklin, the printer, which terminatedto his disadvantage, and he ultimatelygained a very small profit from thepublication of his lordship's works. Onthe prosecution of Byng, he was employedto turn the odium of the peoplefrom the ministry against that unfortunateadmiral, and, for that purpose,wrote a letter of accusation, under thecharacter of a Plain Man, for which heas rewarded with a pension. Noticingas heard of him during the next sixyears, except a dedication of his poemsto the late Duke of Marlborough, inwhich he talks of dedicating also to hisgrace, A Life of his Illustrious Ancestor;a promise which ended not very honourablyto himself, for, though he hadreceived 1,000 for the purpose, he diedLITERATUREwithout having written a line towards it.In 1763, in order to turn the popularfavour towards Lord Bute, he wrote apolitical tragedy, called Elvira, and wasrewarded by his lordship with a place inthe Customs. Towards the close of hiscareer he visited France ; after which,he returned to England, and died ofa decline, on the 21st of April, 1765.Mallet appears to have written withease ; and, in both his poetry and prose,there is a predominance of elegance ofstyle. Of his character as a man, thereis much to blame and nothing to praise.He was twice married, and had severalchildren by his first wife ; his secondone brought him a fortune of 10,000.HOOKE, (NATHANIEL,) of whosehistory little is known, is supposed tohave been born about the year 1700.He was a zealous Roman catholic, andtried to convert to popery many of thedistinguished persons with whom he issaid to have been acquainted. On thisaccount, he lost the friendship of Sarah,Duchess of Marlborough, who had previouslypresented him with 5,000, forassisting her in compiling the memoirsof her own life. His celebrated RomanHistory, from its earliest period, to thesettlement of the empire under Octaves,was first published in four quartovolumes, in 1733, 1745, 1764 (the yearof Hooke's death), and 1771. He alsopublished a translation of Ramsay'sTravels of Cyrus, and Observations onFour Pieces upon the Roman Senate,in which he attempted to invalidate thehistorical authority of Dionysius ofHalicarnassus. As a historian, Hookeis entitled to the praise of accuracy andprecision in the detail of facts, and ofconsiderable critical acumen in the descriptionof conflicting evidence andauthority. His style is clear and easy ;and though, perhaps, he has rather aleaning to the democratical party, he is,upon the whole, candid and impartial.Dudley, (ROBERT,) was born in1703, and, whilst in the humble stationof footman to a lady of fashion, acquireda taste for literature, and published, bysubscription, a collection of poems, entitledThe Muse in Livery. A satiricaldramatic piece, called The Toy Shop,was his next performance, which,through the influence of Pope, wasbrought upon the stage, and met withsuch success, that Dodsley gained profitenough to open a bookseller's shop inPail Mall. Continuing, however, hiscareer as an author, he produced, inaddition to other dramatic pieces, thefarce of The King and the Miller ofMansfield, and a sequel to it, entitledSir John Cockle at Court; which weresucceeded by his most important proseproduction, called The Economy ofHuman Life. Much of the celebrityof this work arose, at the time, fromits being supposed to be written byLord Chesterfield, though its subsequentpopularity has proved that itsown merits were sufficient to justify theimmediate applause with which it wasreceived. In 1758, he wrote his tragedyof Cleon, which the acting ofMrs. Bellamy as the heroine, renderedhighly successful; and, in 1760, hepublished his Select Fables of Aesop,with an ingenious essay on fable.Dodsley also framed the design of ThePreceptor, published a collection of oldplays, and also of poems, by differenthands; one of the most valuable of itskind ; the poems of Shenstone, and othersof eminence, having been first given tothe world in this collection. The subjectof our memoir, who acquired alarge fortune, and was highly respectedin private life, died at Durham, in 17G4.Peggy, (SAMUEL,) born in 1704,was a native of Chesterfield, and receivedhis education at St. John'sCollege, Cambridge, where he obtaineda fellowship. Having taken holy orders,he was presented to the livings of God-marshal,near Canterbury, in 1731, andin 1751, to those of Brittle, in Lancashire,and Whittington, in Staffordshire.He died, in 1796, with thereputation of one of the most learnedand industrious antiquaries of his time.Besides numerous papers inserted inThe Gentleman's Magazine, under thesignature of Paul Menage, and also inthe Archaeological, he wrote A Historyof Branches Abbey; Anonyame; AnEssay on Ancient British Coins, at thetime of Cunobelinus, or Cymbeline ;another on Ancient English Cookery ;on Anglo-saxon Remains, &c. ; andthe Lives of Grossest, Bishop of Lincoln,and Roger de Ascham, Bishopof Lichfield.A P P E N D I X jJENYNS, (Some,) son of Sir RogerJenyns, was born in London, in 1704 ;and, in 1721, became a fellow commonerof St. John's, Cambridge, wherehe remained till his marriage, in 1725,with a lady of fortune, who subsequentlyeloped from him. After havingjustified his pretensions to the characterof a beau, by the publication of a poemOn the Art of Dancing, he, in 1741,came into his paternal estate; and beingreturned to parliament for the countyof Cambridge, obtained a situation inthe board of trade, by his adherence toSir Robert Walpole. He lost thisoffice, on its abolition, in 1780; having,in the meantime, published a varietyof works, and died in 1787, leaving asecond wife, whom he had married in1753. His principal works, which havebeen collected into four duodecimovolumes, are, Free Inquiry into theNature and Origin of Evil ; View ofthe Internal Evidences of the ChristianReligion; Disquisitions on Various Subjects,which gave rise to Mason's satireof The Dean and the Squire ; andThoughts on Parliamentary Reform.He also wrote some pamphlets, andmiscellaneous poems, and was theauthor oi some spirited papers in TimeWorld. His Inquiry lost much of itsreputation after it had been criticisedby Dr. Johnson and others ; but hisView of the Internal Evidences, &c.,has acquired for the author a morelasting fame. His chief proposition is,that the Christian religion must ofnecessity be divine, because, containinga system of ethics, superior to any thatcould have entered into the mind ofman. The style and manner of thework are highly seductive ; and, indeed,Mr. Jenyns, in all his productions,seldom fails to charm, if he be notpowerful enough to convince.BIRCH, (THOMAS,) the son of acoffee-mill maker, wa born in London,in 1705, and was destined to follow hisfather's business ; but, on his undertakingto support himself by his ownexertions, was allowed to follow thebent of his own inclinations for a literarylife. He was, however, probablymaintained by his father up to theyear 1728, when he married the daughterof a clergyman ; and, in 1730, thoughoriginally a Quaker, he himself tookorders in the church ; and, in 1732, waspresented to a living in Essex. Hislast preferment was to the united rectoryof St. Margaret Patterns, and St. GabrielFenchurch, London, and the rectoryof Deaden, in Essex. He was createdD. D., by diploma, in 1753, and waschosen a fellow of the Royal and AntiquarianSocieties, and a trustee of theBritish Museum, some time previous tohis death, which took plat-e on the 9thof January, 1766. Besides the sharehe had in writing the General Historicaland Critical Dictionary, and editing theprose works of Milton, Thurlow's StatePapers, &c., he published Memoirs ofthe Reign of Queen Elizabeth; The Lifeof Henry, Prince of Wales, eldest sonof King James the First; of Dr. JohnWard; of Archbishop Tillotson; and thebiographical sketches which accompanythe heads of illustrious persons of GreatBritain, engraved by Houbraken andVertue. Dr. Birch was a faithful andindustrious writer, and a vast quantityof information is to be found in hisworks, which writers, possessed of morejudgment and discrimination, may useto great advantage. Dr. Johnson oftenderived assistance from the researchesof Birch, though he is said to have consideredhim but a feeble writer ; and tohave remarked, " Torn Birch is as briskas a bee in conversation ; but no soonerdoes he take a pen in his hand, than itbecomes a torpedo to him, and benumbsall his faculties." Dr. Birch left hislibrary, together with a very valuablecollection of manuscripts, to the BritishMuseum.Hadley, (BENJAMIN,) eldestson of the celebrated Bishop of Winchesterof that name, was born inLondon, on the 10th of February, 1706.He received the early part of his educationin Dr. Newcome's school, atHackney; whence, about the year 1722,he removed to Benedict College, Cambridge,where he studied under theblind professor, Saunderson, and acquiredgreat proficiency in mathematics.Dr. Shape, who was opposed to hisfather in controversy, is said not onlyto have behaved with great rudenessto him, but to have pointedly omittedhis name on the list for doctor's degrees, when George the Second visitedthe nnivershy in 1728. He was, how-literature.ever, made M. D. by royal mandate,shortly afterwards, doubtless throughhis father's interest. Having settled,as a physician, in London, he soon becamea fellow of the Royal Society ;and, in June, 1742, was appointed physicianto the king's household, havingbeen previously made registrar ofHereford, while his father held that see.In 1746, he was appointed physician tothe Prince of Wales's household; and,mingling with the highest society oftalent and rank, he became the intimatecompanion of Hogarth and Garrick ;for the first of whom, he arranged thegreater part of his Analysis of Beauty.The work by which he is principallyknown is his comedy of The SuspiciousHusband, one of the most exhilaratingcomedies that had ever been produced.The whole merit of the productionconsists in the skilful arrangement ofthe plot, and a lively ease of dialogue.It is superficial, however, in its satire,and deficient in its delineation of character; and, though now occasionallyperformed, is growing daily more obsolete.Mrs. Inchbald has pithily givenan idea of its merits, by observing thatnext to Ranger, the principal individualin the comedy is Ranger's hat."It is a fact, not generally known, thathe wrote another comedy, entitled TheTatters, which was found at his decease,and performed, many years after,on the 29th of April, 1797, for thebenefit of Holman, the actor. In additionto these, the doctor wrote ThreeLetters on the Origin of Respiration,previously delivered as the Justinianlectures for 1737, which Haller hascharacterized as " a very ingenious defenceof a bad cause ;" The TarpeianOration, written in elegant Latin, anddelivered in 1742 ; and, in conjunctionwith Mr. Wilson, Observations on aSeries of Electrical Experiments. Hedied, at his father's palace at Chelsea,on the 10th of August, 1757, havingbeen twice married. Dr. Hoadley wasa humane, lively, well informed man,whom strong sense induced to makethe most of his numerous worldly advantages.GRIERSON, (CONSTANTIA,) thewife of Mr. Grierson, for whom LordCarteret obtained the patent of king'sprimer, and ' to distinguish and rewardher uncommon merit, had her life insertedin it," was born in Ireland, inthe year 1706. Her attainments wereboth extraordinary and unaccountable ;for, though she was the daughter ofpoor, illiterate parents, and, accordingto her own statement, only receivedsome little instruction from the ministerof the parish, when she could sparetime from her needle-work, she becamemistress of Greek, Latin, Hebrew, andFrench, and a tolerable proficient inmathematics. Mrs. Pilkington, whospeaks of her, at eighteen years of age,as "a young woman who "was broughtto her father to be instructed in midwifery,"describes her as a perfect miracleof learning; and says, that someof the moat delightful hours she everpassed, were in the conversation of thisfemale philosopher. She unfortunatelydied, in 1733, at the age of twenty-seven; having given a proof of herknowledge in the Latin tongue, by herdedication of the Dublin edition ofTacitus to Lord Carteret, and of Terenceto his son, to whom she also addresseda Greek epigram. Several of her poemshave been printed with those of Mr.Barber ; according to whom, Mrs.Grierson "was not only happy in a fineimagination, a great memory, an excellentunderstanding, and an exact judgment,but had all these crowned byvirtue and piety."BROOKE, (HENRY,) was born inIreland, in 1706 ; and, after havingcompleted his education at Trinity College,Dublin, was entered a student ofthe Temple ; but instead of practisingat the bar, returned to his nativecountry, and married a young lady,with the guardianship of whom he hadbeen intrusted, and who became amother in her fourteenth year. Hisincreasing family again induced him tovisit London, where he wrote his poemOn Universal Beauty, and his tragedyof Gustavus Vasa, and derived greatprofits from its publication, in consequenceof the refusal of government toallow its production on the stage. Anintroduction to Frederick, Prince ofWales, seducing him into expensivehabits, he returned to Ireland, andwrote, during a period of rebellion, hisFarmer's Letters ; for which he wasrewarded, by the lord-lieutenant, withAPPENDIX.the post of barrack-master. His nextperformance, that excited particularnotice, was his novel of The Fool ofQuality, which appeared in 1766, andprocured him high and merited reputation.Pecuniary embarrassments, soonafterwards, obliged him to sell his paternalestate, and retire to a smallhouse, at Kildare, where the loss of hiswife gave a shock to his intellects, thatended in total imbecility, of which hehad previously given some indicationsin his last works of Juliet Grenville, andThe Redemption, a poem. He died in1783, survived by only two out of seventeenchildren ; one of whom publishedhis works, with the exception of hisnovels, in four octavo volumes, in 1792.Mr. Brooke's talents were ot a highorder ; and both himself and hiswritings were esteemed by Pope, Swift,and other eminent literati of his age.WEST, (GILBERT,) was born in1706 ; and, after having studied at Etonand Oxford, entered the army, as lieutenantin a troop of horse ; but soonlaid down his commission for an occupationwhich would enable him to devotemore of his time to literature.When Lord Townshend was secretaryof state, he accompanied him to attendthe king at Hanover ; and, in 1729, hislordship nominated him to be clerk-extraordinaryof the privy-council ; butit was some time before a vacancy admittedhim to profit. On his marriage,he retired to Wickham, in Kent; and,devoting himself to learning and piety,published, in 1747, his Observations onthe Resurrection ; for which the Universityof Oxford created him D. D., bydiploma, in the following year. In1752, he was appointed clerk of theprivy-council, and, shortly afterwards,treasurer of Chelsea Hospital ; and diedon the 26th of March, 1756. Besidesthe work above-mentioned, he wrote apoem, entitled The Institution of theGarter ; a translation of some of theOdes of Pindar; and some Imitationsof Spenser. Mr. West was the friendof Lyttleton and of Pitt (afterwards Earlof Chatham ;) and it is said, that his frequentconversations with the former,formed the ground-work of Lyttleton'scelebrated Dissertation on St. Paul.BROWNE, (ISAAC HAWKINS,) wasborn at Burton-upon Trent, in 1706,and educated at Lichfield and WestminsterSchools, and Trinity College,Cambridge. In 1727, he was entereda student of Lincoln's Inn, but relinquishedthe bar for literature, whichthe possession of a moderate fortuneenabled him exclusively to cultivate.The publication of some poems, amongwhich, one, entitled The Pipe of Tobacco,obtained great popularity ; wassucceeded by his marriage in 1744 ; and,in 1748, by his entrance into parliamentas member for Wedlock, in Shropshire ;but his timidity prevented him fromaffording the house one specimen ofthat eloquence which he was wellknown to possess. In 1754, he, at once,established his literary reputation, byhis Latin poem of De Animi Immortalmodelled upon the style of Lucretiusand Virgil, of whom the productionwould not have been pronounced unworthy.Its various beauties wereuniversally acknowledged, and fullyjustified the numerous translations bywhich it was followed. Mr. Brownedied, highly respected, in 1770, leavingan only son, who published an edition ofhis father's poems ; many of which arealso to be found in Dodsley's Collection.WHITEHEAD, (PAUL,) the son ofa tailor, was born in London, on the 6thof February, 1710. He was educatedat Hitch, in Hertfordshire, and apprenticedto a mercer in London ; butwas subsequently induced to abandontrade, and enter himself as student ofthe Middle Temple. Among-his acquaintances,at this time, was Fleetwood,the manager of Drury Lae Theatre,who persuaded him to join him in abond for 3,000, which Whitehead wassubsequently called upon to pay. This,however, he refused to do, though hewas well able, having, in 1735, marriedAnna, daughter of Sir Pinkerton Dyer,Baronet, of Spain Hall, Essex, withwhom he received a fortune of 10,000.He was, in consequence, committed tothe Fleet Prison, where he underwenta long confinement, and it does not appearby what means he was at lengthreleased, without payment, as it is saidhe was. In the meantime, he hadproduced, successively, three satiricalpoems, entitled The State Dunces, Manners,and Honour; in the two former ofLITERATURE.which, he vented his spleen against thereigning family, and attacked, withgreat virulence, Sir Robert Walpole andhis party. A prosecution was in consequencecommenced against Dotisley,the publisher of Manners, who was, forashort time, imprisoned, by order of thehouse of lords. In 1744, he publishedhis Gymnasia, a just satire on the savageamusement of boxing. In 1749, hewas an active partisan in the contestedelection for Westminster, which led tothe imprisonment of the HonourableAlexander Murray; and the politicalsquibs, &c. he wrote on this occasion,raised him high in favour of the Princeof Wales's court, at Leicester House.His circumstances having been renderedmore than easy by his appointment tothe place of deputy-treasurer of thechamber, he retired to Twickenham,but died, at his lodgings in HenriettaStreet, Covent Garden, on the 30th ofDecember, 1774. He left his heart tohis patron, Lord Le Despenser, with arequest that it might be inured in hislordship's mausoleum atHighWycombe,where it was accordingly deposited, withallthe pomp and ceremony of a theatricalexhibition. Whitehead, it is said,was an infidel, and shared in thosescenes of blasphemy and debauchery,which were enacted at MedmemhamAbbey, exposed, out of pique againstone of the membership Wilkes, whowas himself a party. Sir John Hawkins,however, represents him as, bynature, a friendly and kind-heartedman; and says that, at Twickenham,he manifested the goodness of his naturein the exercise of kind offices, in healingbreaches, and composing differencesbetween his poor neighbours. Of hischaracter as a poet, he was himselfvery careless. His lines are generallyharmonious and correct, sometimesvigorous ; but his popularity, thoughhe must be allowed, in his satires, to beamost successful imitator of Pope, restschiefly on the personal calumnies, withwhich they abound, against the leadingmen of rank and political importance ofhis day. His poems were appended tothe last edition of Dr. Johnson's collection; but no persuasion could everinduce him to collect them himself.HAMMOND, (JAMES,) was bornabout the year 1710, and educated atWestminster School, and the Universityof Cambridge ; but it does not appearthat he took any degree. He formedan early intimacy with Lords Cobham,Chesterfield, and Lyttleton, and dividedhis time between books and pleasure.His manners and connexions recommendedhim to the Prince of Wales ;through whose influence, he was, probably,in 1741, elected member of parliamentfor Truro, in Cornwall. Hedied in the June of the following year;his dissolution, it is said, being hastenedby a hopeless attachment, to which weareindebted for his Love Elegies, theonly poems of which he is known to betheauthor. They were published afterhis death, with a preface by Lord Chesterfield,who speaks of them in termsof unqualified approbation. Johnsontreats them with contempt ; they are,obviously, imitations of Tibullus, butdisplay much originality of sentiment,and warmth of imagination ; and are,at least, something beyond " frigidpedantry." Shield, who wrote the chiefpart of what is called Cibber's Lives ofthe Poets, says, " Mr. Hammond seemsto have been one of those poets who aremade so by love, not by nature ;" but,as love, although a subject for, doesnot constitute, a poet, Mr. Hammondis entitled to higher praise than theabove observation appears intended toconvey.MELMOTH, (WILLIAM,) the son ofan eminent advocate, who wrote a stillpopular work, entitled The Great Importanceof a Religious Life, was bornin 1710. He early attached himself toliterary pursuits ; and, in 1742, publisheda volume of Letters, under thename of Fitzosborne, which displayedmuch elegance, taste, and judgment.A translation of the letters of Pliny,which appeared in 1747, was equallywell received, though he is consideredto have somewhat enfeebled the energyof the Latin diction, by the extremecare and polish, which he has used inendeavouring to render the constructionand phraseology purely English. In1753, he added considerably to hisalready high reputation, by giving tothe world one of the most eleganttranslations of the Letters of Cicero, thathad ever appeared. It was publishedin three volumes, octavo; and, in 1773APPENDIX.and 1777, he rendered into English,successively, two of the most pleasingof Cicero's productions, entitled Gato, oranEssay on Old Age ; and Melius, oranEssay on Friendship. The literaryand philosophical remarks with whichboth were accompanied, added greatlyto their value ; and his refutation, inthe latter, 6f Shaftesbury's imputationon Christianity, because it gave no preceptsin favour of friendship, obtainedparticular approbation. His last work,an account of the life of his father,under the title of Memoirs of a lateeminent Advocate and Member of theHonourable Society of Lincoln's Inn,was published in 1796. Mr. Melmothdied at Bath, in 1799, highly respectedfor his private virtues. He had beentwice married : first, to the daughter ofDr. King, principal of St. Mary's Hall,Oxford ; and, secondly, to an Irishwidow, but it does not appear that hehad atiy issue.O'HARA, (KANE,) born in Ireland,some time after the commencement ofthe last century, was the author of thosetwo popular burlettas, Midas, and TomThumb. The former was acted atCovent Garden, in 1764, and the latterin 1780, and both met with a degree ofapplause, with which they have continuedto be received. Little more isknown of the air nor, except that hedied in June, 1782, and wrote, besidesthe above pieces, The Golden Pepper,April Day, and The Two Misers.SALE, (GEORGE,) was born aboutthe commencement of the eighteenthcentury, but of the history of his lifenothing is known, except that he wasone of the founders of the Society forthe Encouragement of Learning, establishedin 1786, and died in the sameyear. He was a principal writer in TheUniversal History, and one of the compilersof the great General Dictionary ;but the work, by which he is chieflyknown, is his translation of the Koraninto English, from the original Arabic,with a preliminary discourse. Thispublication is yet popular, and maybesaid to form a part of our nationalstandard literature.Wilmington, (Letitia,) thedaughter of Dr. Van Lewes, a physicianof Dublin, was born in that cityin the year 1712. At an early age sheattracted many admirers by the charmsof her conversation and an engagingsprightliness, which captivated, amongothers, the Rev. Matthew Pilkington,author of a well-known volume of Miscellanies,to whom she gave her hand.Conjugal dissension soon followed hermarriage, which ultimately ended in aseparation between the parties, neitherof whom appear to have been free fromblame. According to her own statement,her husband was envious of hersuperior abilities, and had no reason forjealousy on other accounts ; even though,as she herself confesses, she was so indiscreetas to permit a gentleman to befound in her bedchamber at an unseasonablehour, and to lodge with him,for the remainder of the night, afterboth had been turned out of Mr. Wilmington'shouse. The small allowanceshe received from her husband,threw her into great distress ; and, ifwe may credit her own account, exposedher to temptations, by yieldingto which she might have preventedher subsequent confinement in theMarshalsea, for debt. She was releasedfrom prison through the assistanceof Colley Gibber, who procured forher a subscription of about fifteenguineas, with which sum she opened abook shop in St. James's Street ; andafterwards, going to Dublin, she diedthere, on the 29th of August, 1750.She was the author of a comedy, calledThe Turkish Court, or London Apprentice;The Roman Father, a tragedy; The Trial of Constancy, andother poems ; but her most interestingperformance is an account of her ownlife, in two volumes, written with somewhatindecent freedom, but displayinggreat knowledge of the world, andshrewd and entertaining throughout.The work is interspersed with severalsmall pieces of poetry, of which boththe style and matter are extremelypraiseworthy. Mrs. Pilkington was theintimate friend of Swift, who thoughtvery highly of her intellectual faculties,of which her power of memory wouldseem to have been the most remarkable,if it be true, as stated, that she was ableto repeat almost the whole of Shakspeareby heart.LITERATURE.MOORE, (EDWARD,) the son of adissenting minister, was born at Abingdon,in 1712, and educated at Bridgewater.Being designed for trade, hewas apprenticed to a linen-draper, inLondon ; and, after having passed someyears in the capacity of factor, in Ireland,returned to the metropolis, andentered into a partnership, which was,however, soon dissolved. He now quittedtrade, and. devoting himself to literature,published a variety of works, whichhave gained for his name a permanentreputation. He died in February, 1757,leaving a widow, and an only son, whoseeducation and support were undertakenby Lord Chesterfield. This nobleman,together with Horace Walpole andothers, assisted Mr. Moore in the periodicalpaper, commenced by him,called The World, the last number ofwhich was published on the day of hisdeath. He is, however, principallyeminent as the author of the tragedy ofThe Gamester, and of his Fables forthe Female Sex, to whom the moralitywhich they inculcate is peculiarly appropriate,besides being sprightly andingenious in their composition. Healso wrote a tale, entitled Envy andFortune; and the comedies of TheFoundling and Gil Bias ; for the productionof which, upon the stage, hewas indebted rather to the friendshipof Garrick, than to their own merit.Although the subject of our memoirdefended Lord Lyttleton's political character,in a poem, entitled The Trial ofSelim the Persian, and dedicated a collectionof his works to the Duke ofNewcastle, he received no patronage ;but lived, says Dr. Aikin, on the vergeof that indigence, which is generally thelot of those who trust to their pen alonefor a subsistence.FRANCIS, (PHILIP.) born aboutthe year 1712, was the son of the Deanof Gilmore, and rector of St. Mary's,Dublin, where the subject of our memoirwas educated for the church.After having taken orders, he came toEngland, and fixed his residence atEsher, in Surrey, where he took pupils,and had, among others, the celebratedGibbon. He obtained, subsequently,the degree of LL. D., and was, throughthe influence of Lord Holland, presentedto the rectory of Barrow, inSuffolk, and made chaplain of ChelseaHospital. As an author, he is principallyknown by his excellent poeticaltranslation of Horace; but he alsowrote two tragedies, entitled Eugenia,and Constantia, both of which wereunsuccessful ; and published a translation,from the Greek, of the orations ofDemosthenes and Aeschines. He diedin 1773.GLOVER, (RICHARD,) the son of amerchant, was born in London, in 1712 ;and, after having received a liberaleducation, commenced trade, devotingmuch of his time, also, to literature.His marriage with a lady of fortune, in1737, enabled him to follow his inclinationmore fully ; and, in the same year,he published his poem of Leonidas,which quickly went through threeeditions. This was followed by twopolitical poems, entitled London, or theProgress of Commerce, and Hosier'sGhost; and he was, shortly afterwards,selected, by the merchants of London, toconduct their application to parliamenton the subject of the neglect of theiri trade ; on which occasion he is said toj have addressed the house of commonsin a very admirable speech. In 1744, hewas left the sum of 500, to write,jointly with Mallet, the Life of theDuke of Marlborough ; but he neverreceived the bequest, and probably declinedhis share of the task. Aboutthis time, he became embarrassed in hiscircumstances, and lived, in consequence,in retirement; but economy,and a present, it is said, of 500, fromFrederick, Prince of Wales, soon retrievedhis affairs. In 1751, he was anunsuccessful candidate for the charnber-ladyship of London ; and, in 1753, histragedy of Boadicea was acted, withapplause, at Drury Lane. His tragedyof Medea, though published in 1761,was not acted till 1767, when it wasvery favourably received. In the interval,he had been elected member ofparliament for Wey mouth, and took avery active part in mercantile questions,particularly in behalf of the West Indiamerchants," who presented him withplate of the value of 300. He diedon the 25th of November, 1785, leavingbehind him, in manuscript, some tragediesand comedies, and a poem calledThe Athenian, which was published inAPPENDIX.1788. The reputation of Mr. Glover,who was one of those to whom theletters of Junius were attributed, restschiefly upon his Leonidas, a poem ofgreat merit, but deficient in interestand imagination.WHITEHEAD, (WILLIAM,) theson of a baker, in Cambridge, was bornin 1715, and received his education atWinchester School, and Clare Hall,Cambridge ; of which he became a fellowin 1742. He had, in the previousyear, published, after the manner ofPope, An Epistle on the Danger ofWriting Verse, which, together withsome subsequent poetical productions,were so favourably received, that hegave up his intention of going into thechurch, and accepted the situation oftutor to the eldest son of the Earl ofJersey. In 1750, he produced a tragedyfounded upon the Horace ofCorneille, which was acted with greatapplause at Dairy Lane. His Creusamet with similar success in 1754 ; aboutwhich time, he proceeded, with hispupil, to the continent, and remainedabroad for two years. On his return,he found himself appointed, throughthe interest of Lady Jersey, secretaryand register of the order of the Bath ;and, in 1757, he succeeded Gibber aspoet laureate. " No court poet," sayshis biographer, Mason, " ever hadfewer courtly strains;" yet their meritdid not protect Whitehead from thesatire of Churchill. The subject ofour memoir, who published, in additionj to the works before mentioned, acomedy, called The School for Lovers,Ode to the Tiber, and other pieces,died, much respected and beloved, inApril, 1785 ; fourteen years of the latterpart of his life having been passed inthe family of the Earl of Jersey. As apoet, Whitehead held a rank "betweenmediocrity and excellence ; below theone, but above the other, he makes nodisplay of commanding genius, whilstfew excel him in elegant correctnessand polished ease.HILL, (Sir JOHN,) the son of aclergyman at Peterborough, was bornabout 1716, and practised as an apothecaryin St. Martin's Lane till employedby the Duke of Richmond and LordPetre, to manage the Botanical Gardens.After making a botanical tour, at theexpense of these noblemen, he publishedan account of his researches ;made an unsuccessful debut as an actor,and then returned to his shop. At length,in 1746, he obtained both fame andemolument, by the publication of aGreek tract of Theophrastus on Gems ;and being introduced to some influentialmembers of the Royal Society, heattempted, but in vain, to procure admissioninto that body, which so offendedhim, that he published a satiricalreview of their transactions, to which,however, he had himself contributed.He now became a most prolific writer,and is said to have received, in thecourse of one year, .1,500 for works ofhis own composition. He also procuredthe diploma of M. D. and practised as aphysician; but, from his invention ofnostrums, had the reputation of a quack,rather than a regular practitioner. Tocollect matter for the employment ofhis pen, he was to be seen at everyplace of amusement ; and the publicityhe gave to his observations, procuredhim, on one occasion, a horse-whippingat Ranelagh. Contemptible, however,as he rendered himself by hisliterary scandal and professional puffs,he was honoured with the hand of LordRanelagh's sister, and with the title ofknighthood, by the King of Sweden, inreturn for a present of his botanicalworks. In these he developed talentof no mean order ; and his VegetableSystem, in seven folio volumes, is entitledto a place among the productionsof our most eminent botanists. Otherof his publications are, A General NaturalHistory, three volumes, folio;Essays on Natural History and Philosophy; several papers in the BritishMagazine and Inspector; of which periodicalshe was the founder and editor;and a variety of novels and plays, toonumerous and insignificant to mention.He died in November, 1775. The followingepigram, by Garrick, with whomhe had quarrelled for rejecting one ofhis farces, is said to apply to Hill:For physic and farces, his rival there scarce is ;His farces are physic, his physic a farce is.GRANGER, (JAMES,) was bornabout the year 1716 ; studied at Christchurch,Oxford ; and, after having takenorders, was presented to the vicarageLITERATURE.of Shipmate, Oxfordshire. Further prefermenthe neither obtained nor aspiredto, if we may judge by the followingpassage in the dedication to HoraceWalpole of his Biographical History ofEngland : " My name and person,"he says, " are known to few, as I hadthe good fortune to retire early to independence,obscurity, and content. Mylot is indeed humble, so are my wishes."The history above-mentioned, whichwas published, in four quarto volumes,in 1769, and has since gone throughtwo or three editions in octavo, hasbeen continued by the Rev. MarkNoble. The work was deservedlypopular, though some very inconsiderablecharacters are swelled intoundeserved importance as appendices,and some very poor engravings areamongst the heads that accompany thememoirs, which are, however, sketchedwith spirit, discrimination, and impartiality.In 1772, Mr. Granger evidenced'his humanity and eccentricity,by the publication of a sermon, entitledAn Apology for the Brute Creation,dedicated to " T. B., as the severestexerciser of the lash, and most profaneswearer he had known." On Sunday,the 14th of April, 1776, he was struckwith apoplexy, whilst in the act of administeringthe sacrament, and diedthe following day. He is said to haveleft behind him a collection of fourteenthousand portraits.CARTER, (ELIZABETH,) the taughtter of a clergyman, at Deal, in Kent,j was born there on the 16th of December,1717, and was educated by herfather, who, at first, from the slownessof her faculties, despaired of her progressin intellectual attainments. She,however, pursued her studies with suchperseverance, that, in a short time, sheovercame all her difficulties, and becamemistress, successively, of Latin,Greek, French, German, Italian,Spanish, Portuguese, and Hebrew. Asearly as 1736, some of her poems hadappeared in The Gentleman's Magazine; and, in 1738, a quarto pamphletof her poetical productions was publishedby Cave. In 1739, she gave atranslation of The Critique of Creusaon Pope's Essay on Man, and ofAlgarotti's Explanation of Newton'sPhilosophy, for the Use of the Ladies,which procured her a high reputationamong the literati, both at home andabroad. About 1741, she became acquaintedwith Miss Catherine Talbot,and Seeker (afterwards Archbishop ofCanterbury), under whose encouragementshe composed her celebratedtranslation of Epictetus, which appearedin quarto, in 1752. It was published,by subscription, at the price ofone guinea, and is said to have producedto the authoress 1,000. Heigreat acquisitions and intellectual powershad already procured for her the friendshipand admiration of some of themost eminent men of letters of the day,and, in 1763, she accompanied LordBath, Mrs. Montagu, and Dr. Douglas(afterwards Bishop of Salisbury), on atour to Spa. In the space of ten yearsfrom this time, she lost, successively,her friends Lord Bath, ArchbishopSeeker, Miss Talbot, and her father;having arrived, says her biographer,at a time of life, when every year wasstealing from her some intimate friendor dear relation." In 1782, at the requestof Sir William Pulteney, whoallowed her an annuity of 150 perannum, she accompanied his daughterto Paris; and, in 1791, she had thehonour, by her majesty's express desire,of an interview with Queen Charlotte.She also, subsequently, received visitsfrom several of the royal family, andcontinued to be held in great reputation,long after she had ceased toattract public notice as a writer. Shelived to the age of eighty-eight, anddied, highly respected and esteemed bya numerous circle of friends, on the 19thof February, 1806. In 1807, were publishedMemoirs of her Life, with a newedition of her poems, &c., together withNotes on the Bible, and Answers toObjections concerning the ChristianReligion, by the Rev. Montague bennington; and, in 1808, her correspondencewith Miss Talbot was published,in two volumes, octavo. Theintellectual qualities of Mrs. Carterwere neither dazzling nor commanding ;but she possessed sound sense, vigourof thought, and indefatigable application.Elegance of style and purity ofsentiment, which sometimes rises to thesublime, are the chief characteristics ofher poetry ; for which, however, she isless celebrated than for her learning.APPENDIX,HENRY, (ROBERT,) the son of afarmer, in Scotland, was born there onthe 18th of February, 1718, and waseducated at the grammar-school ofStirling, and the University of Edinburgh.He was master of the grammar-school at Annann till 1748, when hebecame minister to a presbyterian congregationat Carlisle, and held the samesituation at Berwick, from 1760 till1768, when he was appointed to officiateat New Greyfriars Church, Edinburgh.After having taken his degree of D. D.he was, in 1774, chosen moderator ofthe general assembly, and succeededas joint minister to the old church in1776. His death, accelerated, possibly,by the circumstances related in ourmemoir of Gilbert Stuart, occurred in1790. As an author, the reputation ofDr. Henry is sustained by his Historyof England, in six quarto volumes,down to the time of Henry the Eighth.It has gone through several editions,and is said to have produced its authorj3,300 for his copyright, besides anannuity of 100 from the crown. Ourauthor, whose private character washighly estimable, also published a translationof Coquet's Origin of Laws, inthree octavo volumes.Thickness, (PHILIP,) the sonof a clergyman, was born at Farthing,in Northamptonshire, on the 10th ofAugust, 1719. After being a shorttime at Westminster School, he wasapprenticed to an apothecary ; and, in1735, he accompanied General Oglethorpeto the new settlement of Georgia.Returning, in 1737, he obtained commissionin the army, and served forsome time in the West Indies ; and, in1741, when he appears to have been inthe marines, he married the daughterof a French refugee, in the hope of obtaininga large fortune, in which, however,he was disappointed. Becominga widower in 1759, he married, a fewmonths afterwards, Lady ElizabethToucher, the heiress of the Audleyfamily, who brought him a fortune ;out of which he purchased the office oflieutenant-governor of Vanguard Fort.This lady, with whom he did not livehappily, died in 1762 ; and, about ayear afterwards, he took a third wife,in the person of Miss Ford, the daughterof a solicitor, in London. He nowturned his attention to literary pursuits,and published, in succession, besidessome letters and pamphlets, Man-midwiferyAnalyzed ; Proceedings of aCourt Martial ; and A Narrative ofwhat passed with Sir Henry Erskine;all in quarto. In 1766, he made a tourto France, of which he published anaccount ; and, upon his return to "England,he resided in Wales and at Bath.The unsuccessful termination of a chancerysuit respecting the property of hisfirst wife, induced him, a second time,to leave England, in 1775, when hevisited Spain, and other parts of thecontinent, and remained two yearsabroad. In 1777, he published an accountof his journey, and removed toBath, where he produced The NewYear's Bath Guide, The Valetudinarian'sBath Guide, A Year's Journeythrough the Pays Bas and AustrianNetherlands, Sketch of the Life ofThomas Gainsborough, and memoirs ofhis own life. In 1790, he visited Paris;and, in 1792, had proceeded as far asBologna, on his way to the former place,for the third time, when he expiredsuddenly in his carriage, on the 19thof November. He had children byall his wives, and was survived by hislast, a lady who gained some eclatby the publication of a novel, calledThe School of Fashion, and her BiographicalSketches of Literary Femalesof the French Nation. Mr. Thickness,by his eccentricities, and personal,rather than literary, controversies,became an object of much notorietyin his time ; but his works are nowdeservedly forgotten, or read only as amatter of gossip and curiosity. He issaid to have assisted the Duchess ofKingston in her altercation with Foote,who remarked, with more asperity thantruth, " that he had the stupidity of anowl, the vulgarity of a blackguard, theobdurate heart of an assassin, and thecowardice of a dung-hill cock."HAWKINS, (Sir JOHN,) the son ofa builder and surveyor, was born inLondon, in 1719. He was educated forthe profession of a solicitor, which hefor some years practised, at the sametime writing for the periodical press.Whilst still a young man, he wasthe friend and associate of the celebratedDr. Samuel Johnson, of whoseLITERATURE.club he became a member in 1749.Having been appointed the doctor'sexecutor, he was employed by thebooksellers to draw up a memoir of hisdeceased friend, to accompany a posthumousedition of his works; butneither in the capacity of editor orbiographer does he appear to advantage.He was, in consequence, severelyhandled by the critics, and by PeterPindar in particular; and his laboursare now only remembered to be ridiculed.In 1765, he was chosen chairmanof the Middlesex quarter sessions ;knighted in 1772 ; and died on the 21stof May, 1789. Besides writing his lifeof Johnson, he contributed some notesto Johnson and Steevens's famous editionof Shakspeare, and edited a newedition of Isaac Walton's CompleteAngler. He also published Observationson the Highways, and A Historyof the Science and Practice of Music,in five volumes, quarto, which cost himseveral years' labour and research, andmay be looked upon as an authority insuch matters. He left a son and adaughter by his wife, a lady of fortune,to whom he was united in 1753.MONTAGUE, (ELIZABETH,) thedaughter of Matthew Robinson, Esq.,was born at York, on the 2nd of November,1720. Her early years werepassed at Cambridge, where she derivedgreat advantage, in the progressof her education, from the assistance ofDr. Confers Middleton, the second husbandof her grandmother. In 1742,she married Edward Montague, Esq.,member of parliament for Huntingdon,and became a widow, in 1775, with nochildren ; but, having a handsome fortune,she was enabled to gratify hertaste for study, and literary and fashionablesociety, to the fullest extent. Herfirst production formed part of LordLyttleton's Dialogues of the Dead ; andwas followed by her classical and trulyelegant Essay on the Genius andWritings of Shakspeare, compared withthe Greek and French Dramatic Poets.About the same time, she gained additionaleclat by opening her house toa literary society, called The BlueStocking Club ; so named from the appearanceof one of its members in bluestockings. She is, however, chieflycelebrated for her correspondence, publishedin several volumes after herdeath, which took place, at her house inPortman Square, on the 25th of August,1800. Mrs. Montague possessed a profoundunderstanding and lively fancy,whilst her taste and judgment were bothcorrect and severe. She was intimatewith all the most eminent literati of herday, particularly with Lord Lyttletonand Gilbert West, who are said to havehad great influence over her mind inkeeping it steady to the principles ofChristianity. In private life, she wasan example of liberal discretion andrational benevolence. It was at herhouse that an annual entertainmentwas given, on May-day, to all theclimbing boys and chimney-sweepers'apprentices in the metropolis. Cowpersaid of her Essay on Shakspeare, " Thelearning, the good sense, the soundjudgment, and the wit displayed in it,fully justify, not only my compliment,but all compliments that either havebeen already paid to her talents orshall be paid hereafter."BRYANT, (JACOB,) was born atPlymouth, about the year 1720, andcompleted his education at King's College,Cambridge, where he graduatedM. A., in 1744. In 1756, the Duke ofMarlborough, who had been one of hispupils, gave him a place in the ordnancedepartment, and he afterwardsaccompanied his patron to Germany, inthe capacity of secretary. On his return,he settled at Sydenham, near Windsor,where he devoted the remainder of hislife to literature, refusing to accept thepost of master of the Charter-house,lest it might interfere with his favouritepursuit. He died in November, 1804,leaving behind him, among other works,Observations and Inquiries relating tovarious parts of Ancient History ; ATreatise on the Truth of Christianity ;and his principal production, A NewSystem, or Analysis of Ancient Mythology,in three volumes. This workprocured the author considerable reputation; but, though generally admired,was severely animadverted upon by anumber of critical opponents, to whosestrictures he certainly laid himself open,by producing arguments drawn fromthe oriental languages, with which he issaid to have been little acquainted. Mr.Bryant, who was fond of employing hisAPPENDIX.pen on conjectural subjects, advocatedthe authenticity of Rowley's poems ;and he also wrote A Defence of the disputedpassage in Josephus, relative toJesus Christ, and a book to show thatno such place as Troy ever existed.BLACKLOCK, (THOMAS,) the sonof a master bricklayer, was born atAnnann, in Scotland, in the year 1721.Before he was six months old, he becametotally blind from the small-pox ;and being thus unfitted for any mechanicalemployment, he eagerly soughtto improve his mind by an attention tothe various books which his father andsome of his friends, at his request, readto him. At the age of nineteen, henearly lost his life through his want ofsight, being on the point of steppinginto a draw-well, of considerable depth,when the sound of his favourite dog'sfeet on the boarded cover, warnedhim of his danger. In 1741, Dr. Stephenson,a physician of Edinburgh,hearing, whilst at Dumfries, of Black-lock'spoetical talents, which he hadshown at a very early age, invited himto the Scotch metropolis, and sent himto the university, where he remainedtill the breaking out of the rebellion, in1745, when he returned to Dumfries.In the meantime, he had become aproficient in the Latin language, madegreat progress in Greek, and obtaineda facility in the French, chiefly bymeans of conversation with the lady ofProvost Alexander, who was a native ofParis. In 1746, he published an octavovolume of his poems, which reached asecond edition in 1754 ; when he returnedto Edinburgh, and resumed hisstudies. In 1756, a quarto edition ofhis poems was published, by subscription,in London, the profits of whichwere considerable, and placed himin a comfortable situation, in regardto pecuniary circumstances. Havingprepared himself for going into thechurch of Scotland, he was licensed bythe presbytery of Dumfries, in 1759,and soon obtained high reputation as apreacher. In 1762, he married MissJohnstonee, the daughter of a surgeonat Dumfries ; and, in a few days afterwards,he was ordained minister ofKirkcudbright, in consequence of a presentationfrom the crown, obtained forhim by the Earl of Selkirk. The prejudiceof his parishioners, however,either against a pastor who had lost hissight, or a patron with whom they werethen at political enmity, induced ourpoet, after two years of irksome duty,to resign his living, and accept of amoderate annuity in its stead. In 1764,he removed to Edinburgh, where hereceived into his house a few studentsof the university, as boarders ; and continuedto teach, in this manner, forupwards of twenty years. In 1766,the degree of D. D. was conferred uponhim by the Marischal College of Aberdeen; after which, he published, successively,Paralysis, or Consolationsdeduced from Natural and RevealedReligion ; Two Discourses on the Spiritand Evidences of Christianity, fromthe French ; A Satirical Panegyricon Great Britain ; The Graham, anheroic ballad, in four cantos ; Remarkson the Nature and Extent of Liberty,&c. ; and an article on the Educationof the Blind, in The EncyclopaediaBritannica. The last was written in1783, at which time he was afflictedwith occasional deafness, as well asblindness ; an event that greatly distressedhim, as he was passionatelyfond of music. Depression of spiritswas also now added to a constitution,by nature delicate and nervous ; butthe gentleness of his temper neverforsook him, to the moment of hisdeath, which occurred on the 7th ofJuly, 1791. It is impossible to conceivea more truly virtuous and amiablecharacter than that of the subjectof our memoir ; his modesty, saysMr. Hume, was equal to the goodnessof his heart, and the beauty of hisgenius ; and no teacher, observes theauthor of The Man of Feeling, was,perhaps, ever more agreeable to hispupils, nor master of a family to itsinmates, than Blacklock. His poetryexhibits an ardent imagination, a refinedtaste, and a feeling heart, combinedwith the purest spirit of piety and benevolence.Elegance, ease, and harmony,characterize all his productions, to whichthe rapidity of his composition has alsoimparted a stamp of vivacity and animation; though frequently, Dr. Aikinobserves, at the expense of correctnessand regularity. The accuracy withwhich he describes visible images isastonishing, and has induced his pane-literature.grist, Mr. Spence, to ascribe to him asupernatural conception of visual objects.An anecdote is told of the blinde>et, too singular to be omitted :having retired from table, one day,much fatigued, one of his companions,alarmed at the length of his absence,went into his bed-room a few hoursafterwards, and finding him, as he supposed,awake, prevailed upon him toreturn to the dining-room. When heentered the room, two of his acquaintanceswere engaged in singing, and hejoined in the concert, modulating hisvoice, as usual, with taste and elegance,without missing a note or a syllable ;and, after the words of the song wereended, he continued to sing, adding anextempore verse, full of beauty, andquite in the spirit of the original. Hethen went to supper, and drank a glassor two of wine, but was observed to beoccasionally absent and inattentive. Byand by, he was heard speaking to himself,but in so slow and confused a manner,as to be unintelligible. At last,being pretty forcibly roused by Mrs.Blacklock, who began to be alarmedfor his intellects, he awoke with a suddenstart, unconscious of all that had happened,having been the whole time fastasleep. The principal part of these remarkableparticulars is mentioned byDr. Leghorn, in his Thesis de Somno,and the rest is related by our poet'sbiographer, in The Encyclopaedia, onthe authority of Mrs. Blacklock. Heonce spoke oaf a sunbeam as somethingpointed : and he also said, that " abrisk tune was much more like therays of the sun, than a melancholyone."DOUGLAS, (JOHN,) the son ofparents who emigrated, after the revolution,from Scotland to London, andkept the British coffee-house, in CockspurStreet, was born at Pittenweem,in Cheshire, in 1721. After passingsome years at a school at Dunbar, hewas, in 1736, entered a commoner ofSt. Mary's Hall, Oxford, where he remaineduntil 1738, when he removedto Baliol College. In 1741, he took thedegree of B.A., and, after paying a visitto the continent, graduated M. A. in 1743.In the following year, he was ordaineddeacon, and appointed chaplain to thethird regiment of foot guards, whichhe joined in Flanders, and was presentat the battle of Fontenoy, in 1745. Hewas ordained priest in 1747, and shortlyafterwards was selected, by the Earl ofBath, to accompany his son, Lord Pul-tenet,on his travels, from which hereturned in 1749, and was presented,by the earl, with the benefices of EatonConstantine, and Lexington, in Shropshire.In November, 1750, he publishedhis first literary work, entitledThe Vindication of Milton from thecharge of Plagiarism, brought againsthim by Lauder; and in the same yearhe was presented, by his patron, to thevicarage of High Ercal, in Shropshirewhen he vacated Eaton Constantine.In the spring of 1754, he publishedhis Criterion of Miracles in defence ofChristianity against Hume, and othersceptical writers. In 1757, he publishedBower and Tillemont compared ;shortly after, A Full Confutation ofBower's Three Defences; and, in thespring of 1758, The Complete andFinal Detection of Bower. In this yearhe took his degrees of B.D. and D.D. ;became one of the royal chaplains ; andwas presented, by Lord Bath, to theperpetual curacy of Henley, in Shropshire.In 1759 and 1761, he publishedsome political pamphlets, which wereattributed to the Earl of Bath, throughwhose interest he was, in November,1762, made canon of Windsor, whichbenefice he exchanged with Dr. Barrington,for a residentiary canonry ofSt. Paul's. In 1763, he went to Spawith his patron, who, dying in 1764,left him his library; but, as GeneralPulteney wished it should not beremoved from Bath House, he accepted1,000 in lieu of it. When thegeneral, however, died, he left it tothe bishop again, who relinquishedit, on similar tennis, to the late SirVV. Pulteney. In 1764, he exchangedhis livings in Shropshire, for that ofSt. Austin and St. Faith, in WallingStreet, London. In 1787, he succeededDr. Law, as Bishop of Carlisle, andto the deanery of Windsor; .and, in1792, his preferments ended in histranslation to the see of Salisbury.In the meantime he had been electeda fellow of the Royal and AntiquarianSocieties, and vice-president of the latter; and had added to his literary reputationby several political papers in theAPPENDIX.Public Advertiser, under the signaturesof Tacitus and Mantis, and his editionsof Cook's Second and Third Voyages.During the latter part of his life he sufferedmuch from the gout, and died onthe 18th of May, 1807. He had beentwice married: first, in September, 1752,to Dorothy, sister of Richard Penthouse,Esq., of Reynolds's Hall, near Wall-sail,Staffordshire ; secondly, in 1765,to Elizabeth, daughter of BridewellRooke, Esq. Besides the works alreadynamed, he was concerned in manyothers, the credit of which he sufferedtheir nominal and reputed authors exclusivelyto enjoy.SHERIDAN, (THOMAS,) third sonof Dr. Thomas Sheridan, was born atQuilca, near Dublin, in 1721. He waseducated at Westminster School, andTrinity College, Dublin, which universityhe suddenly quitted, after havinggraduated M.A., and turned actor. Inthis character he obtained some celebrity; but, combining it with that ofmanager of a theatre in his native place,his affairs became embarrassed, and herelinquished the stage for the more profitableemployment of teaching elocution.Some pieces, which he publishedon this subject, gained him some reputation,and one of them, A Dedication toLord Bure, procured from that ministera pension of jg200 a-year for theauthor. On his return from France,whither he had gone to avoid his creditors,he became manager of DruryLane Theatre ; but, owing to some disgust,soon retired from that situation.The principal result of his literarylabours, to which he now devoted himself,was an Orthoepical Dictionaryof-the English Language, which appearedin 1788, and is still considereda standard work. In the summer ofthe same year, he had set out for Lisbon,for the benefit of his health, butdied a few hours after his embarkation,at Margate, on the 14th of August, andwas buried in that place. His wife was avery accomplished and amiable woman,and is favourably known as the authoressof an interesting novel, entitledSidney Biddulph, and otherworks, chiefly romantic. She died beforethe subject of our memoir, whowas the father of the celebrated RichardBrinsley Sheridan, and of other sons.The other principal works of Mr.Thomas Sheridan, are his British Elocution,and a Life of Dean Swift.Wanton, (JOSEPH,) son of theRev. Thomas Wanton, professor ofpoetry at Oxford, was born in 1722,at Unsold, in Surrey. He wasprincipally educated by his father,till he arrived at his fourteenth year,when he was admitted on the foundationof Winchester College, where heremained till 1740, when he was enteredof Oriel College, Oxford. Herehe pursued his studies with great diligence,and, during his leisure hours,composed several poems of merit. Hetook his degree of B.A.Jn 1744, andwas ordained to his father's curacyat Basingstoke, which he served tillFebruary, 1746, when he removed toChelsea; and, in the same year, publisheda small volume of odes. In1747-8, the Duke of Bolton presentedhim to the small rectory of Winslade,in Buckinghamshire ; and about thesame time he married. In 1753, he publishedhis famous edition of Virgil ; theaeneid, translated by Pitt; and, theEclogues, Georgicss, and the whole ofthe notes, by himself; with dissertations,and three essays, from his ownpen, on pastoral, epic, and didacticpoetry. The work gained him greatreputation, and reached a second editionbefore 1759, in which year theUniversity of Oxford conferred uponhim, by diploma, the degree of M.A.In 1754, the Jervis family presentedhim to the living of Tamworth ; and,in 1755, he succeeded the Rev. SamuelSpeed, as second master of WinchesterCollege. He now found leisure to complete"his first volume of his famousEssay on the Writings and Genius ofPope, which he published, anonymously,in 1756 ; but the objections raised againstit were so powerful, that he did notadd the second and concluding volume,until twenty-six years afterwards. In1766, he was advanced to the headmastershipof Winchester College ; andhe soon after visited Oxford, and proceededto the degrees of B.D. and D.D.In 1772, his first wife died, leaving himsix children ; and, in the following year,he married a daughter of Robert Nicholas,Esq. In 1782, he obtained a stallin St. Paul's ; and, in 1788, a prebendLITERATURE.in Winchester Cathedral, together withthe rectory of Easton, which he waspermitted to exchange for Upham. In1793, he resigned his mastership atWinchester, and retired to Wickham,where he employed his leisure in superintendinga new edition of the works ofPope, which appeared in nine volumes,in 1797. His next undertaking was anedition of Dryden, but he was preventedfrom finishing more than two volumes,by his death, which took place at Wick-ham,on the 23rd of February, 1800.As a poet the reputation of Wanton hasscarcely survived him, though manyof his odes attest no ordinary genius.Johnson observes of him, as a critic,that he taught us " how the brow ofcriticism may be smoothed, and how shemay be enabled, with all her severity,to attract and to delight." In privatelife he was much beloved, and hisabilities and elegant manners causedhim to be equally courted by men oflearning and of rank. " Whilst he washead master at Winchester," says hisbiographer, Mr. Wooll, " his brotherTom, who was an usher, used to supplysome of the boys with themes and verses,when they had omitted to do theirs.On one of these occasions, a copy ofverses was shown up to the doctor ; heimmediately recognized them to be hisbrother's ; and, calling to him, tookout five shillings from his pocket, andpresented it to the boy, observing, toTom's no small chagrin, ' this youthhas produced such excellent verses,that I have rewarded him with a crown ;and I have no doubt but you will do thesame !' " It was either the subject ofour memoir, or his brother, who, onsnuffing a candle out, exclaimedBrevisesse laborObscures fioLELAND, (THOMAS,) was born inDublin, in 1722, and entered, as a pensionerof Trinity College, in the universityof that city, after having receivedthe rudiments of education at the schoolof the famous Dr. Sheridan. Afterhaving graduated B. A. in 1742, andobtained a fellowship in 1746, he enteredinto holy orders in 1748 ; and, in1754, he published an edition of TheOrations of Demosthenes, with a Latinversion, and notes, which he had undertaken,in conjunction with Dr.Stokes, at the request of the university.In 1756, he published an Englishtranslation of the some, followed by asecond volume in 1761, and a third in1770; having, in the intermediate time,produced The History of the Life andReign of Philip, King of Macedon,which appeared in 1758, in two volumes,quarto. He next translated theOrations of aeschines ; and, in 1762,appeared the ingenious historical romance,Longford, Earl of Salisbury ;which, though never claimed, is supposedto be written, by him. In thefollowing year, he was appointed professorof oratory of his college ; and,in 1764, he published a Dissertationon the Principles of Human Eloquence ;with particular regard to the Style andComposition of the New Testament ; inwhich the arguments used by BishopWarburton, on the " doctrine of grace,"are allowed to be completely refuted.He was also victorious in a subsequentcontroversy with Hurd, who defendedWarburton in a petulant pamphlet, towhich Leland replied with equal temperand success. In 1768, he was appointedchaplain to Lord Townshend, the lordlieutenant of Ireland j and lie subsequentlyobtained the prebend of Carmichael,in the cathedral of St. Patrick,Dublin, together with the vicarage ofBray, the extent of his church preferment.In 1773, he published, in threevolumes, quarto, The History of Ireland,from the invasion of Henry theSecond ; a work which can be consideredas little better than a sketch,being deficient in a variety of informationobviously important, and whichthe author might easily have supplied.He died in 1785 ; and, in 1788, threevolumes of his sermons were published,with an account of his life and writings,in which his discourses are characterizedas possessing strong earnestnessto enforce conviction, withoutbeing trite, meagre, or overlaid withflimsy ornament. He was the mostadmired preacher in Dublin ; and inclassical learning was considered, byDr. Johnson and others, to be unrivalled.In his translation of Demosthenes,he unites the man of tastewith the man of erudition ; and in hisDissertation upon Eloquence, and hisDefence" of it, he displays, in anequal degree, strength and perspicuityAPPEN DIXof style, accurate knowledge, and soundjudgment.ASKEW, (ANTHONY,) was born atKendal, in Westmorland, in 1722, andwas educated at the Jedburgh gram-mareschal,and Emanuel College,Cambridge. Here, though he studiedmedicine, and graduated Mab. in 1745,he was chiefly distinguished for hisproficiency in classical literature ; and,whilst he was collecting materials for acomplete edition of the works of aeschylus,he, in 1746, published a specimenof the intended work, under the title ofNovae Editions Tragedian ^EschyliSpecimen. In the same year, he becamea medical student at the Universityof Leyden ; and, after travellingsome time in Holland and Greece, returnedto England with a curious andvaluable collection of ancient manuscripts.In 1750, he graduated M. D.,and was shortly afterwards elected afellow of the College of Physicians, andof the Royal Society. He died on the27th of February, 1774 ; leaving behindhim, besides the materials for the workabove-mentioned, some manuscripts,from which an appendix to the GreekLexicon of Scapula was published in1789. He was considered the bestGreek scholar in England, and hadamassed a very valuable library, whichwas sold, after his death, for 5,000.GRAINGER, (JAMES,) a native ofDense, in Scotland, was born about theyear 1723, and studied medicine at theUniversity of Edinburgh, where he tookhis degree of M.D. He then proceededto Germany, in the capacity ofan army surgeon ; and, returning in1748, commenced practice in London,but gained more celebrity by his literary,than his professional, talents. In 1759, hepublished a translation of the Elegies ofTibullus, which procured him meritedreputation, and brought him into intimacywith Shenstone, and other distinguishedmen of letters. The work,however, did not, in his opinion, receivethe eulogy it deserved, and he defendedit against the criticisms of Dr. Smollett,with a virulence which produced, onboth sides, an irreconcilable quarrel.The smallness of his professional emoluments,it is supposed, induced him toaccept an advantageous offer of settlingat St. Christopher, in the West Indies,where he contracted a lucrative marriage,and practised with great success.At the same time he pursued his literaryoccupations, and wrote, during hisresidence there, a poem On the Cultureof the Sugar Cane, and A Treatise onthe Diseases of the West Indies; theformer of which he published on hispaying a visit to England, in 1764. Onhis return to St. Christopher, he continuedto practise till the spring of1767, when he died of an epidemicfever, at that time raging in the island.He was a man of amiable dispositionand engaging manners, an able physician,and a poet of no mean order. "Hewas also the author of several medicaltracts ; and his Ode to Solitude, and AWest Indian Ballad, published in thecollection of Dr. Percy (afterwardsBishop of Dromore), were the subject ofmuch admiration.GREGORY, (JOHN,) was born atAberdeen, on the 3rd of June, 1724, andbecame professor of philosophy in thatuniversity, after having studied medicineat Edinburgh and Leyden, andtaken his degree of M.D. He continuedto lecture on mathematics, natural philosophy,and moral philosophy, till theclose of the year 1749, when he' resignedhis situation, and shortly afterwardsmarried a daughter of Lord Forbes, andcommenced practice at Aberdeen. Findinghis success not equal to his'expecta-tons, he, in 1754, came to London,where he was immediately electeda fellow of the Royal Society, andremained until 1756, when he succeededhis brother in the professorshipof medicine at King's College,Aberdeen. While in this city he, inconjunction with Dr. Rid, instituteda literary society, from the meetings ofwhich, says Smellie, one of Dr. Gregory'sbiographers, "many of the mostcelebrated works of Campbell, Beattie,and others, derive their origin." It wasbefore this society that Dr. Gregory readthe essays which laid the foundation ofhis work, published in 1764. entitledA Comparative View of the State andFaculties of Man, with those of theAnimal World. It is astonishing, saysa writer in the Biographic Medical,that the author of so remarkable a workshould have published it anonymously.LITERATURE.*' The idea of the work, however," saysMr. Smellie, " although ingenious, is byno means elucidated, or even followed."In 1764, Dr. Gregory removed toEdinburgh, where, in 1766, he was appointedprofessor of the practice ofphysic ; and in the same year he succeededDr. Whytt as first physician tohis majesty, for Scotland. After lecturingfor three years in his proper branch,he alternately interchanged with Dr.Cullen, the lectureship on the theory,and on the practice of physic ; by whicharrangement, says Lord Woodhouselee,another of his biographers, " the studentshad the benefit of the wholemedical system of both these eminentprofessors." In 1766, and afterwards,in 1772, he published his two introductorylectures, On the Duties and Officesof a Physician, and On the Method ofProsecuting Inquiries in Philosophy.These were succeeded by a work,entitled Elements of the Practice ofPhysic, intended as a text-book for hispupils, and which he was preventedfrom completing by his death, whichtook place on the 10th of February,1773. In person, Dr. Gregory was talland symmetrical, but his limbs wereinactive, and his countenance, exceptwhen he was engaged in conversation,gave no indication of his mental abilities.His principal intellectual characteristicwas good sense, which appearsto have been united with genius andacuteness of understanding. In hisprofessional capacity, he was equallyliberal to, and beloved by, his patients,pupils, and professional brethren. As alecturer, his aim was to point out thedefects of physic, rather than to flatterthe students with hopes of perfectionin an art, which he considered as littlemore than in its infancy. His medicalwritings are still in high repute, butare less remarkable for the medicalknowledge contained in them, than fortheir elegance of style, and the spiritof benevolence, sound sense, and truephilosophy, which they breathe. Hismost important work appeared the yearafter his death, entitled A Father'sLegacy to his Daughters. It has gonethrough several editions, and " ismarked," says the biographer of theauthor, in The Edinburgh Encyclopaedia," by a deep knowledge of theworld, and of the human character, andabounds with the finest lessons of pietyand virtue."HOME, (JOHN,) was born nearAntrum, in Roxburgshire, Scotland, in1724; and, whilst studying at the Universityof Edinburgh, for the church,joined the royal army against the Pretender,and was made prisoner at thebattle of Falkirk. On the terminationof the rebellion, he retired to hisstudies at Edinburgh, where he waslicensed to preach, in 1747, and commencedhis duties as minister of Athensin East Lothian. Here hecomposed his tragedy of Douglas, whichwas performed at Edinburgh, withgreat applause ; but incurring, throughit, the censure of the presbytery, whoregarded his dramatic labours as derogatoryto his profession, he resigned hiscure, to prevent deprivation, and cameto London, where his play was performed,and himself patronised byDavid Hume, and other literary menof eminence. In 1763, he was appointed,by Lord Bute, commissioner ofsick and wounded seamen, and appointedconservator of the Scottish privilegesat Ampere, in Zealand. Inthe meantime, he had produced histragedies of Agis, The Siege of Aquileia,The Fatal Discovery, Alonzo, andAlfred ; but none of them met with success.In 1778, he received a captain'scommission in the Buccleugh fencible,which he held until the peace ; and, in1802, he published his History of theRebellion of 1745, which can only bepraised for the liberal opinions and justprinciples of the author, who died onthe 4th of December, 1808, at Merchis-tonbank, in Scotland. He was a manof great learning; but, as a writer, isonly to be considered as the author ofDouglas, which, though it still keepsthe stage, may be said to be declining inpopularity ; though the poetry of it willalways be admired. The poet Gray, inspeaking of it in 1757, says, " I amgreatly struck with it, though it hasmany faults ; and there is one scene(between Matilda and the old peasant)so masterly, that it strikes me blindto all the defects in the world."KIPPIS, (ANDREW,) the son of a silkhosier, was born at Nottingham, on the28th of March, 1725. He received the54GAPPENDIX.rudiments of education at Sleaford, inLincolnshire; and at the age of sixteen,was admitted into the academy of Dr.Doddridge, at Northampton, with a viewof qualifying himself as a dissentingminister. He commenced the duties ofpastor in 1746, at Boston, in Lincolnshire;but, in 1750, removed to Dorking,in Surrey, and, izi 1753, succeededDr. Hughes, in Princes Street, Westminster.In 1763, he became classical andphilological tutor in the London dissentingacademy, supported by the fundsof William Coward, Esq. ; and, in 1767,he received the unsolicited honour ofthe degree of D.D. from the Universityof Edinburgh. In March, 1778, he waselected a fellow of the Society of Arts ;and, in the month of June of the followingyear, a fellow of the Royal Society.On the dissolution of Mr. Coward'sacademy, he assisted in the establishmentof a dissenting college at Hackney,of which he was, for a while, atutor, and continued to promote itsinterest till his death, which took placeon the 8th of October, 1795. Dr.Kippis is principally known, as an author,by his new edition of the BiographiaBritannica, of which five foliovolumes only were published. He alsowrote the lives of Drs. Doddridge andLarder, and Sir John Pringle, to beprefixed to their respective works ; andthe life of Captain Cook, singly. Heestablished the New Annual Register ;wrote several articles for the MonthlyReview, and a periodical, called TheLibrary ; besides some political andother pamphlets, particularly one invindication of the act of toleration, publishedin 1772, when the dissenterspetitioned for its enlargement. In relationto the Biographia Britannica, whichis certainly better calculated to supplyinformation than to guide the judgment,the following anecdote is told ;I happened to say," observes HoraceWalpole, to a friend, " that theBiographia Britannica was an apologyfor everybody. This reached the earsof Dr. Kippis, who was publishing anew edition ; and who retorted thatthe life of Sir Robert Walpole shouldprove that the Biographia was not anapology for everybody. Soon after, .1was surprised with a visit from thedoctor, who came to solicit materials formy father's life. You may guess I verycivilly refused." Dr. Kippis was avery popular preacher among the dissenters; and he is described, by Dr.Rees, as combining, with a variety ofexternal accomplishments, a mild andgentle temper, a comprehensive understanding,and a sound judgment. Hewas married in 1753, to Miss Bott, thedaughter of a merchant at Boston ; butit does not appear whether he had anyissue.BALLARD, (GEORGE,) was born ofhumble parents, at Camden. in Gloucestershire,about the year 1725. Hewas apprenticed to a habit-maker,and, though of a weakly constitution,managed to steal sufficient time fromhis hours of sleep, to learn the Saxonlanguage, and otherwise improve himselfin literature. Lord Chatsworth, andother gentlemen in the neighbourhoodof Camden, hearing of his diligence,offered him an annuity of 100 perannum, but he would only accept 60,upon which sum he went to Oxford,where he was made one of the eightclerks of Magdalen College, and afterwardsone of the university beadles. Hedied, it is said, of over application, inJune, 1755, leaving behind him avariety of manuscripts, and a printedwork, which became deservedly popular,entitled Memoirs of British Ladies,who have been celebrated for theirwritings or skill in the learned languages,arts, and sciences.Enrich, (WILLIAM,) was bornabout the year 1725, at Watford, inHertfordshire, and quitted his businessof a rule-maker, for the cultivation ofliterature. After procuring, at Ley den,a doctor's degree, but in what facultydoes not appear, he came to London,and obtained some reputation by avariety of works, which he published insuccession, from 1751 till the time ofhis death, in 1779. The principal ofthem are, The Grand Question debated,or an Essay to prove that theSoul of Man is n it, neither can it be,Immortal ; the reverse of which heimmediately attempted to prove in aReply, by himself; A Review of Dr.Johnson's Shakspeare ; three unsuccessfulcomedies ; some poetical productions,entitled Epistles, Philosophicaland Moral; The Pelion; The Pas-literature.quince ; besides a Dictionary of theEnglish Language, and several critiquesin the London Review. Enrich possessedgreat literary industry and talents,but the manner in which he exercisedthem has much detracted from theapprobation that he otherwise merits.ROBERTSON, (JOSEPH,) the sonof a maltster, was born at Knife, inWestmorland, on the 28th of August,1726. He was educated at the gram-mareschalof Appleby, and Queen'sCollege, Oxford, where he studied forthe church ; and, having taken orders,he obtained, in succession, the livingsof Hereward, in Hampshire; Sutton, inEssex ; and the vicarage of Hardcastle,in Lincolnshire; to which 'last he wasappointed in 1779. He died on the 19thof January, 1802, leaving several works,of which the principal is his tract, entitledThe Parian Chronicle, or theChronicle of the Aurelian Marbles ;with a dissertation concerning their| authenticity, which he disputes, withequal learning, ingenuity, and acuteness.Among his other works may bementioned, An Introduction to the Studyof Polite Literature ; An Essay onPunctuation, which went through foureditions ; and a translation of Telemachus,with a life of its author, Fenton.He also published some Letters,Sermons, &c., and is said to have beenthe author of two thousand six hundredand twenty articles in the Critical Review,to which he contributed from1764 to 1785. He was married, in1758, to a Miss Raises, and had severalchildren by her, all of whom diedyoung.Hole, (JOHN,) the son of a watchmaker,was born in London, in December,1727 ; and, after having receiveda classical education, was, in1739, entered as a clerk at the EastIndia House. A perusal of Sir JohnHarrington's version of Orlando Furioso,inspiring him with a taste for Italianliterature, he acquired a knowledge ofthat language, and was thus enabledto give to the public his versions ofTasso's Jerusalem Delivered, and ofthe Orlando, the former of which waspublished in 1763, and the latter completedin 1783. He also translatedTasso's Rinaldo, and six plays of ,and was the author of a life ofMr. Scott, of Unwell, some miscellaneouspoems, and three unsuccessfultragedies, entitled Cyrus, Timanthes,and Cleon. After having filled thesituation of auditor of the Indian accounts,Mr. Hoole retired to Abiger,near Dorking, in 1786, and died, muchrespected, in 1803. Mr. Hoole's principalperformance is his Jerusalem Delivered; the dedication of which, to thequeen, was written by Dr. Johnson.The work is a faithful but spiritlesstranslation, and utterly wanting in thatenergy and harmony of versificationwhich distinguish the original ; it has,therefore, greatly declined in popularity,and is now seldom quoted orread, though it obtained for its authorconsiderable reputation.Capons, (HESTER,) the daughterof Thomas Multo, Esq., of Tvvywell,Northamptonshire, was born in 1727,and is said to have written a romanceat the age of nine. She was one ofthe female favourites of the novelistRichardson, and was introduced by himto Mr. Charon, a lawyer, whom shemarried in 1760, but was left a widowten months afterwards. Her abilitiesand respectable character procured herthe friendship of many eminent writersof her own sex, and particularly Mrs.Montagu and Miss Carter ; to the latterof whom she addressed a poem, on hertranslation of Epictetus. Her otherworks are, An Ode to Peace ; the storyof Fidelia, in The Adventurer ; Letterson the Improvement of the Mind, addressedto a young lady ; and a volumeof Miscellanies, in prose and verse.The Letters are her most celebratedproduction, and have been justly describedas the most unexceptionablethat can be put into the hands of youth.The system laid down in them is withouteccentricity or peculiarity, havingexperience for its foundation, and utilityfor its. end. Her poems deserve morenotice than they have obtained. Shedied at Hadley, in 1801 ; and her worksand correspondence were published, intwo volumes, duodecimo, in 1807, withan account of her life.PERCY, (THOMAS, Bishop of Promote,)was a descendant of the ancientEarls of Northumberland, and bornAPPEN Dix,at Bridgeport, Salop, in 1728. Afterpassing some time at a provincial gram-mareschal,he was entered at Christchurch,Oxford, where he graduatedM. A. in 1753 ; and, after taking holyorders, was presented, by his college,to the vicarage of Easton Mauduit, andto the rectory of Wilbye, in Northamptonshire,by the Earl of Surrey.He commenced his literary career in1761, by publishing Han Kiou Chouan,a translation from the Chinese ; whichwas followed, in 1762, by ChineseMiscellanies ; and, in the followingyear, by Five Pieces of Runic Poetry,freely paraphrased from the Icelandic.In 1764, appeared his version of theSong of Solomon, which was succeeded,in the following year, by his most popularwork, Reliques of Ancient EnglishPoetry ; a production which forms anera in the history of English literaturein the eighteenth century. In 1769, hewas appointed chaplain to the king ;in 1778, Dean of Carlisle; and, in 1782,Bishop of Dromore, in Ireland ; having,in the mean time, published A Key tothe New Testament; translations ofMallet's Northern Antiquities ; TheHermit of War worth, a poem; and acurious and valuable record belongingto the Percy family, entitled The NorthumberlandHousehold Book. Hedied at Dromore, on the 30th of September,1811, having become totallyblind for some years previously, leavingbehind him an almost spotless character,both as a divine and a man.Literature lost, in him, a bright ornamentand a warm patron ; the delicacyand ardour of his genius, and his exquisitetaste and correctness of judgment,in the walks in which he trod, havescarcely been equalled.MURPHY, (ARTHUR,) the son of aDublin merchant, who died two yearsafter his son's birth, was born at Clom-quin, in Roscommon, in Ireland, on the27th of December, 1730. In 1740, hewas sent to the college of St. Omens,where he remained about seven years ;and, on his return, was apprenticed tohis uncle, a merchant at Cork. Hisfondness for theatricals, however, sooninduced him to quit this situation, andto come to London, where he, at first,acted as clerk to a banker ; but, subsequently,devoted himself entirely toliterature. In 1752, he published TheGray's Inn Journal, and continued toconduct it until 1754, in which year heappeared upon the stage, but soonquitted it, although he had been veryfavourably received. His first dramaticpieces, entitled The Apprentice, an. IThe Spouter, were acted in 1756 ; and,about the same time, he brought out aperiodical paper, called The Test, inopposition to The Contest, conductedby Owen Ruffled. On quitting thestage, he studied for the bar ; and, afterbeing refused admission to the Templeand Gray's Inn, on the ground of hishaving been an actor, he was called bythe Society of Lincoln's Inn ; and, for awhile, practised his profession, but withlittle success. He, some time afterwards,edited a weekly paper, calledThe Auditor, in opposition to TheNorth Briton ; and, in 1762, he publishedan edition of Fielding's works,with a life of the author. In 1788, heleft the bar altogether, having previouslyproduced several successfulplays, and gained considerable reputationas a scholar, by his Latin versionsof some popular English poems. In1792, he published his Essay on theLife and Genius of Dr. Johnson ; and,in the following year, his celebratedtranslation of Tacitus, addressed to Mr.Burke. Towards the latter end of hislife, he was appointed, by Lord Loughborough,a commissioner of bankrupts ;and he also received a pension of 200per annum some time previous to hisdeath, which occurred in June, 1805.Besides the dramatic pieces before-mentioned,and his still popular ones ofThe Grecian Daughter, The Way toKeep Him, Know Your Own Mind,and All in the Wrong, he wrote TheEnglishman from Paris, The Upholsterer,The Orphan of China, TheDesert Island, The Old Maid, TheCitizen, No One's Enemy but His Own,What we must all come to, The Schoolfor Guardians, Zenobia, Alzuma, ThreeWeeks after Marriage, News fromParnassus, The Choice, The RivalSisters, Arminius, and a variety ofothers, neither played nor published.He also wrote the life of Garrick, and atranslation of Sallust, and several otherof his writings were published separatelyafter 1786, in which year his workswere printed, in seven octavo volumes.LITE RATURE.MOORE, (JOHN,) the son of aclergyman, and father of the celebratedSir John Moore, was born at Stirling,in Scotland, some time in the year 1730.Having completed his education at theUniversity of Glasgow, whither he removedwith his mother, after the deathof his father, in 1735, he became themedical apprentice of Dr. Gordon ; onleaving whom, he went abroad as anarmy surgeon. On his return to England,he attended, in London, the lecturesof Dr. Hunter, and then proceededto Paris, where he passed two years,greatly improving himself in his profession,and was, for some time, surgeonto the household of Lord Albemarle,the British ambassador. After re-attending the lectures of Dr. Hunter,and hearing a course on midwifery, byDr. Smellie, he went to Glasgow, andthere commenced practice in partnershipwith Mr. Hamilton, professor ofanatomy. In 1772, he took, at Glasgow,his degree of M. D., and wasshortly afterwards appointed, by theDuchess of Hamilton, to attend her sonto the continent, where he passed aboutfive years in visiting the principal citiesand countries. In 1778, he returnedto Glasgow ; and, in the same year,removed with his family to London,where he published, in 1779, a workentitled A View of Society and Mannersin .France, Switzerland, and Germany ;and, in two years afterwards, a continuationof the same, called A View ofthe Society and Manners of Italy. Bothpublications met with a highly favourablereception from the press and thepublic, and were, in a short time, succeededby other editions, and translatedinto several foreign languages.In 1786, he published his MedicalSketches; a work which, though wellreceived, and proving his accurateknowledge of his profession, did notmuch extend his practice, and gavegreat offence to many of the faculty, bythe disclosure of certain medical arcanawhich they wished to keep secret. Henext appeared in print as the authorof his most important work, Zeluco ;Various Views of Human Nature ; inwhich he contrived to combine, with amost interesting course of events, aforcible and instructive moral respectingthe education of youth, which raisedhim td the rank of a first-rate writer offictitious narrative, and has procuredhim permanent reputation. In 1793,he published A Journal during a Residencein France ; and, in 1795, a workin two volumes, entitled A View of theCauses and Progress of the FrenchRevolution. This was succeeded, inthe following year, by a publicationsomewhat analogous to Tom Jones,called Edward ; Various Views ofHuman Nature, taken from Life andManners, chiefly in England ; and, in1800, by a novel, in three volumes,entitled Mordant, Sketches of Life,Characters, and Manners in variousCountries, including the Memoirs of aFrench Lady of Quality. The latterpart of Dr. Moore's life was passed atRichmond, where he died, much regretted,some time in 1803.FALCONER, (WILLIAM,) the sonof a barber, at Edinburgh, was bornthere about the year 1730. He hadscarcely been taught the rudiments ofeducation before he was sent to sea inthe merchant service ; and whilst in thecapacity of second mate to a vesselsailing from Alexandria to Venice, waswrecked, and, with two others, formedthe only portion of the crew that wassaved. This circumstance led to hisproduction of The Shipwreck, whichappeared in 1762, and at once establishedhis poetical fame. The dedicationof this work to Edward, Duke ofYork, procured Falconer a midshipman'ssituation, in 1763; and, havingaddressed his royal patron in an ode onhis second departure from England asrear-admiral, our author was soon aftermade purser of the Glory. In 1769,he published his Universal MarineDictionary ; a work of great utility,highly approved of by the profession,and still the chief work of its class.In the same year, being appointedpurser to the Aurora frigate, he sailedfor Bengal ; but, after having touchedat the Cape of Good Hope, in December,the vessel was never moreheard of, and is supposed to havefoundered in the Mozambique Channel.Falconer's other works are, a poem onthe death of Frederick, Prince of Wales,in 1751, and a satirical piece, calledThe Demagogue, containing an attackupon wilkes and his partisans. Itis, however, only as the author of theAPPENDIX.song of The Storm, which he is said tohave written, and of The Shipwreck,that he is to be considered as a poet.The latter is not only remarkable forharmony of versification and fidelity ofdescription, with unrivalled imagery,but as containing within itself the rudimentsof navigation, sufficient to formacomplete seaman. " I have heardmany experienced officers declare,"says his biographer, Mr. Clarke, " thatthe rules and maxims, delivered in thispoem, for the conduct of a ship in themost perilous emergency, are the best,indeed the only opinions which a skilfulmariner should adopt." Falconerwas married, but it does not appearwhether he left any issue.Johnston, (CHARLES,) wasborn in Ireland, about the year 1730 ;and, after having practised some timeat the Irish and English bars, turnedhis attention to literature, in conferenceof deafness preventing his furyattendance at court. His firstproduction appeared in 1760, when hepublished two volumes of Crystal, orthe Adventures of a Guinea, professingto be a dispassionate, distinct account,of the most remarkable transactions ofthe present times, all over Europe, withcurious and interesting anecdotes of thepublic and private characters of theparties principally concerned in thosescenes, especially in England, &c. Thesuccess this met with induced him tobring out two additional volumes, in1765, which were read with equal avidityand interest. The scenes he developedhaving some foundation in truth, thoughhighly exaggerated, excited generalcuriosity ; and a remarkable sensationwas produced by that part relating to aclub of fashionable profligates, said tohave been held at the house of a dissipatednobleman in Buckinghamshire.His other works, displaying great satiricaltalent and knowledge of the world,are, The Reverie, or a Flight to theParadise of Fools ; Graces, Princeof Betlis ; The Pilgrim, or a Picture ofLife ; and The History of John Juniper,Esq., alias Juniper Jack. He alsowrote essays for, and was a joint proprietorof, The Bengal Newspaper,having gone out to India in 1784; inwhich country he died, about the year1800.CUMBERLAND,(RiCHARD,) grandsonof the celebrated Dr. Bentley, andgreat-grandson of the Bishop of Peterborough,was born at Cambridge, on the19th of February, 1732. His father,who was Bishop of Concert, sent himfirst to school at Bury St. Edmund's,and afterwards to Westminster, whencehe proceeded to Trinity College, Cambridge,where he graduated B. A., in1750 ; and, shortly afterwards, obtaineda fellowship, having, in the meantime,become private secretary to Lord Halifax.Whilst in London, he published AnElegy, written on St. Mark's Eve ; ofwhich, he says, the result was neitherfame nor profit. Declining to take holyorders, he resigned his fellowship, andobtained a lay one, but forfeited thisalso on his marriage, in 1759, when hewas appointed crown agent for NovaScotia. When Lord Halifax went toIreland, as lord-lieutenant, our authoraccompanied him ; and is said to havebeen offered a baronetcy by his patron,who, however, on becoming secretaryof state, refused Cumberland a higherstation than that of clerk of the reports,in the office of trade and plantations.Having before indulged his taste fordramatic composition, he now commencedwriting, with assiduity, for thestage, and produced a variety of plays,of which his comedy of The West Indianwas the most successful. On the accessionto office of Lord Germaine, hewas made secretary to the board oftrade, but of this office he was subsequentlydeprived, by Mr. Burke'seconomy bill, after having been previouslyobliged to part with the wholeof his hereditary property, to defray theexpenses of a mission, upon which hehad been sent to the courts of Lisbon andMadrid. His loss, upon this occasion,amounted to ^5,000, which governmentrefused to pay, though for what reasonwas never stated to him. With a veryinadequate pension, he now retired toTunbridge Wells, and devoting himselfentirely to literature, produced, in succession,a variety of works ; and, amongother dramatic pieces, his comedies ofThe Jew, and The Wheel of Fortune.He also projected and edited, during itsbrief existence, The London Review ;and, in 1806, published memoirs of haslife, which terminated, in London, onthe 7th of May, 1811. Cumberland isLITERATURE.distinguished more by the quantity thanthe quality of his writings, which, intoo maiiy instances, bear evident marksof haste and necessity. His mostpopular performances we have alreadymentioned ; and these, together withThe Fashionable Lover, are his onlydramatic efforts that display more thanordinary merit. As a poet he canscarcely be mentioned; and the reputationhe has gained, as a critic, by hiscollection of essays, entitled The Observer,was no longer accorded to him,after the confession of his obligations toDr. Bentley's manuscripts. His charadeter, allowing for the drawback of an| equal addiction to flattery and detraction,| had some estimable and honourable| traits, of which the following anecdoteis an instance : Being presented, by a1 distant relation, with a deed of gift inj his favour of some considerable property,he positively refused to accept it, tillJ assured it had not been made to theI prejudice of a near relation, and, insistedfinally, on the insertion of a clauseof resumption, of which the giver subsequentlytools advantage. His mannerswere those of the courtier and thegentleman ; and his powers of conversationwould seem, from an observationof Dr. Johnson, to have been of no commonorder. " The want of company,"says the doctor, in a letter to Mrs. Thrale,is an inconvenience, but Mr. Cumberlandis a million." He was extremelysensitive to hostile criticism ; on whichaccount Garrick called him " the manwithout a skin ;" and Sheridan is saidto have intended Sir Fretful Plagiary asasatire upon this part of Cumberland'scharacter. His principal literary productions,in addition to the before-mentioned,are Anecdotes of SpanishPainters ; the Novels of Arundel,Henry, and John de Lancaster ; Calvary,a poem ; A version of fifty of thePsalms of David; and two pamphlets,one addressed to Dr. Loath, in defenceof Bentley ; and another to Dr. Parr,entitled Curtis restored from the Gulf.Among other of his plays may bementioned The Summer's 'Tale ; TheBrothers ; The Widow of Delphi ; TheNatural Son; The Choleric Man; TheBattle of Hastings, and several tragedies,of which the Carmelite was least unsuccessful.WALKER, (JOHN,) was born nearBarnet, Hearts, on the 18th of March, 1732.His aversion to trade, for which he wasdestined, induced him to appear on thestage, but though a respectable, he neverbecame a popular, actor; and he finallyquitted the boards in 1768. In thefollowing year, he opened a school atKensington Gravel-pits, in conjunctionwith a catholic clergyman, but a disagreementarising between the parties.Mr. Walker relinquished his situation,and commenced teaching elocution,which he did with a success that procuredhim great celebrity, both at theuniversities and capitals of England,Scotland, and Ireland. As an author,he also acquired considerable reputationby the publication of several usefulelementary works, of which the mostpopular are, his Rhetorical Grammar,Elements of Elocution, and PronouncingDictionary. He also published aRhyming Dictionary ; a compilationfrom the English classics ; The AcademicSpeaker; a Key to the Correct Pronunciationof Greek, Latin, and ScripturalNames; the Teacher's Assistant;and Outlines of English Grammar. Mr.Walker was one of the best speakers atthe Robin Hood Debating Society, andhad qualities which procured him theesteem of Dr. Johnson, Garrick, Burke,and others. He died on the 1st ofAugust, 1807 ; having, some time previousto his death, become a Romancatholic, though, in the early part ofhis life, he had been a strict Calvinisticdissenter.LLOYD, (ROBERT,) the friend andassociate of Churchill, was born in 1733,and educated at Westminster School, ofwhich his father was second master,and where Robert himself was, for sometime,an usher. His classical attainmentswere considerable, and gave promiseof his future eminence ; but, preferringthe wit to the scholar, he soonresigned his situation, and, in connexionwith Churchill, took to dissipation, andbecame an author. The Rescind of thelatter was suggested by Lloyd's poemof The Actor, which, together witha miscellaneous volume of poems, procuredhim considerable reputation. Healso wrote for the St. James's Magazine,and other periodicals ; and, among otherdramatic pieces, a comic opera, calledAPPENDIX.The Shepherd's Wedding. The samecarelessness and extravagance which hehad manifested throughout his literarycareer, at length led to his confinementin the Fleet prison, where he died, in1764, with the reputation of an ablewriter, rather to be condemned, thanpitied, for his misfortunes.SHARP, (GRANVILLE,) youngestson of Dr. Thomas Sharp, a prebendaryof Durham, and grandson of Dr. J.Sharp, Archbishop of York, was born in1734, and educated for the bar, butnever practised his profession. He hada place in the Ordnance office, till thecommencement of the American war,when he took chambers in the Temple,and, soon afterwards, became known tothe public by his philanthropic conductand writings. A negro, named Somerset,who had been brought, by hismaster, from the West Indies, andturned into the streets, in consequenceof illness, was placed, by Mr. Sharp, inBartholomew's Hospital; and, on hisrestoration to health, established by hisbenefactor in a comfortable situation.His former master, on ascertaining this,thought proper to seize him, and commithim to prison, as a runaway slave,when the subject of our memoir broughtthe case before the Lord Mayor, whodecided in favour of the slave's freedom.His inhuman master, however, graspinghim by the collar, and attempting todetain him, Mr. Sharp commenced anaction against the former, in the court ofKing's Bench ; and the result was, by adecision of the twelve judges, that slaverycould not exist in Great Britain. Thusencouraged, he continued his exertionsin opposition to slavery, for the abolitionof which he instituted a society ; and,about the same time, sent over, at hisown expense, a number of negroes toAfrica. Another instance of his publicspirit was shown in his obtaining therelease of a citizen of London, who hadbeen impressed into the navy ; to effectwhich, he procured a habeas corpusfrom the King's Bench, and himselfaddressed the court. He died, belovedand respected by all who knew him,July the 6th, 1813. Besides sometreatises on the Slave Trade, Duelling,&c., and a pamphlet in favour ofparliamentary reform, Mr. Sharp, whowas an able Biblical linguist, wroteseveral theological works, the chief ofwhich, entitled Remarks on the definitiveuses of the Article in the GreekTestament, has obtained permanentreputation for its defence of the doctrineof the divinity of Christ against thearguments of the Unitarians.LANGHORNE, (JOHN,) the son ofa clergyman, was born at Kirby Stephen,in Westmorland, in March,1735. He was first placed at WantonSchool, afterwards at Appleby, wherehe continued till his eighteenth year,when he became private tutor to afamily near Ripon, in Yorkshire, andwas next assistant in the free-school ofWakefield. Having taken deacon'sorders, he obtained some popularity asapreacher ; and, in 1759, became tutorto the sons of Robert Cracroft, Esq., ofBlackthorn, near Lincoln ; but left thatgentleman's house, in consequence ofan attachment to one of his daughters,whom, however, he subsequently married.Having previously published avolume of poems, he, in 1760, becamea member of Clare Hall, with a view ofproceeding to the degree of B. D. ; and,in the same year, he printed his Tearsof the Muses, a poem to the memoryof Handel. In 1761, he officiated ascurate at Dagenham, in Essex, andshortly afterwards he obtained considerablereputation in the literary worldby the publication of his eastern tale ofSolyman and Aliena, and other smallworks. His Letters on Religious Retirement,which followed, received theapprobation of Warburton, and led toLanghorne's composition of The Lettersthat passed between Theodosius andConstantia, founded on the well-knownstory in The Spectator. In 1764, hecame to reside in London, on obtainingthe curacy and lectureship of St. John's,Clerkenwell ; and, about the same time,became a writer in The Monthly Review,being the only one in that periodicalwho escaped the animadversion ofSmollett. In 1765, he was appointed assistantpreacher at Lincoln's Inn Chapel;and, about the same time, published,among other pieces, a poem calledGenius and Valour, in vindication of theScots, against the satire of Churchill andothers, and for which the University ofEdinburgh created him D. D., in 1766.in 1767, he married Miss Cracroft,LITERATURE.whose relations procured for him therectory ot' Brandon, in Somersetshire ;hut, losing his wife in the followingyear, he removed to Folkestone, inKent, the residence of his brother William,who assisted him in his celebratedtranslation of Plutarch's Lives, whichappeared in 1770. In 1771, he publishedhis Fables of Flora, and a poemcalled The Origin of the Veil ; and, inthe following year, on his marriage witha Miss Thomson, he made a tour inFrance. On his return, he fixed hisresidence at Brandon, where he practisedboth in a magisterial and clericalcapacity ; and, after having been madea prebendary of Wells, in 1777, died inApril, 1779. Dr. Langhorne, thoughan easy and elegant poet, is principallyknown as the translator of Plutarch'sLives, and few of his other writings arenow popular. In addition to the worksbefore-mentioned, he wrote Effusions ofFriendship and Fancy, in two volumes,after the manner of Sterne ; Letters toEleanoraa, being his correspondencewith Miss Cracroft, previous to his marriagewith her; Precepts of ConjugalHappiness ; The Country Justice ; besidessome poems, sermons, an editionof the Poems of Collins, a translation ofMilton's Italian Sonnets ; and a tragedy,called The Fatal Prophecy. His deathis said to have been accelerated by atoo convivial course of living; but he isdescribed as having been of an amiabledisposition, a friend to morality andreligion, and a refined wit.FARMER, (RICHARD,) the son of amaltster, at Leicester, was born thereonthe 28th of August, 1735. He waseducated at the grammar-school of hisnative town, and at Emanuel College,Cambridge, where he obtained a fellowship,and graduated B. A. in 1757,and M.A. in 1760. Having enteredinto holy orders, he obtained a curacynear Cambridge, of which university hewas elected junior proctor, in 1765, andhad been previously admitted a memberof the Antiquarian Society. His wellknown taste for the study of antiquities,procured his admission to this body ;arid, in 1766, he established his reputation,both as a critic and an antiquary,by the publication of his Essay on theLearning of Shakspeare. In this, hemaintains that the poet acquired hisknowledge of the writings of the ancientsthrough the medium of translations ;and if the mass of evidence he bringsforward is to be relied on, his conclusionis indisputable. This work, bothfrom its style and matter, procured theauthor considerable reputation ; and, inafew years, reached a third edition.In 1769, previously to which, the subjectof our memoir had graduated B. D., hewas appointed one of the preachers atWhitehall ; in 1775, master of his college; and, shortly afterwards, vice-chancellorof the university. In 1778,he was chosen principal university librarian; obtained, subsequently, a stall andchancellorship in Lichfield Cathedral,whence he removed, in 1782, to occupyone at Canterbury, and finally to St.Paul's, of which he was appointed acanon residentiary, in 1788. He diedat Cambridge, on the 8th of September,1797, leaving behind him a library,the sale of which occupied thirty-fivedays, and produced 2,200. Dr. Farmerwas held in general respect andesteem ; and Parr, who wrote his epitaph,describes both his intellectual and moralcharacter in glowing terms of admiration.He appears to have had a fewpeculiarities; and, like Sheridan, is saidto have thrown letters into the fire unopened,which he was too indolent toread. There were three things, it wassaid, which the master of Emanuelloved above all others, viz. : old port,old clothes, and old books; and threethings which nobody could persuadehim to perform, viz.: to rise in themorning, to go to bed at night, andto settle an account. He was generousand philanthropic in the distribution ofgreat part of his income, and was aliberal patron both of learned men andlearned publications.Cough, (RICHARD,) the son of acaptain in the East India Company,and a member of parliament, was bornin London, in 1735. As early as hiseleventh year, he commenced a translation,from the French, of a History ofthe Bible, and gave other indications ofa taste for literature and antiquities.In 1752, he was admitted a fellow-commonerof Bent College, Cambridge,and left the university without taking adegree, in 1756. He then made visitsto various parts of England, Scotland,Apple Nix.and Wales; and, in 1762, published,anonymously, The History of Carausius,or an Examination of what has beenadvanced on that subject by Genebrierand Dr. Stukeley, a work displayinggreat industry and critical skill. In1768, appeared his Anecdotes of BritishTopography, and the same work waspublished, in 1780, in two volumes,quarto, to which the manuscript of athird was added, in 1806, but was unfortunatelydestroyed by the fire whichburnt down Mr. Nichols' printing-office.His next works, in succession, were anew edition of Camden's Britannia, inthree volumes, folio ; editions of Martin'sHistory of Thetford, and Vertue'sMedals, Sic.; and his most importantpublication, the Sepulchral Monumentsof Great Britain, applied to illustratethe history of families, manners,and arts, in two folio volumes. This istermed, by Dr. Aikin, a splendid performance,the result of industrious research,and replete with the most valuableand curious particulars. He wroteother works of minor consideration,edited many publications similar to hisown, was a contributor to The Gentleman'sMagazine, to the Vesta Monument,and to the Archaeologia of theSociety of Antiquaries, of which he wasa director, as also a member of the RoyalSociety. From both of these institutionshe withdrew himself, for somereason not apparent, several years previousto his death, which took place inFebruary, 1809. Nichols speaks highlyof his private character ; but even fromthe account given by this somewhatpartial biographer, it may be inferredthat Mr. Gough was disposed to indulgestrong aversions. He was married to aMiss Hall, but had no issue by her.Stevens, (GEORGE,) the son ofan East India director, was born atStephen, on the 10th of May, 1736, andreceived his education at the grammar-school at Kingston, and at King's College,Cambridge. Having a taste forliterature, he, in particular, examinedthe writings of Shakspeare, twenty ofwhose plays he published, with notes,in four octavo volumes, in 1766; and,about the same time, advertised for assistancein an intended edition of thewhole of that poet's works. This hepublished, in conjunction with Dr.Johnson, in ten volumes, in 1773 ; ofwhich a second edition appeared in1785, and a third, in fifteen volumes, in1793, the most complete and accurateof all. Mr. Steevens, in the meantime,had been engaged in a literary disputewith Mr. Malone, and others, whichwas conducted, on his part, with a virulenceand malignity that reflected greatdiscredit on his character. He is alsosaid to have rendered himself odiousin private society, by his sneers andcalumnies, till he was at length soshunned, that Dr. Johnson observed helived " the life of an outlaw." He is,however, said to have been generousand humane, and to have given awaygreat part of his fortune with equal discriminationand liberality. Besides hisedition of Shakspeare, of whom he isthe best illustrator we have, he is theauthor of several contributions to Hogarth'sBiographical Anecdotes, and theBiographia Dramatic.Ebb, (JOHN,) was born in Londonin 1736, but received his education inIreland, where his father was Dean ofShell. He was entered first of TrinityCollege, Dublin, and afterwards ofPenthouse, Cambridge, where he graduatedB. A., in 1757, and M. A. in1761, when he obtained a fellowship.This he relinquished in 1764, on hispresentation to the rectory of Dodington,in Norfolk ; and, in the followingyear, he published, in conjunction withthe Rev. R. Thorpe, and J. Wollaston,a work, entitled Excerpt quaedame Newton Principiis Philosophise Naturalis,cum notes variorum, &c. In1768, he delivered, at Cambridge, acourse of lectures on the Greek Testament;and, in 1769, having married arelation of the Earl of Marlborough, hewas appointed chaplain to that nobleman; and, in the same year, obtainedthree livings in Suffolk. The freedom,however, of the opinions he had expressedin his lectures, which were stillmore openly avowed, on his endeavours,with Archdeacon Blackburn, to procurethe abrogation of clerical subscriptionto the thirty-nine articles, andto improve the mode of education atCambridge, raised such a party againsthim, as induced him, in 1775, to resignall his benefices and academical appointments.At the same time, he pub-literature.lished a statement of the motives whichhad led to his conduct ; and, coming toLondon, in 1776, he studied medicine,and, having obtained a diploma from St.Andrew's, was admitted a licentiate ofthe College of Physicians, and practisedhis new profession with tolerable success.Equally open in his political andreligious opinions, he took an activepart in the discussions respecting thewar with America, and was a frequentspeaker on that subject at the variousmeetings which were held in the metropolis.He died deservedly respected andesteemed, on the 2nd of March, 1786 ;and a collection of his works, withmemoirs of his life, was published, byDr. Disney, in three volumes, octavo,in 1787.Touch, (THOMAS,) was born atSandal, in Yorkshire, in 1737, and educatedat Wakefield, and Trinity College,Cambridge. He graduated B.A. in1761 ; became a fellow of his college in1763; and, having taken orders, was,in 1770, presented to the rectory ofWycliffe, in the North Riding of Yorkshire.In 1791, he was appointeddeputy-commissary of the archdeaconryof Richmond ; and, in 1793, chaplainto the master of the Rolls, and rector ofScrayingham. In 1795, on the deathof his brother, the Rev. Henry Touch,he succeeded to an estate at Sandal,where he resided till his decease.In 1805, Mr. Pitt gave him the secondstall in Durham Cathedral; and, inthe same year, having previously proceededM.A. and B.D., he took hisdegree of D.D. In 1808, he declinedthe proffered see of Carlisle, on accountof his age, and died, at his native place,on the 17th of December, 1815. Hewas a learned, pious, and amiable man,and obtained merited reputation by hisseveral publications. Besides the Crucifixion,a poem that gained the CambridgeUniversity Newtonian prize, andsome anonymous publications, he printedAn Inquiry into the Prophetic Characterof the Romans, as describedin Daniel; The Good Schoolmaster,exemplified in the Character of theRev. John Clarke ; An Attempt toIllustrate some of the Prophecies of theOld and New Testament; A Memoirof the Life and Writings of Sir PhilipSidney ; also of John Sudbury, Deanof Durham ; besides Anecdotes of IzaakWalton's Love and Truth ; and also ofhis Lives of Donne, Wanton, Hooker,Mr. George Herbert, and Sanderson ;together with a Life of Walton himself.He was likewise the author of someassize and other sermons, which areprinted.GEDDES, (ALEXANDER,) the son ofhumble parents, of the Roman catholicpersuasion, was born in Banffshire,Scotland, in 1737. He received the rudimentsof education at a free Romancatholic seminary, at Scala, in theHighlands, and, at the age of twenty,was removed to the Scotch College, atParis, where he studied divinity, andmade himself master of the Greek,Latin, French, German, Spanish, andlow Dutch languages. He returned toScotland in 1764, and was ordered toDundee, to officiate among the catholicsat Angus. In 1765, he became chaplainto the Earl of Traquaire, but leftthat nobleman, in consequence of hisvow of celibacy being in danger froman attachment he had formed to a relativeof the ,earl. After passing sometimein Paris, he, in 1769, accepted thecharge of a congregation at Achingin Banffshire, where he remainedtill 1779, when the Universityof Aberdeen conferred on him the degreeof LL.D., being the first catholicto whom it had been granted since theReformation. In 1780, he came to London,with a view of carrying into effecthis long-cherished design of a newtranslation of the Bible; in which,though opposed by the majority of hisown persuasion, he was encouraged topersevere by Lord Petre, who allowedhim jg200 per annum. He published thefirst volume in 1792, and the second in1797; but displayed such latitude ofopinion, particularly with respect to thedivine mission of Moses, that he was suspendedfrom his ecclesiastical function,and both catholics and protestants lookedupon him as an infidel. He repliedto the animadversions which the workcalled forth, with a power of irony andargument by no means contemptible ;and, in 1800, he published his first andonly volume of Critical Remarks on theHoly Scriptures, corresponding with hisnew translation. He died on the 26thof February, 1802 ; leaving behind him,APPENDIX.in addition to the works before-mentioned,a variety of tracts, some indifferentpoems, three papers inserted inthe Transactions of the EdinburghAntiquarian Society ; besides numerouscontributions to the various newspapersand magazines of the day j and a Translationof the Psalms, as far as the Hundredand Eighteenth, printed after hisdeath. His life has been written byDr. Mason Good, who thus describeshim on his first introduction. " He wasdisputing," says the doctor, " with oneof the company when I entered ; andthe rapidity with which, at this moment,he left his chair, and rushed, with anelevated tone of voice, and uncourtlydogmatism of manner, towards hisopponent, instantaneously persuadedme, that the subject upon which thedebate turned was of the utmost moment.I listened with all the attention Icould command; and, in a few minutes,learned, to my astonishment, that it relatedto nothing more than the distanceof his own house in the New Road,Haddington, from the place of ourmeeting, which was in GuildfordStreet."TOWERS, (JOSEPH,) was born in1737, at Sherborne, in Dorsetshire, but,according to some accounts, in Southwark,where his father dealt in secondhandbooks. He received no regulareducation, and is said to have acquiredhis first taste for literature by listeningto the conversation of Hawkesworth andothers, who used to meet at the shop ofGoodby, the bookseller, in the RoyalExchange. In 1754, he was apprenticedto a printer, at Sherborne, and, oncomingagain to London, he for sometimesupported himself as a journeymanin that trade. In 1763, he publishedhis first work, entitled A Review of theGenuine Doctrines of Christianity; and,subsequently, contracting a profitablemarriage, he opened a bookseller'sshop, in Fore Street ; but, in 1774, heresigned his business, and became adissenting preacher. He was, in thesame year, chosen pastor of a congregationof dissenters at Highgate ; and, in1778, was elected one of the ministersat Newington Green. In 1779, theUniversity of Edinburgh conferred uponhim the degree of LL.D., from whichtime he continued to publish, at intervals,a variety of pamphlets, up to theperiod of his death, in June, 1799. Exclusiveof the share he had in the BiographiaBritannica, and the BritishBiography, of which he composed thegreater part, most of his works willbe found in three volumes of pamphlets,printed, by subscription, in 1756.He also wrote Memoirs of the Lifeand Reign of Frederick the Third,King of Prussia, in two volumes, whichreached a second edition. Dr. Towers,who is said to have been a modifiedArian, was an industrious and forciblewriter; but the bias of his own politicaland religious opinions, is too apparentin his biographical compilations, andrenders them but an exceptionable authorityin regard to character.MACPHERSON, (JAMES,) a nativeof Inverness, was born in 1738, andeducated at Aberdeen and Edinburgh,where he attracted the notice and curiosityof the literary world, in 1760, bythe publication of his Fragments ofAncient Poetry, collected in the Highlandsof Scotland, and translated fromthe Gaelic, or Erse Language. Theywere received with mingled suspicionand applause, and Dr. Blair and othersenabling the author, by means of a subscription,to pursue his researches inthe highlands, he produced, successively,in 1762 and 1763, his Fingal,and Remora, and other poems, all professedlytranslated from the Gaelic ofOssian, the son of Fingal, a prince ofthe third century. These publicationsgave rise to a literary controversy, whichended, if it may be said to have yetterminated, in contributing to the fame,without either satisfactorily establishingor destroying the credit, of the subjectof our memoir. Whether authentic ornot, they certainly contain many passagesof pure poetry, and, in general,forcibly remind us of the sublimestyle of the Bible, and Homer. Manyof the ideas of Byron, and other of oursubsequent poets, may be traced to thepoems of Ossian, though we are inclinedto question both the originalityand fidelity of Macpherson, in some ofhis passages. The following, deliveredby Oithona, " Why did I not pass awayin secret, like the flower of the rock,that lifts its fair head unseen, and strewsits withered leaves on the blast ?" onlyLITERATURE.,557differs in the application from Gray'scelebrated lines :Full many a flower iAnd waste its sweetAnd the same poet's ' Bard," beginningRuin seize the, ruthless king,Confusion on thy banners wait!would seem to have suggested to Omahathe exclamationConfusion pursue thee over thy plains!Ruin overtake true, thou king of the world!Mr. Macpherson went out to Florida,in 1764, as secretary to Governor John-stone,and was subsequently appointedagent to the Nabob of Ascot, and sat inparliament from 1780 to 1790. He diedin February, 179C, leaving behind him,in addition to the works before-mentioned,The Highlander, a poem ; aprose translation of Homer's Iliad ; AnIntroduction to the History of GreatBritain and Ireland; The History ofGreat Britain, from the Accession, to theHouse of Hanover ; besides some historicalcollections and political pamphlets.KELLY, (HUGH,) was born in Ireland,in 1739, and apprenticed by hisfather, who was of good family, but inreduced circumstances, to a stay-makerin Dublin, whence, on the expiration ofhis indenture, he proceeded to London,and commenced business on his ownaccount. Meeting, however, with nosuccess, he became clerk to an attorney ;and, subsequently, turning his attentionto literature, was employed as editor toThe Ladies' Museum, and other periodicalpublications. His industry andprudence keeping pace with his ability,he was soon enabled to marry ; afterwhich, politics and the drama, as wellas literature, occupying his attention, hepublished, in succession, A Vindicationof the Administration of Mr. Pittacollection of essays, called The Babbler;Louisa Midday, a poem ; and FalseDelicacy, a comedy, which was actedwith success. It was followed by AWord to the Wise, and a tragedy, calledClementina; but both were unsuccessful,in consequence of a suppositionthat lie was employed to write for theministry, and he was, in consequence,induced to get a friend to assume theauthorship of his next piece, The Schoolfor Wives, which was received withgreat applause. He next wrote TheRomance of an Hour, and The Man ofReason, and appears to have been calledto the bar about three years previous tohis death, which took place on the 3rdof February, 1777. He left five childrenand a widow, for whose benefit his playof A Word to the Wise, was performedafter his decease, and his works werealso published, in quarto, with a lire ofthe author. None of his pieces keeppossession of the stage, but most of themmay be read with pleasure ; they aredeficient, perhaps, in energy and point,but are pathetic and interesting, andingeniously written.VINCENT, (WILLIAM,) the son ofa merchant's packer, was born on the2nd of November, 1739, in Lime StreetWard, London. In 1748, he was sentto Westminster School, and from thenceelected to Trinity College, Cambridge,where he graduated B.A. in 17G1, M.A.in 1764, and obtained a fellowship.He had, in the meantime, been appointedan usher of Westminster School ;and, in 1771, was made second master.Having been previously chosen chaplainin ordinary to the king, and taken thedegree of D. D., he was, in 1777, appointedsub almoner to his majesty ;and, in the following year, obtained therectory of Allhallows, but resigned it atthe end of five years. In 1788, he wasmade head master of his school ; in1801, a prebend; and, in 1802, Dean ofWestminster ; six years after which, hepresented himself to the rectory ofSlip. He died on the 21st of December,1815, having acquired some fameas an author by his Commentary onArran's Voyage of Searches, and hisPericles of the Ethereal Sea ; theformer of which was translated intoFrench, by Billecoq. He also publishedA Tract on Parochial Music, The GreekVerb Analysed, A Defence of PublicEducation, and A Charity Sermon. Helikewise wrote several articles in TheBritish Critic, and a volume of hisdiscourses, with a memoir of his life,was published posthumously. He wasmarried to a Miss Wyatt, by whom heleft two sons.PIOZZI, (HESTER LYNCH,) wasborn at Bodvel, Caernarvonshire, inAPPENDIX.1739. She was the daughter of JohnSalisbury, Esq., and was early distinguished,in fashionable life, by her personalcharms and mental accomplishments.In 1763, she married Mr.Thrale, a brewer of great opulence,and then member of parliament forSouthwark ; and soon after, she commencedthat acquaintance with Dr.Johnson, which has given the chiefnotoriety to her name. On the death ofher husband, in 1781, she retired toBath; and, in 1784, gave her hand toa Florentine, of the name of Piozzi, bywhich union she greatly offended thedoctor, though he does not seem, asstated in various accounts, to have discontinuedhis intercourse with her altogether.Shortly after her marriage,she accompanied Mr. Piozzi to Florence,and there joined Mr. Merry andothers in the production of a collectionof pieces, in verse and prose, calledThe Florence Miscellany. On her return,she devoted herself to the pleasuresof literary society, and published, successively,a tale', in imitation of LaFontaine, called The Three Warnings ;a translation of Boileau's Epistle to hisGardener ; Observations made in aJourney through France, Italy, andGermany, two volumes, octavo ; BritishSynonymy, two volumes; and Retrospection,or a view of the most strikingevents which the last one thousandeight hundred years have presented tothe view of mankind, two volumes,quarto, 1801. She survived her secondhusband, and died at Clifton, on the2nd of May, 1821, having, a few momentsbefore her death, says the authorof Piozziana, suddenly sat up, and,with a piercing aspect, and slow, distinctutterance, said, " I die in the truth,and the fear of God." As an authoress,Mrs. Piozzi held but a veryinferior rank among the writers of herage; and, from the specimen given inthe work just mentioned, her conversationalsullies do not seem to havebeen of the wittiest kind. The writerof Piozziana, however, gives her a veryhigh character for learning and generosity; telling us, in proof of the former,that she read and wrote Hebrew,Greek, and Latin, and, for sixty years,had constantly and ardently studiedthe Scriptures, and the works of commentators,in the original languages.Of her greatness of mind, he tells thefollowing anecdote: When Gifford hadabused her, in his Baviad andMaeviad, asThrale's grey widow, she contrived toget herself invited to dine at the sametable with him, just after the publicationof his poem, when she sat opposite tohim, and removed his perplexity byproposing a glass of wine as a libationto their future good fellowship.BOS WELL, (JAMES,) born at Edinburgh,on the 29th of October, 1740,was the son of Alexander Boswell, LordAuchinleck, one of the judges of thesupreme courts of session, in Scotland.He received his education at the schooland university of his native city, andthere, as well as at Glasgow, studiedcivil law. His own desire seems tohave been for a military life, but, incompliancewith his father's request, hefollowed the profession he had studied ;for improvement in which he proceededto Utrecht, in 1763, having, in his waythither, been introduced to Dr. Johnson,in London. While abroad, he visitedSwitzerland and Italy, and became intimatewith General Paoli, at Corsica, amemoir' of whom he subsequently published,together with an account of thatcountry. In 1766, he returned to Scotland,and was called to the bar of advocates,and about the same time gainedsome creditable notoriety by the publicationof a pamphlet, under the title ofEssence of the Douglas Cause. In 1773,he accompanied Dr. Johnson in his celebratedtour to the Hebrides; and having,in 1782, succeeded to his family estate,he, shortly afterwards, procured his admissionto the English bar, and devotedhimself to literary leisure. The fruitsof his connexion with Dr. Johnson appearedin 1790, when he printed, in twovolumes, quarto, his celebrated life ofthat great man. Boswell was also theauthor of a series of essays in the LondonMagazine, entitled The Hypochondriac; of several fugitive pieces in proseand verse ; two political pamphlets ;and was made recorder of Carlisle sometimeprevious to his death, which tookplace on the 19th of June, 1799. HisLife of Johnson, and the various criticismsupon it, are too well known toneed a dilation in this place, eitherupon the style or contents of the work.It is universally acknowledged as oneLITERATURE.of the most interesting and amusingbiographical compositions in our language; and, though the author is oftencontemptibly minute, and ostentatiouslydiffuse, he has, upon the whole, presentedus with such a portrait of thesubject of his memoir, as to make uswish all retained, for the sake of Dr.Johnson, though the omission of somethings might have raised, in our estimation,the dignity of his biographer.Johnson seems to have formed about ajust estimate of Boswell's capacities, indescribing him as one, whose acutenesswould help inquiry, and whose gaietyof conversation, and civility of manners,were sufficient to counteract the inconveniencesof travel. He was married toMiss Montgomery, in 1769, whom hesurvived, and by whom he had twosons and three daughters.ADAM, (ALEXANDER,) was born ofhumble parents, in Yorkshire, Scotland,in June, 1741 ; and, after havingreceived the rudiments of education,entered himself of the University ofEdinburgh, in 1758. His privations atcollege were such, that he was sometimesin want of a mouthful of bread,yet his perseverance in study remainedunchecked ; and, in 1761, he was appointedone of the teachers in Watson'sHospital, which he held until 1767,when he was chosen assistant to therector of the high school. He succeededto the situation of rector in1771, and retained it till the period ofhis death, which took place on the 18thof December, 1809, when he was honoured,by his fellow-citizens, with apublic funeral. In the early part of hisrectorship, he was involved in a disputewith the under masters, respecting theintroduction of his work On the Principlesof Latin and English Grammar,as a substitute for'Ruddiman's Grammar; but the former was at lengthprohibited, by an order of the magistrates,as patrons of the school. Hisother works are, Roman Antiquities ; ASummary of History and Geography ;A Dictionary of Classical Biography ;and a Latin dictionary, entitled LexiconLinguae Latina Compendium. Thefirst is that by which he is most known,and, besides having gone through severaleditions, has been translated intoGerman, French, and Italian. Caution,however, is requisite in reading thisvaluable work, especially with respectto the Roman coins, the value andnames of which were too frequentlychanging, to allow of an implicit adoptionof the ordinary interpretations.There are many inaccuracies also inthe section on the Roman year ; but,even with these and other drawbacks,the work still remains creditable to theauthor, and a valuable auxiliary to thereaders of Roman literature. Dr. Adamwas a man of great boldness of character,amounting sometimes to indiscretion; he never concealed what he felt,and he would sometimes, it is said, givevent, with considerable emphasis, to hispolitical opinions, which were liberal,in the presence of his class.MALONE, (EDMUND) son of anIrish judge, was born in Dublin, on the4th of October, 1741. After havinggraduated B. A. at Trinity College,Dublin, he became a student of theTemple, and was called to the Irishbar in 1767 ; but, though he gave greatpromise as an advocate, the acquisitionof a competent fortune induced him togive up his profession, and devote himselfto literature. The writings ofShakspeare first occupied his attention,and he was employed by Mr. Steevensto assist him in his forthcoming edition,but, quarrelling with that gentleman,he published an edition of his own, ineleven octavo volumes, in 1790 ; which,though partly superseded by the subsequentone of Steevens, has been esteemedby Porson, and others, in some respects,the better of the two. In 1796, heprinted a pamphlet, denying the authenticityof Ireland's Shakspeare Papers ;and he also wrote the Lives of SirJoshua Reynolds, Dryden, W. GerardHamilton, and the celebrated statesman,Windham ; those of the three first beingprefixed to collections of their respectiveworks. A pamphlet on the subjectof Rowley's Poems, which he pronounceda forgery, is also attributed tohim. He died, much respected, on the25th of May, 1812.Field, (WILLIAM,) born atSudbury, in 1741, was educated at Daventry,for the dissenting ministry, andhe was chosen pastor of a congregationat Liverpool, in 1763. In 1770, he wasA P P E N D I X .appointed resident tutor and lecturer inthe belles lettres, in the Warrington Academy;and, whilst holding that situation,was created LL.D., by the University ofEdinburgh, and published The Speaker,and other popular works. On the dissolutionof the academy, in 1783, he tookprivate pupils ; and, in 1785, becameminister to a congregation at Norwich,where he devoted the remainder of hislife to literary occupations, and his pastoralduties. He died on the 3rd ofNovember, 1797, highly beloved andrespected. " To be amiable," says Dr.Aikin, of whose Biographical Dictionaryhe wrote half of the first volume) "wasthe essence of his character ; and inevery relation of life, the benevolenceof a kind heart displayed itself in themost engaging features." Besides TheSpeaker, equally valuable for the selectionsmade by the author, and his ownEssay on Elocution, he wrote a sequelto the work, entitled Exercises in Elocution; The Preacher's Directory ; TheEnglish Preacher ; Biographical Sermonson the Principal Characters in theOld and New Testament ; Institutes ofNatural Philosophy, and an abridgmentof Bruce's History of Philosophy.This last was written with peculiarelegance and perspicuity, presenting,in an attractive form, a work of greatvalue, but one seldom consulted in thej original, on account of its harsh andinvolved Latin style.REED, (ISAAC,) the son of a baker,was born in London, on the 1st ofJanuary, 1742. He practised first as anattorney, and subsequently as a conveyancer,but devoted much of his timeto literature, as well as to his profession.As an author, he is principally knownby his splendid edition of Shakspeare,in twenty-one volumes, octavo, combiningall the information of Johnson,Steevens, and Farmer, and justly consideredthe most perfect ever published,of the works of the immortal bard. Mr.Reed also wrote a History of the EnglishStage, prefixed to his edition of TheBiographia Dramatic ; was, for manyyears, owner and editor of The EuropeanMagazine ; and, in 1783, publishedfour volumes of a miscellaneouscollection of humorous pieces, entitledThe Repository. He was well knownas a book collector, and his library occupiedthirty-nine days in the sale ofit by auction, after his death, whichoccurred on the 5th of January, 1807.Mr. Reed edited the poetical works ofLady Montagu, and several other publications; and he was one of the mostvaluable contributors to the Westminsterand Gentleman's Magazines.CHALMERS, (GEORGE,) was bornat Fochabers, in Scotland, towards theend of the year 1742. He received therudiments of education at the grammar-school s of his native town, and wasafterwards sent to King's College, Aberdeen,whence he removed to Edinburgh,and studied law for severalyears. In 1763, he accompanied hisuncle to America, for the purpose ofgiving him legal assistance in the recoveryof a large tract of land at Maryland; and was induced to practise hisprofession at Baltimore, where he, in afew years, acquired an extensive andprofitable business. His prospects, however,were completely destroyed by thebreaking out of the American revolution;and, in 1775, he came to England,not one of the least suffering loyalists.Without receiving any compensation forhis losses, he applied himself to the firstof his literary undertakings, which appearedin 1780, entitled Political Annalsof the Present United Colonies, fromtheir Settlement to the Peace of 1763,compiled chiefly from Records, andauthorized often by the insertion ofState Papers. This was succeeded byAn Introduction to the History of theRevolt of the Colonies ; Estimate ofthe Comparative Strength of GreatBritain during the Present and FourPreceding Reigns, which went throughseveral editions, and was translatedinto French and German ; Opinions onInteresting Subjects of Public Law andCommercial Policy, arising from AmericanIndependence ; and Three Tractson Irish Arrangements. In August,1786, he was appointed chief clerk tothe board of trade; and, for the nextforty years, continued to publish a varietyof works, of which the principalare, Church-yard Chips concerningScotland; Life of Mary, Queen of Scots;Political Works of Sir David Lindsay ;Life of Ruddiman; and his Caledonia,in three volumes, quarto. This last, aswell as several others, he, unfortunately,LITERATURE.did not live to complete ; dying whilstthe fourth volume was in progress, inMay, 1825. As an author, Mr. Chalmerswill never be known to posterityby any other work than his Caledonia ;which, with all its defects, says hisbiographer in The Edinburgh Encyclopaedia,is one " which a person ofgreater genius or scholarship would nothave undertaken, and one which amere plodding antiquary would nothave performed." Its chief faults areawant of skill in the condensation ofhis materials, and an affectation ofstyle totally inconsistent with the subject.The matter is truly valuable andoriginal, and no source seems to havebeen overlooked in his investigationsafter truth. His other publications, andparticularly his controversial writings,have not gained more than temporarycelebrity ; an arrogant and dogmatictone pervades them, neither warrantedby their own intrinsic merit, nor thestation of his antagonists, among whomwere Malone and Steevens, Dr. Pinkerton,Dr. Carrie, and others of equaleminence.COWLEY, (HANNAH,) was thedaughter of Mr. Warehouse, a bookseller,at Tiverton, in Devonshire, andborn there in 1743. She received anexcellent education, and, at the age oftwenty-five, married a captain in theEast India service, of the name ofCowley. It was while sitting with herhusband at one of the theatres, sometimein 1776, that she first entertainedthe idea of dramatic writing. Struckwith the mediocrity of the play whichhappened to be acting, she said thatshe could write as well herself; and,next morning, is said to have sketchedthe first act of The Runaway. On itscompletion, it was received with suchapplause as induced her to continue herlabours; and the result was the productionof a number of excellent plays ;of which The Belle Stratagem, and Whois the Dupe? which still retain theirplace on the stage, may be mentionedas the principal. As a poetess, she isfavourably known, by her pieces of TheMaid of Arragon, The Scottish Village,and The Siege of Acre. She died,highly respected, and after a most exemplarylife, on the llth of March,1809. Her dramatic and poetical workswere published, in three volumes, octavo,in 1813. In her poetry, as in herplays, she displays great ease andliveliness; and she ii said to have beenthe Anna Matilda who so long-maintaineda celebrated poetical newspapercorrespondence with Delia Crusca (Mr.Merry).EDGEWORTH, (RICHARD Lovell,)was born at Bath, in 1744. Hewas of an Irish family, and received hiseducation at Trinity College, Dublin,and Corpus Christ College, Oxford.He seems to have had some idea offollowing the law as a profession, as heentered a student of the Middle Temple,but, if he was called, he neverpractised at the bar. Literature andthe science of mechanics formed hischief pursuits, and the practical resultof his studies in the latter showed considerablegenius. Among them maybementioned his construction of atelegraph, in 1767, though the idea wasnot altogether original, and he failed inbringing it into general use. He passedseveral months in France, engaged inthe superintendence of some works onthe Rhone, at Lyons; and, on his return,was elected a fellow of the Royal Society,and a member of the Royal IrishAcademy, on its foundation, in 1785.He spent the latter part of his life uponhis own estate, at Edge worth Town, inthe south of Ireland, engaged in agricultural,scientific, and literary pursuits.His principal work is a treatiseon practical education, and another onprofessional education ; the former ofwhich he wrote in conjunction withhis more talented daughter, Miss MariaEdgeworth. He also published AnEssay-on the Construction of Roadsand Carriages ; A Letter to LordClaremont on the Telegraph ; andvarious papers in the Transactions ofthe Irish Academy. He died in June,1817, having married four wives, ofwhom two were sisters. Mr. Edgeworthis rather distinguished for theversatility of his talents than the excellenceof his writings, which are,however, useful and well-intentioned,if not splendid or profound.NICHOLS, (JOHN,) was born atIslington, on the 2nd of February,1744 ; and, after having received a goodAPPENDIX.education, became apprentice to thecelebrated printer, Bowyer, with whomhe was subsequently admitted intopartnership. In 1778, he became jointproprietor with Mr. David Henry, and,after that gentleman's death, editor, ofThe Gentleman's Magazine ; to whichhe himself contributed a variety ofarticles relative to British topographyand antiquities. Having previouslybeen admitted a common-councilman ofthe city of London, he was, in 1804,chosen master of the Stationer's Company.About four years afterwards,is printing-office was burnt down,when a number of very valuable workswere irremediably lost. He died onthe 26th of November, 1826, leavingbehind him numerous publications, ofwhich the chief are, his Anecdotes ofWilliam Bowyer, and Literary Anecdotesof the Eighteenth Century, thewhole forming ten octavo volumes ;and the History and Antiquities ofLeicestershire, in folio. His LiteraryAnecdotes is the only work of the kindexisting, and may be consulted as aninteresting and faithful supplement tothe memoirs of all the eminent literatiof the period to which it is confined.PYE, (Henry JAMES,) a lineal descendantof the sister of the illustriousHampden, was born in London, onthe 10th of February, 1745, at whichtime his father represented the countyof Berkshire. He was educated athome, under private tutors, until theyear 1762, when he was entered a gentlemancommoner of Magdalen College,Oxford, when he ultimately obtainedthe degree of LL.D. In 1784, he wasreturned for Berkshire; in 1790, appointedpoet laureate j and, in 1791, apolice magistrate for Queen Square ;which he resigned in 1811, and retiredto Pinner, where he died, on the llthof August, 1813. Mr. Pye having madehimself responsible for his father's debts,amounting to nearly 20,000, ultimatelybecame much involved. As ascholar, Mr. Pye ranked highly; and,as a poet, was respectable. In privatelife he was universally beloved. Amonghis chief works are, Alfred, an epicpoem ; the tragedies of Adelaide, Siegeof Beaux, and The Inquisitor; PriorClaims, a comedy, in conjunction withS. J. Arnold, Esq. ; Comments on theCommentators of Shakspeare ; BirthdayOdes ; four volumes of MiscellaneousPoems ; The Democrat, a novel,in two volumes; The Aristocrat, anovel, in two volumes ; besides severalTranslations of Xenophon, Pindar,Horace, &c.Mckenzie, (HENRY,) the sonof a physician at Edinburgh, was bornthere in August, 1745. He was educatedfor the profession of the law ; and,after having studied, both in Londonand Edinburgh, became an attorney inthe court of Exchequer, in the lattercity, in 1766 ; three years before which,his tragedy of The Prince of Tunis hadbeen successfully represented on thestage. In 1771, appeared, anonymously,the work for which he is chiefly celebrated,entitled The Man of Feeling ;the merited popularity of which induceda Mr. Eccles, of Bath, to layclaim to the authorship, which he endeavouredto maintain, by producing acopy transcribed with his own hand,with blotting, erasures, and interlineations.This gave rise to a public contradictionof the fraud on the part ofthe real author, whose reputation was,in consequence, so fully established,that he was induced, some years afterwards,to publish The Man of theWorld; an inferior continuation of hisformer novel, but still an impressiveand powerful performance. His nextproduction was entitled Julia de routine,an epistolary novel, which, SirWalter Scott has observed, gives thereader too much actual pain to be sogenerally popular as The Man of Feeling.He, however, adds, that the veryacute feeling which the work usuallyexcites among the readers, he is disposedto ascribe to the extreme accuracyand truth of the sentiments, aswell as to the beautiful manner inwhich they are expressed. In 1778,having become member of a new literarysociety, he suggested the institutionof a periodical paper, called TheMirror, of which he was editor, asalso, subsequently, of The Lounger;where appeared his review of thepoems of Burns, who was thus broughtinto immediate public notice, and preventedfrom quitting his country forthe West Indies. In 1783, Mr. Mac-kenzieproduced The Shipwreck, orLITERATURE.Fatal Curiosity, an adaptation of Lillo'stragedy, at Covent Garden, and at thesame theatre, his two unsuccessful comediesof The Force of Fashion, and TheWhite Hypocrite, were subsequentlyacted. He is also the author of anothertragedy, called The Spanish Father;and, besides editing the poems ofBlackmore, contributed several papersto the Transactions of the Royal Societyof Edinburgh, and of the HighlandSociety. He also published, in1791, a small volume of translationsfrom the German Drama ; and has distinguishedhimself in political literature,by a series of letters under the signatureof Brutus. During the greaterpart of his life, Mr. Mackenzie, who ismuch esteemed in private life, has enjoyedthe office of comptroller of thetaxes for Scotland, a situation worthabout 800 a-year. He married, in1767) a daughter of Sir James Grant,and has a family by her, of eleven,children. His celebrity is derived principallyfrom his Essays and his Man ofFeeling, which are distinguished bysweetness and beauty of style, deeppathos, and tenderness and delicacy ofimagination, that will always renderthem popular. Sir Walter Scott heldin great estimation the talents of Mr.Mackenzie ; and, in dedicating to himthe novel of Waverley, styled him theScotch Addison. In summing up hismerit as a novelist and essayist, thesame high authority observes, "thehistorian of the Homespun Family mayplace his narrative, without fear ofshame, by the side of The Vicar ofWakefield. Colonel Caustic and Um-phraville, are masterly conceptions ofthe ' laudatory temporis act ;' andmany passages in those papers, whichMr. Mackenzie contributed to TheMirror and Lounger, attest with whattruth, spirit, and ease, he could describe,assume, and sustain, a variety of characters."Harley, (WILLIAM,) descendedfrom a respectable family at Chichester,was born in that town on the 29th ofOctober, 1745. He lost his father atthree years of age, and, after havingreceived the rudiments of education inhis native town, was sent to a school atKingston-upon-Thames, whence, in consequenceof a severe illness, occasionedby mismanagement, he was removedto the care of a private tutor at Teddington.Here he took great delightin poetry and dramatic composition ;and, one day, reciting, with great vehemence,the lines which immediatelyprecede the death of Othello, he, in hisardour, actually thrust the knife intohis breast, and was near ending hisdays in reality. In August, 1757, hewas sent to Eton, and quitted it in1763 ; in which year he was entered ofTrinity Hall, Cambridge, where poetryand painting seem to have occupiedthe chief part of his time. In June,1766, he was admitted a student of theMiddle Temple, but took no furtherstep towards going to the bar, and appearsto have left the university in1767, without taking any degree. In1769, after a somewhat romantic attachment,he married a Miss Ball ; thederangement of whose mother inducedMrs. Hayley to ask her son how hewould feel if his wife should fall avictim to the same calamity. " Inthat case," he replied, " I should blessmy God for having given me couragesufficient to make myself the legalguardian of the most amiable and mostpitiable woman on earth." After havinghad two tragedies rejected, The AfflictedFather and The Syrian Queen,he retired to Earthen, and, devotinghimself to poetical composition, published,in 1778, An Epistle to anEminent Painter ; and, afterwards, successively,An Epistle to Adam Keppel,Elegy on the Ancient Greek Medal,and Epistle to a Friend on the Deathof John Thornton, Esq. In 1780, appearedhis Essay on History ; and,in 1781, his celebrated Triumphs ofTemper. He afterwards published separateEssays on Epic Poetry, Painting,and Sculpture ; The Triumph ofMusic ; a prose Essay on Old Maids,in three volumes ; and his Life andCorrespondence of Cowper. The deathof a natural son having induced himto remove to Pelham, in Sussex, hedied there on the 12th of November,1820. Hayley's best productions are,his Essay on Old Maids, and Triumphsof Temper ; the latter performance hasmuch poetical merit, and will probablysuffer little in the general estimation,by Lord Byron's couplet against itin the English Bards, &c. SheridanAPPEN DI X.has also the following lines to theauthor :Miss keeps her temper five long cantos throughEgad ! its more than half your readers do ja sarcasm which may be ascribed, likethat of the noble poet, to mere wantonness.His other works, with the exceptionof the Life of Cowper, have obtainedlittle notice, nor do they indeedrise much above mediocrity.MURRAY, (Lindsey,) the son ofan American merchant, was born atSwear, near Lancaster, in Pennsylvania,in 1745. He received a goodeducation, and practised as a barristerat New York, until the breaking outof the war with England, when he retiredto Slip, in Long Island ; and,subsequently, engaging in mercantilepursuits, acquired a handsome competency.He visited this countryshortly after the establishment of Americanindependence ; and, for the benefitof his health, settled at Holdgate,near York, where he wrote a varietyof useful works ; of which, the chief ishis celebrated English Grammar, firstpublished in 1795. He died on the 10thof January, 1826; leaving behind him,besides the grammar just mentioned,English Exercises and Key ; The EnglishReader ; The English SpellingBook ; A Selection from Home's Commentaryon the Psalms ; The Duty andBenefit of Reading the Holy Scriptures; and a tract, entitled The Powerof Religion on the Mind, of which noless than seventeen editions have beenprinted.MORE, (HANNAH,) the daughter ofa clergyman, was born at Hallam,near Bristol, about the year 1745. Shewas educated by her sisters, who keptone of the most celebrated female seminariesin the west of England. At anearly age, she became acquainted withthe Rev. Dr. Storehouse, of Bristol,who not only encouraged her fondnessfor literary pursuits, but is said to havecorrected ail her early effusions. Herfirst publication appeared about 1770,under the title of The Search after Happiness,a pastoral drama. The receptionit met with induced her to proceedin her literary career; and she, shortlyafterwards, produced, in succession, herSir Mitred of the Bower; The BleedingRock ; and a tragedy, entitled TheInflexible Captive. Her predilectionfor dramatic writing was the cause ofher introduction to Garrick ; and, in1778, her tragedy of Percy was performed.It procured her great temporaryreputation, which was well sustainedby another tragedy, which wasacted in the following year, entitledFatal Falsehood. Her thoughts, however,taking a more serious turn, sheceased writing for the stage, and beganto think it altogether undeserving thecountenance of a Christian. In 1782,she published Sacred Dramas, designedprincipally for the use of theyoung, and which had been previouslyacted by the pupils of her sisters'school. In 1785, she wrote A BiographicalPreface to the Poems of AnneYearly, a Milkman ; her connexionwith whom ended in a quarrel, thatdrew towards her the public attentionand animadversion. The facts werenever properly ascertained, but MissMore accused her protegee of ingratitude,whilst Anne hinted that the subjectof our memoir had purloined avolume of her manuscripts. In 1786,she published Florio, a tale ; The BasBleu ; and Thoughts on the Mannersof the Great, which, being publishedanonymously, was, for some time,ascribed to Mr. Wilberforce. Her nextworks were, Estimate of the Religionof the Fashionable World; VillagePolitics ; Remarks on the Speech ofMonsieur Dupont on Religious Education; and Strictures on the ModernSystem of Female Education. HerHints towards forming the Characterof a Young Princess, which appearedin 1808, was written with a view to theeducation of the Princess Charlotte,respecting which she had been consulted,and her work was much approvedby the king and queen. Inthe following year, she published hermost popular work, Celebes in Searchof a Wife, which ran through ten editionsin the course of a month, and hasattained a permanent place in ourstandard literature. Her succeedingworks were, Practical Piety; ChristianMorals ; Essay on the Character andWritings of ' St. Paul ; and MoralSketches of Prevailing Opinions andManners, 1819. Many years haveelapsed since Miss More and her sistersLITERATURE.retired to Mentis, in Somersetshire,where they established charity schools,and devoted themselves, in other ways,to the religious instruction of the neighbouringpoor.WHITE, (JOSEPH,) the son of aweaver, was born at Stroud, in Gloucestershire,in 1746, and was sent, by agentleman in the neighbourhood, whohad noticed his inclination for reading,to Wadham College, Oxford, were hegraduated M.A. in 1773, and obtaineda fellowship. Devoting himself particularlyto the study of oriental literature,he was, in 1775, appointed Laudianprofessor of Arabic, and shortly afterwards,editor of the Philoxenian Syriacversion of the Four Gospels, which hepublished in 1778, with a Latin translationand notes. About the same time,he was nominated one of the preachersat the Chapel Royal, Whitehall ; and, in1781, delivered, as preacher of theBampton lecture, a set of sermons onthe evidences of Christianity. Theywere published in 1784, and procuredthe subject of our memoir distinguishedreputation ; which, however, much declined,on the discovery of the share inthem which belonged to Dr. Parr. Afterhaving been collated to a prebend atGloucester, and taken the degree ofD. D., he married, and obtained a collegeliving in Suffolk, whither he removedabout 1790, and set up a printingpress in his own house. He died in1814, having published, in addition tothe works before-mentioned, an editionof Major Davy's translation, from thePersian, of the Institutes of Timour ;egyptian, with a Latin version ofAbdollatiph's account, in Arabic, ofegypt; an edition of the Greek Testament,from the text of Griesbach ;and A Harmony of the Four Evangelists,in Greek.O'KEEFE, (JOHN,) was born inDublin, in 1746, of catholic parents, andreceived the chief part of his educationunder a priest of that persuasion. Heappears, at first, to have studied drawing,with some success, at the RoyalAcademy of his native city ; but adefect in his sight, induced him to relinquishall idea of becoming an artist byprofession. He then took to dramaticcomposition and, at the age of sixteen,wrote a comedy, called The GenerousLovers ; but his first production broughton the stage was entitled The SheGallant, acted at Dublin, in 1764. Hesoon afterwards appeared on the stagehimself, and continued to act and composeduring a period of twelve years ; atthe expiration of which he came toLondon, where he produced severalsuccessful plays, chiefly at the HaywardTheatre. Whatever emolument hemight have derived from his dramaticlabours was speedily dissipated ; and,in 1800, he found himself under thenecessity of taking a benefit at CoventGarden Theatre, on which occasion, hedrew tears from the whole audience.His benefit produced him a sum withwhich he purchased an annuity, andshortly afterwards he retired to Chichester,where he composed that veryentertaining work, his Recollections.O'Keefe's most popular pieces are, hisWild Oats, The Castle of Andalusia,Fontainebleau, The Poor Soldier, PeepingTom, and The Highland Reel.Besides these, he wrote The World inaVillage, Tony Bumpkin in Town, TheLondon Hermit, Life's Vagaries, and avariety of others, principally farce andopera. The success which most of hisproductions met with was, in a greatmeasure, owing to the subjects beingfounded on fact, and the charactersdrawn, as it were, on the spot, from theauthor's own observation of them.O'Keefe is said to be a convivial companion,fond of his glass and his jest,though inoffensive in the one, and temperatein the other ; and is, by all whoknow him, much beloved and respected.The part of Dobbin, in The Man Milliner,having been given to Rock insteadof Quick, for whom it was designed,O'Keefe induced the manager to followhis own wishes, by sending him thefollowing lines :As on the wave expose I nutMy freight of little wit,Oh ! let me to a Quick-sand trust.Nor 011 a Rock be splitSEWARD, (ANNA,) the daughterof a clergyman, was born at Exam, inDerbyshire, in 1747. She received butan ordinary education, her parents notbeing anxious to encourage the tasteand talent which she early displayedfor literature. Her correspondence,APPENDIX.however, shows that she had both readand thought much in her youth. Thefirst effusions of her muse that weregiven to the public, appeared in a selectionfrom Lady Miller's Poetical Vase ;and, in 1780, she published an Elegyon the Death of Captain Cook ; followed,in the next year, by A Monody onMajor Andre. These pieces procuredher considerable reputation ; and Dr.Darwin complimented her, by termingher the inventress of epic elegy. Jn1784, she produced a poetical novel,entitled Louisa, which became popular,and passed through several editions.Her last publication was entitled Memoirsof the Life of Dr. Darwin; inwhich she lays claim to the lines at thecommencement of The Botanic Garden,though unacknowledged by the author.Miss Seward died at Lichfield, inMarch, 1809, leaving the copyright ofher miscellaneous works to Walter Scott,who published them in three volumes.Her other poems, not yet mentioned,are Llangollen Vale, a volume of Sonnets,Ode paraphrased from Horace,and a poem upon the death of LadyMiller. Miss Seward holds a respectablerank among English poets : herchief faults are redundancy of ornament,and want of simplicity of expression;but she abounds m harmonious versification,delicate sentiment, and beautifuland appropriate descriptions. Heropinions, on all subjects, were those ofa strong and liberal mind ; and, thoughfond of compliment, she could admireexcellence in those who did not acknowledgeit in herself.Hancock, (SAMUEL,) the son of abutcher, was born at South Milton, inDevonshire, about the year 1747. Hewas educated for a preacher among thedissenters, and was, for some time, pastorof a congregation at Beer Regis, inDorsetshire, and afterwards at Barnstaple,in his native county. In 1777,he removed to South Milton ; and, in1780, whilst the controversy respectingthe materiality or immateriality of thesoul was pending between Priestley,Price, and others, Hancock published atract upon the subject, which, thoughthe least in size, was considered the firstin merit. In 1781, he wrote, with greatforce against Mr.Madan's Thelyphthora;and, in 1783, his admirable critique onPriestley's History of the Corruptions ofChristianity, appeared in The MonthlyReview. It produced a reply fromPriestley, who observed that " theknowledge and ability of the reviewermade him a formidable arid respectableantagonist." The reputation of Bad-cockinduced Dr. White to apply forhis assistance in the Bampton lectures,in which he had a considerable share,and a fourth part of the notes were alsofurnished by him. In 1786, he conformedto the established church ; and,in the following year, was ordained tothe curacy of Broad Cyst, near Exeter,by Bishop Ross, who dispensed withallexamination. Ill health obliginghim to relinquish his curacy, almostimmediately, he became assistant toDr. Gabriel, of the Octagon Chapel,Bath, and died on the 19th of May,1788, in London. In addition to theworks before-mentioned, he wrote apoem, entitled The Hermitage, and wasthe author of some curious memoirs ofthe family of the celebrated JohnWesley, and of several pieces in thevarious magazines of the day. He wasa man of extensive learning, and acutejudgment ; as a preacher, " it was anunhappiness," observes one of his biographers," not to have heard him ;"and, in his private character, he is saidto have been gentle, humane, andlively.DAY, (THOMAS,) the son of a collectorof the Customs, was born in London,in 1748, and received his educationat the Charter-house, and Corpus ChristCollege, Oxford, where he became intimatewith Mr. (afterwards SirWilliam)Jones. Though called to the bar, anample fortune precluded the necessityof his practising; and, at the same time,enabled him to pursue that romanticand benevolent course of life, for whichhe early evinced a disposition. This,he, in the first instance, put into practice,by residing in particular spots,where he made himself acquainted withthe mental and physical wants of thelower classes of society, and remediedboth to the utmost of his power. Heis said to have acquired a temporarymelancholy from the pain caused himby the distresses he witnessed ; andsome harrowing consequences of femaleseduction, which had come under hisLITERATURE,notice, roused his indignation againstthat crime to such a pitch, that hechallenged, to single combat, a nobleman,famous, at the time, for his licentiousnessand debauchery; who, however,declined answering him. Afterreturning from a philanthropic tour inFrance, he selected two girls from thepoor-house, at Shrewsbury, with theintention of educating them after theprinciples of Rousseau, and of makingone of them his wife ; but their conductdid not answer his expectations, though,on their union with the objects of theirchoice, he presented them with 500each. In 1778, he married a MissEsther Milnes, and retired to his estatesin Essex and Surrey, where he took anactive part in the public meetings ofthe time, and was an eloquent speakerin behalf of American independenceand parliamentary reform. He alsowrote several political pamphlets, inone of which, with reference to negroslavery, he says, " If there be an objecttruly ridiculous in nature, it is an Americanpatriot signing resolutions of independencewith the one hand, and,with the other, brandishing a whip overhis affrighted slaves." ^ The work, however,which gained him his chief celebrity,is his Sandford and Merton, oneof the most popular ever written forthe information of youth, and powerfullyinculcating all the manly virtues,and containing no small portion of instructionin the principles of science.With the same end in view, but adaptedfor lower life, he also wrote The Historyof Little Jack. Tim high-mindedand benevolent man was killed, by afall from his horse, on the 28th of September,1789 ; and his wife was soafflicted with the intelligence, that sheis said to have closed round her thecurtains of her bed, and never after sufferingthe light of the sun to visit them,died, in that melancholy state, abouttwo years afterwards.SMITH, (CHARLOTTE,) whosemaiden name was Turner, was born inSussex, in 1749, and possessed a handsomefortune at the time of her marriagewith Mr. Smith, who soon dissipatedthe whole of it by his extravagance.The state of indigence into which shewas thus brought, is said to have calledforth the display of those abilities, forwhich she subsequently became celebrated,and which enabled her to supporther husband and family in tolerablecomfort. She passed much of the latterpart of her life in Normandy ; but died,after her return to England, at Thetford,Surrey, in the autumn of 1806. Asanovelist, Mrs. Smith is favourablyknown to the public by her Romanceof Real Life, Emmeline, Desmond,Marchant, Ethelinda, Celestina, andothers ; besides which, she wrote someelegiac sonnets, a poem called TheEmigrant, and some works well adaptedfor youth, entitled Rural Walks, RamblesFarther, Minor Morals, and Conversation; all of which display no ordinarypowers.HUDDESFORD, (GEORGE,) son ofthe Rev. William Huddesford, principalof Trinity College, Oxford, was born in1750, and educated at Winchester, andNew College, where he graduated B.A.in 1777, and M.A. in 1780. Having, inthe meantime, entered into holy orders,he was presented to the vicarage ofLoxley, in Warwickshire, and diedin London, in November, 1809. He isknown as the author of a variety ofcomical and satirical pieces, which, intheir time, attracted considerable notice,and, as may be guessed from their titles,evinced much originality of style in theauthor. They consist of Salmagundi,a miscellaneous combination of originalpoetry ; Topsy Turvy, with Anecdotesand Observations Illustrative of theLeading Characters in the Governmentof France, 1790 ; Bubble and Squeak,a Galli-maw-fry of British Beef, withchopped Cabbage of Gallic Philosophyand Radical Reform ; Crabbe Repel; The Wiccamical Chaplet, a selectionof original poetry, comprisingsmaller poems, serious and comic ; LesChampignons du Diable, or ImperialMushrooms, a mock-heroic poem, infive cantos, including a conference betweenthe Pope and the Devil on hisholiness's visit to Paris in 1805.DALZELL, (ANDREW,) the son ofa farmer, in the parish of Ratio, nearEdinburgh, was born there about theyear 1750. He completed his educationat the university of the Scotchmetropolis, whence he proceeded to thecontinent, in the capacity of tutor toAPPENDIX.the Earl of Lauderdale. On his return,he was appointed Greek professor atthe university, and in that characterobtained considerable celebrity, particularlyby the publication of his selectionsfrom the works of ancient Greekwriters, under the titles of CollectaneaGraeca Minora, and Collectanea GraecaMajora. He was subsequently appointedsecretary to the Royal Societyof Edinburgh, to whose Transactions hewas a valuable contributor ; keeper ofthe public library in the university, andprincipal clerk to the general assemblyof the Scottish clergy ; and died in 1806.He was one of the most eloquent andaffecting lecturers of his day, and at theconclusion of some of his discourses,both himself and his pupils were notunfrequently in tears.LEE, (SOPHIA,) the daughter of agentleman bred to the law, but whoafterwards became an actor, was bornin London, in 1750. She received agood education, which she studied toimprove by literary pursuits, and, in1780, appeared in print as the author ofa comedy, entitled The Chapter of Accidents.The success it met with producedher considerable profits, withwhich she opened a school at Bath;and, in 1784, she published her celebratednovel of The Recess, and in 1787,a ballad, called A Hermit's Tale. Bothof them increased her reputation, andthe public looked with favourableanxiety for the representation of hertragedy of Almeida, Queen of Granada,which was performed in 1796, but disappointedthe general expectations,although Mrs. Siddons played the heroine.In the Canterbury Tales of hersister, Miss Harriet Lee, the subject ofour memoir wrote three tales ; from oneof which, entitled Krutzner, LordByron adapted his tragedy of Werner.In 1803, she relinquished her school,and after having given to the public anovel, called The Life of a Lover, andher comedy of The Assignation, shedied at Clifton, near Bristol, on the 13thof March, 1824. Her writings displayingenuity and pathos, and appeal forciblyto the passions, and at once strike,interest, and excite the reader. Thenames of both Sophia and Harriet Leewill, possibly, obtain a permanent recordin the annals of literature.BUTLER, (CHARLES,) nephew tothe Rev. Alban Butler, author of theLives of the Saints, and son of alinen-draper, was born in Pall Mall,London, on the 15th of August, 1750.He was educated at the Roman catholicacademy at Hammersmith, and at theEnglish College of Douay, on leavingwhich he was placed with an eminentconveyancer, of the name of Holliday.He studied his profession with zeal,notwithstanding his attachment to classicalliterature, and ultimately becameone of our most eminent equity draughtsmen,besides attaining considerablefame as a writer. He was not called tothe bar until 1791, when he was thefirst Roman catholic who had thathonour, after the passing of the reliefbill in that year. He never, however, arguedany case, except the celebrated oneof Cholmondeley v. Clinton, before SirThomas Plumer and the house of lords.His first publication, which attractedparticular notice, was his Horae Biblical,first printed in 1797, and of whichfive editions have appeared, besides aFrench translation. It was followed byhis Horse Juridicae Subserve, a valuableand learned work, reprinted in1807. His writings in behalf of thecatholics are numerous and valuable, andinvolved him in occasional controversywith some eminent men of letters. Theprincipal are his Historical and LiteraryAccount of the Formularies, Confessionsof Faith, or Symbolic Books of theRoman Catholic, Greek, and principalProtestant Churches, octavo ; the Bookof the Roman Catholic Church; andA Vindication of the same against theReverend George Townshend's Accusations.It gave rise to no less thansix replies on the protestant side, all ofwhich Mr. Butler answered in an Appendixto the Vindication. His professionalworks are, An Essay on theLegality of Impressing Seamen ; Hargrave'sedition, completed, of Cokeupon Lyttleton, in which he has givenan admirable annotation on feuds; andthe sixth edition of Feare on ContingentRemainders. His other worksare too numerous to specify ; they consistchiefly, of a continuation of AlbanButler's Lives of the Saints; separateBiographical Memoirs of Eminent Lawyersand Divines; History of the Geographicaland Political Revolutions ofLITERATURE,Germany ; Reminiscences of Himself;and a variety of tracts relative to theRoman catholic church and doctrines.WAKEFIELD, (PRISCILLA,) wasborn at Tottenham, on the 31st ofJanuary, 1751. Sir Richard Phillips,in his biographical collection, says, thather maiden name was Freeman ; butawriter in The New Monthly Magazinedescribes her as the eldest daughter ofDaniel Hell, and granddaughter of thecelebrated Robert Barclay, who wrotethe Apology for the Quakers. She wasmarried, in January, 1771, to Mr. EdwardWakefield, a merchant of London,by whom she has two sons and onedaughter. Mrs. Priscilla Wakefield,who has for many years been a greatsufferer from bodily infirmity, is favourablyknown to the public as the authorof a variety of popular works for youth,and is said to have been the originalpromoter of those institutions, now sogeneral, under the name of Savings'Banks. Her publications are entitledJuvenile Improvement, Leisure Hours,An Introduction to Botany, MentalImprovement, Reflections on the Conditionof the Female Sex, The JuvenileTraveller, A Familiar Tour throughthe British Empire, Domestic Recreation,&c. &c.Loft, (Cape,) the son of a barrister,was born in London, in November,1751, and received his educationat Eton and Peter-house College, Cambridge,where he was distinguished forhis classical attainments, and produceda Latin poem in praise of Shakspeare,which procured him the notice ofGarrick, whose friendship proved, at asubsequent period, very serviceable tohim. After having gone through theusual forms, he was, in 1775, called to thebar, and practised till 1781 ; when, succeedingto the Capell estates, he retiredto Tuston, in Suffolk, and acted, withgreat credit, as a magistrate, for severalyears. In 1800, however, beingdismissedfrom his office, for a humane but mistakeninterference in behalf of a youngwoman under sentence of death, he resumedthe practice of his profession, andwas chosen recorder of Marlborough in1810, He subsequently quitted England,to reside with his family on the continent,and died at Montpellier, on the26th of May, 1824. Mr. Lofft is not onlyfavourably known as an author, but asthe encourager of merit in others ; and,in particular, of the genius of Bloomfield,as we have already noticed inour memoir of that poet. The principalof his literary productions are, Timoleon,a tragedy; Eudosia, a poem, in blankverse ; a translation of the two firstGeorgicss of Virgil ; Laura, or an Anthologyof Sonnets ; and a volume ofAphorisms from Shakspeare. His professionalworks are, A Collection ofCommon Law Cases, from 1772 to1774 ; two volumes of law maxims,entitled Principia turn Juris Universalsturn praecipe Anglican ; Essay on theLaw of Libel ; and an edition of Gilbert'sLaw of Evidence. Mr. Lofft alsowrote several political pamphlets, andcontributed largely to most of the periodicalpublications of his day.Not, (JOHN,) born at Worcester, onthe 24th of December, 1751, was broughtup as a surgeon, and studied under SirCaesar Hawkins, and at Paris. Heafterwards went to China, in a medicalcapacity ; and whilst there, learnt thePersian language, from which he translatedsome of the odes of Hafiz. In1788, he took his degree of M.D. ; became,afterwards, family physician tothe Duchess of Devonshire, with whomhe travelled on the continent ; and, onhis return, settled at Bristol Hot-wells,where he died, in 1826. Mr. Not wasthe author of numerous works, whichgained him some reputation as a scholarand philological writer, and as an elegant,if not a profound, poet. His principalliterary productions are, Alonzo, a poetictale ; Leonora, an elegy ; translations ofthe first book of Lucretius, and theodes of Horace ; an edition of Catullus,with the Latin text rendered intoEnglish verse ; besides some professionaltracts, and a variety of manuscripts,among which was a translationof Filius Italics.KNOX, (VicESiMT-s,) the son of aclergyman, was born on the 8th of December,1752, and received his educationat Merchant Tailors' School, andKing's College, Oxford, of which hebecame a fellow. After having enteredthe church, he succeeded his father ashead master of the grammar-school atAPPENDIX.Tunbridge, and held that situation till1811, when he retired in favour of hisson. He had, in the meantime, beenpresented to the chapelry of shipboard,in Kent ; and, at the sameperiod, held his own livings of the rectoryof Unwell and Ramsden Grays,in Essex. Dr. Knox was considered avery eminent preacher, but it is in hiscapacity of author that he is chieflyknown. Many of his works have beentranslated into the different Europeanlanguages, and have received great praisefrom Dr. Johnson, and other eminentliterary characters. The principal ofthem are, Essays, Moral and Literary,three volumes, octavo ; Liberal Education,two volumes, octavo; Winter Evenings,three volumes, octavo ; ChristianPhilosophy; and a pamphlet on the NationalImportance ot'Classical Education.The well-known works, Elegant Extracts,and Elegant Epistles, are hisselections. He is also said to have published,anonymously, several politicaltracts at the commencement of theFrench revolution ; and, besides othersermons, he printed his famous one, deliveredat Brighton, upon The Unlawfulnessof Offensive War. He died,highly respected, at Tunbridge, on the6th of September, 1821, leaving twosons. His literary reputation is deservedlygreat ; he was not only wellskilled in his own language, butwrote Latin, both in prose and verse,with the most classical purity.NARES, (ROBERT, Archdeacon ofCarlisle,) son of Dr. Nares, the composer,was born at York, in June, 1753,and educated at Westminster School,and Christchurch, Oxford. After havingtaken the degrees of B. A. and M. A.,he became tutor to the sons and brotherof Sir W. W. Wynne ; in 1782, waspresented, by his college, to the livingof Easton Mauduit, in Northamptonshire; and shortly afterwards, he obtainedthat of Dodington, in the samecounty. In 1787, he was appointedchaplain to the Duke of York ; and, inthe following year, assistant-preacherat Lincoln's Inn. In 1795, he waselected a fellow of the Society of Arts ;during the same year, he became ,and shortly afterwardsmanuscript librarian, at the BritishMuseum. In the latter capacity, priorto his resignation, which occurredin 1807, he prepared the third volumeof the catalogue of the Harleian manuscripts,which was published by therecord commissioners. In 1798, he waspresented to the rectory of Stanford,in Leicestershire, which he resigned inthe following year, on being collated tothe fifth stall of the canons residentiaryof Lichfield Cathedral. In 1800, heobtained the archdeaconry of Carlisle ;in 1804, became a fellow of the RoyalSociety ; and, in the next year, waspresented to the living of St. Mary,Reading, which he exchanged, in 1818,for that of Allhallows, London*. In1823, he was elected a vice-presidentof the Royal Society of Literature, inthe establishment of which he hadbeen greatly instrumental. He died onthe 23rd of March, 1829. He was theauthor of various periodical essays ;numerous contributions to The Gentleman'sMagazine ; a number of occasionalsermons ; some communicationsto the Royal Society of Literature ;Elements of Orthoepy ; Remarks onthe favourite Ballet of Cupid and Psyche,with some account of the Pantomime ofthe Ancients; The Principles of Governmentdeduced from Reason ; A Glossary,or Collection of Words, Phrases,Names, and Allusions to Manners, &c.,which have been thought to requireIllustration in the Works of EnglishAuthors, particularly Shakspeare andhis Contemporaries, &c. &c. He alsoedited The British Critic, up to theforty-second volume ; Dr. Purday'sLectures on the Church Catechism ;The Sermons of Dean Vincent, &c. Inaddition to these and other literarylabours, he wrote a preface to, and assistedin the completion of, Bridge'sHistory of Northamptonshire; and, inconjunction with Tooke and Below,revised and enlarged the General BiographicalDictionary. He is described,by a writer in The Gentleman's Magazine,as a profound scholar, a laboriousand judicious critic, and an elegantwriter ; whose intimacy was courted asearnestly for the instruction it supplied,as for the taste and vivacity of mannersby which it was embellished ; andthe merit of whose varied talents wasexcelled by that unassuming modesty,which uniformly marked and adornedhis character.LITERATURE.MAURICE, (THOMAS,) was bornabout the year 1755, and received theearly part df his education at Christ'sHospital, but principally under the instructionof Dr. Parr, and at St. John'sCollege, Oxford. Here he gained greatreputation by a translation of theOedipus Tyrannous of Sophocles, and byseveral miscellaneous poems, whichwere published about 1778. Aftertaking his degree of B. A., he was ordainedcurate of Woodward, Essex, andsubsequently purchased the chaplaincyof the ninety-seventh regiment, thehalf-pay of which he received till theday of' his death. In 1799, he waspresented, by Earl Spencer, to thevicarage of Wormleighton, Warwickshire,and appointed assistant-librarianat the British Museum. In 1804, thelord-chancellor gave him the living ofCham, in Kent; and he died on the30th of March, 1824. Mr. Mauricepublished a variety of miscellaneousworks, but is principally known to theliterary world by his History of Hindostan,and Indian Antiquities. Theseevince an accurate acquaintance withthe oriental history and languages, anddisplay the learning and research ofthe author in a manner very creditableto his abilities. His other compositionsconsist of tragedies, poems, anddissertations on the antiquities of Egypt,Babylon, &c.MERRY, (Robert,) the founder ofwhat is known as The Delia EtruscanSchool of Poetry, was born in London,in April, 1755. His father was governorof the Hudson's Bay Company,and is said to have been the firstEnglishman who returned home overlandfrom the East Indies. The subjectof our memoir was educated atHarrow, and Christ College, Cambridge; on leaving which, he became astudent of Lincoln's Inn, but, insteadof going to the bar, purchased a commissionin the dragoons, on the deathof his father, and was, for some time,adjutant. On quitting the service, hewent abroad ; and, during a stay onthe continent of nearly eight years,passed the chief part of his time atFlorence, where he studied the Italianlanguage, engaged in 4 poetical composition,and was elected a member of theAcademy of Delia Crusca. The nameDf the academy was that by which, onbis return to England, he distinguishedhis contributions to the various periodicaljournals of the day, and whichproduced so many imitators, and werefor a time so popular, that he was consideredthe founder of a new school inpoetry. The Delia Etruscan School, however,was short-lived, and was ridiculed,by Gifford, in his Baviad and Maevius,with a severity which the indifference ofposterity seems likely to justify, as thereis not one of Mr. Merry's poems whichis now generally read. He died on the24th of December, 1798, at Baltimore,in America, whither he had retired, in1796, with his wife, formerly MissBrandon, an actress, (sister to the Countessof Craven) to whom he was marriedin 1791. Besides his poems, he wasthe author of some dramatic pieces, noneof which had any great success. He issaid to have been an accomplished gentleman,but to have become gloomy andmorose in the latter part of his life, andto have attached himself to low company.PERRY, (JAMES,) the son of abuilder, in Aberdeen, was born there onthe 30th of October, 1756, and educatedat the high school and college of hisnative city. He at first studied for theScottish bar, but, in consequence of hisfather failing in business, he proceededto England, and became clerk to amanufacturer in Manchester, where hedisplayed great talent in moral andphilosophical discussion, as a memberof a society established for that purpose.In 1777, he removed to London,and, being engaged as reporter to theLondon Evening Post, he raised thesale of that paper many thousands a-day, during the trials of Admirals Keppeland Palliser, by sending up, daily,from Portsmouth, eight columns of proceedings,taken by himself in court. In1782, he projected, and afterwardsedited, for a short time, The EuropeanMagazine ; and he subsequently becamesole editor and proprietor of The MorningChronicle, which he conducted insuch a manner, that Pitt and Lord Shellin order to make use of his influence,offered 'him a seat in parliament.This he, however, refused ; and,continuing firm to his Whig principles,was twice prosecuted by government:first, for printing the Resolutions of theAPPENDIX.Derby Meeting ; and, secondly, forcopying a paragraph from the Examiner,respecting George the Fourth,then Prince of Wales. In both cases heobtained acquittals ; acting, in the latter,as his own counsel. He died much respected,and in the possession of ahandsome fortune, at Brighton, on the4th of December, 1821.EGERTON, (Scrooge, Earl ofBridgewater,) youngest son of theBishop of Durham, was born on thellth of November, 1756. He took thehonorary degree of M.A., at All Souls'College, Oxford, in which year he wasappointed, by his father, a prebendary ofDurham. In 1780, the Duke of Bridgewaterpresented him to the rectory ofMiddle, and, in 1797, to that of White-church,both in the county of Salop. Hewas raised to the rank of an earl's sonin 1808, and succeeded to the titles of hisbrother in 1823. He died at Paris, inthe month of April, 1829. His productionsconsist of an edition of the Hippolytusof Euripides, with notes, variousreadings, and a Latin version ; a Lifeof Lord-chancellor Egerton ; A Letterto the Parisians, upon Inland Navigation; and Anecdotes of his own family.His singularities are said to have formeda general topic of conversation atParis ; his house was nearly filled withdogs and cats ; and out of fifteen of theformer animals, two were admitted tohis table ; and half a dozen, dressed uplike himself, were frequently seen alonein his carriage, drawn by four horses,and attended by two footmen. W r hentoo debilitated to partake of field sports,he kept in his garden a large stock ofrabbits, pigeons, and partridges, withtheir wings cut, which he would occasionally,with the aid of his servants,walkout to shoot. With all these eccentricities,however, he had no ordinary shareof learning and ability, and shewed hiszeal for letters and science by his posthumousmunificence. He bequeathedhis manuscripts and autographs to theBritish Museum, with the interest of7,000 to the librarian who should takecare of them ; also 5,000 towards augmentingthe collection of that institution,and 8,000 to the president of the RoyalSociety, with a request that a portion ofit might be given to some person orpersons who should write, print, andpublish one thousand copies of a work,entitled, On the Power, Wisdom, andGoodness of God, as manifested in theCreation.CHARNOCK, (JOHN,) was born onthe 28th of November, 1756, and waseducated at Winchester School, andMerton College, Oxford, where he obtaineda silver medal for elocution, butdoes not appear to have taken any degree.He served, for some time, bothin the army and navy; and, after publishingseveral miscellaneous works ofmerit, died in the King's Bench, inMay, 1807. His life was much embitteredby pecuniary distress, which issaid to have chiefly arisen from the expenseshe had incurred in preparing hisHistory of Marine Architecture, in threequarto volumes, and from the confinedsale of that useful and extensive work.He also wrote a pamphlet, entitled TheRights of a Free People ; BiographiaNavalis, six volumes, octavo; an ableSupplement to Campbell's Lives of theAdmirals; A Letter on Finance ; andA Life of Lord Nelson, in which areinserted several original letters of thatgreat commander.PINKERTON, (JOHN,) the son ofa dealer in hair, was born in Edinburgh,on the 13th of February, 1758; and,after having received an ordinary education,was articled to a writer of thesignet, with whom he remained fiveyears. In 1781, he settled in London,w here he published a variety of works,and, in 1806, removed to Paris, anddied there on the 10th of March, 1826.His chief publications are, An Essay onMedals ; Letters on Literature ; Wal-poland; The Treasury of Wit ; Dissertationon the Origin and Progress of theScythian, or Goths, being an introductionto the Ancient and Modern Historyof Europe; The Medallic History ofEngland; An Inquiry into the Historyof Scotland, preceding the Reign of Malcolmthe Third; Biographia Scotia;Modern Geography, digested on a newplan ; General Collection of Voyagesand Travels; New Modern Atlas; andPetralogy, or a Treatise on Rocks. Hewas also the author of several poems ofmerit, and committed a literary forgery,by the publication of some AncientScottish Poems, from the (pretended)LITERATURE.manuscript collection of Sir RichardMaitland, Knight, Lord privy-seal ofScotland. Of the numerous works whichthis prolific and eccentric writer produced,the greater part are forgotten ;but his Atlas and Geography, with afew others, are still popular.LEMPRIERE, (JOHN,) was born inJersey, about the year 1760, and receivedhis education at WinchesterSchool, and Pembroke College, Oxford,where he graduated A.M. in 1792, and,in the same year, obtained the headmastershipof Abingdon grammar-school. He was subsequently appointedto the same situation at the free gram-mareschalof Exeter, which he, however,was obliged to resign, afterpetitioning parliament, in consequenceof a dispute with the trustees. Havingproceeded B.D. in 1801, and D.D. in1803, he was, in 1811, presented withthe rectory of Meath, which, togetherwith the living of Newstock, in the^samecounty, he held till his death, in'Feb-february, 1824. As an author, he hasobtained celebrity by the publication ofhis Bibliotheca Classics, and UniversalBiography; works of standard utility,and which have gone through severaleditions. In the former, the author hasemployed much original research, andthough modelled on the plan of theSiecles Pains of the Abbe Sabatier deCastres, it has the advantage of considerableadditions, from a variety ofnovel sources, enumerated by Dr. Lem-priere, in his preface. A Latin translationof the work was published atLavender, in Holland, in 1794, and nobook is extant that can be found ofequal value to the mythological student.Dr. Lempriere is also the authorof a first volume of a translation of Herodotus,but was induced to discontinueit, in consequence of the appearance ofMr. Below's edition.DRUM MONO, (Sir WILLIAM,) wasborn in Scotland, about the year 17GO,and was made a knight of the Crescentin 1801, at which time he was ambassadorto the Ottoman porte. He hadpreviously acted as envoy extraordinaryto the court of Naples, and sat in parliamentfor St. Makes; and, at thetime of his death, which occurred atRome, in 1828, was a privy-counsellor,and fellow of the Royal Societies ofLondon and Edinburgh. Sir Williamwas a profound and elegant scholar ;and, besides his able translation of theSatires of Persius, published A Reviewof the Government of Sparta andAthens ; Academical Questions ; Origines,or Remarks on the Origin ofSeveral Empires, States, and Cities;Odin, a poem; Essay on a Punic Inscription,found in the Isle of Malta ;Oedipus Indices ; and, in conjunctionwith Robert Walpole, Esq., Herculesor Archaeological and PhilologicalDissertations. Sir William leftno issue by his widow, who now residesat Naples, in great splendour.ROGERS, (SAMUEL,) one of ourmost elegant poets, was the son of abanker, and himself follows that businessin the metropolis, where he was born,about 1760. He received a learnededucation, which he completed by travellingthrough most of the countriesof Europe, including France, Switzerland,Italy, Germany, &c. lie hasbeen all his life master of an ample fortune,and not subject, therefore, to thecommon reverses of an author, inwhich character he first appeared in1787, when he published a spirited Odeto Superstition, with other poems.These were succeeded, after an intervalof five years, by The Pleasures of Memory; a work which at once establishedhis fame as a first-rate poet. In1798, he published his Epistle to aFriend, with other poems ; and did notagain come forward, as a poet, till 1814,when he added to a collected edition ofhis works, his somewhat irregular poemof The Vision of Columbus. In thesame year came out his Aquiline, atale, in company with Lord Byron'sLaura; and, in 1819, his Human Life.In 1822, was published his first part ofItaly, which has since been completed,in three volumes, duodecimo ; and ofwhich, a recent edition has been given tothe world, accompanied with numerousengravings. This poem is his last andgreatest, but by no means his best, performance; though an eminent writer inThe New Monthly Magazine calls itperfect as a whole." There are certainlymany very beautiful descriptivepassages to be found in it; and it is totallytree from meretriciousness : but weAPPEN DIX.think the author has too often mistakencommon-place for simplicity, to renderit of much value to his reputation, as awhole. It is as the author of The Pleasuresof Memory, that he will be chieflyknown to posterity, though, at the sametime, some of his minor poems areamong the most pure and exquisitefragments of verse, which the poets ofthis age have produced. In society, fewmen are said to be more agreeable inmanners and conversation than thevenerable subject of our memoir ; andhis benevolence is said to be on a parwith his taste and accomplishments.Lord Byron must have thought highlyof his poetry, if he were sincere in saying," We are all wrong, exceptingRogers, Crabbe, and Campbell."WILLIAMS, (HELEN MARIA,) issaid to have been born in London, aboutthe year 1762, though so early a dateseems inconsistent with that affixed totwo publications, entitled Memoirs andLetters, &c., and Anecdotes in a Convent,of which Watt, in his BibliothecaBritannica, makes her the author in1770 and 1771. In what situation of lifeher parents were, does not appear ; butthey resided at Berwick some time afterthe birth of Helen, who again came tothe metropolis in 1782. Of her educationno account has been given ; shedeveloped, at an early age, a taste forpoetry, and, in the year just mentioned,published a tale in verse, entitled, Edwinand Elfride, under the patronageof Dr. Kippis. The success with which itwas met, encouraged her to continue herliterary labours ; and, in 1783, she producedan Ode to Peace ; in 1784, Peru,a poem ; in 1786, two volumes of MiscellaneousPoems; and, in 1788, a poemon the Slave Trade. These acquiredher some fame, and considerable profit ;and, proceeding to France, in the last-mentionedyear, she formed some literaryand political connexions, whichinduced her to take up her residence inParis, in 1790. In the same year, shepublished a novel, in two volumes,called Julia; and, shortly afterwards,' herLetters written from France, to whicha second and third volume were addedin 1792. This work was written insupport of the French revolution, andof the doctrines of the Girondists; andthe authoress was, in consequence, ontheir fall, under Robespierre, imprisonedin the Temple, at Paris, and, for sometime,was in danger of her life. Afterher liberation, she published, in succession,A Sketch of the Politics ofFrance ; a translation of Paul and Virginia;Tour in Switzerland ; Sketchesof the State of Manners and Opinionsin the French Republic ; and a translationof the Political and ConfidentialCorrespondence of Louis the Sixteenth,with observations. About the time ofthe truce of Amiens, she is said to havebeen consulted by the English government; and, on the breaking out of thesubsequent war, she was seized, togetherwith her papers, by the Frenchpolice, and underwent an examination,la 1814, she translated the first volumeof the Personal Narrative of the Travelsof Humboldt, which she completed, insix volumes, in 1821. Her other performancesare, A Narrative of Eventsin France, 1815 ; On the Persecution ofthe Protestants of the South of France,1816; Letters on the Events whichhave passed in France, from the Landingof Napoleon, on the 1st of March,1815, till the Restoration of Louis theEighteenth, 1819; and a sketch, entitledThe Leper of the City of Aoste, fromthe French. In these works, she avowedsentiments entirely different from herformer ones, advocating the cause of theBourbons, and condemning the revolution.She died at Paris, where sheis said to have lived with an adulterer,of the name of Stone, in December,1827. Her letters, and some of herpoems, have been translated into theFrench language, and appear to haveacquired more celebrity in that countrythan in her own.RADCLIFFE, (ANN,) the daughterof a gentleman in trade, named Ward,was born in London, on the 9th ofJuly, 1764. In her twenty-third yearshe married, at Bath, where her parentsthen resided, William Radcliffe, Esq.,who subsequently became the proprietorand editor of The EnglishChronicle. Not long afterwards shepublished her romance of The Castlesof Athlin and Dumblaine; which wassucceeded by The Romance of theForest ; The Sicilian Romance ; and, in1793, by her celebrated production ofThe Mysteries of Udolpho, for whichLITERATURE.she received 500. In 1794, shetravelled on the continent ; but didnot, as generally supposed, from thevividness of her description of that country,visit Italy, being, according to awriter in the" Biographic Universelle,prevented from proceeding beyond Fri-burg,on suspicion of not, being anEnglishwoman, notwithstanding herpassport. In 1795, she published, inquarto, An Account of a Journey inHolland, with Observations made duringa Tour on the Lakes of Westmorelandand Cumberland ; and the samework subsequently appeared in twooctavo volumes. She next gave to theworld her romance of The Italian, forwhich, though by no means so popularas The Mysteries of Udolpho, she receivedfrom the publisher 800. Theauthor of the article, Radcliffe, in aFrench publication, called DictionnaireHistorique, Critique, et Bibliographique,also attributes to her two works, entitledrespectively, Woman's Advocate, andVisions of the Castle of the Pyrenees ;and a romance by her, called Gastonde Bonneville, appeared shortly afterher death, which took place on the 7thof February, 1823. In person, the subjectof our memoir was low in stature,but exquisitely proportioned, with a fineexpressive countenance, indicative ofVivacity and intelligence. As a writerof romance, Mrs. Radcliffe stands atthe head of her class : a rank assignedher by the critics of all countries whereher work*, which have been translatedinto almost all the European languagesbeen made known. Sheridanspoke with great praise of The Mysteriesof Udolpho; and Dr. JosephWanton said, that happening to takeit up at night, he was so fascinatedthat he could not go to bed until he hadfinished it. It is in the delineationof guilt, under the influence of terrorand superstition, that Mrs. Radcliffeis so pre-eminently successful andoriginal; and, in this respect, Cheer,in his Observations upon the EnglishRomance Writers, ranks her next toShakspeare.Bailie, (JOANNA,) sister of thecelebrated Dr. Matthew Baillie, wasborn at Bothwell, in Scotland, aboutthe year 1765. We have been unableto collect any particulars of her life,but she is well known to the public asone of the most successful female writersof the present age. Her most celebratedproduction is her Plays of thePassions; a series in which each passionis made the subject of a tragedyand a comedy. These procured hergreat reputation, particularly her tragedies,which evince strong conceptionsof character, vivid imagery, and amasterly delineation of the various passions.One of her most recent publicationsis A View of the general Tenor ofthe New Testament, regarding theNature and Dignity of Jesus Christ.She is also the author of The FamilyLegend, a tragedy; Metrical Legends,or Exalted Characters ; and two dramas,entitled, respectively, The Martyr, andThe Bride.MORGAN, (Lady,) whose name isso well known in the literary world,was a Miss Benson. Her father belongedto the Theatre Royal, Dublin,where she was born, about the year1770. She is principally known as theauthor of two works, called, respectively,France and Italy, both in twovolumes. These had an extensive circulationat home and abroad ; and, foratime, were very influential over theopinions of the reading English, respectingthose countries. Both of themwere prohibited in Sardinia, Rome, andAustria, and the authoress was forbiddento enter the Austrian territories. Herother works consist chiefly of novels,of which The O'brien and the O'Fla-hertys is one of the most recent. Shemarried, not very early in life, Dr.Morgan, a physician, who was subsequentlyknighted. Her Book of theBoudoir, published in 1829, containssome amusing particulars and anecdotesconcerning herself, but a disgusting airof egotism and conceit pervades thewhole. Her last publication is Francein 1829-30, which contains a livelypicture of the moral and political stateof the country at that time. Herfeeblest production is considered to beher Life and Times of Salvator Rosa.Besides the works before-mentioned,she is the author of the novels of St.Clair, The Novice of St. Dominic, TheWild Irish Girl, Patriotic Sketches ofIreland, Woman, or Ida of Athens, andAbsenteeism; which, with the exceptionAPPENDIX.of the last, were all published previousto her marriage.Robin, (JOHN,) the son of a WestIndia merchant, was born at Salisbury,in 1770, and educated at Bristol andSouthampton. He afterwards came toLondon, and practised as an attorney,but employed the greater part of histime in writing for the stage, where,however, none of his pieces were produced,with the exception of an indifferentfarce, till after his death, whichoccurred in 1804. In the same year,his play of The Honeymoon, which hadbeen previously rejected, was acted atCork ; and, in consequence of the applausewhich it met with, was followedby The Curfew, another of TobSn'splays. The Honeymoon, however, wasthe more popular of the two, and is,indeed, the sole production on whichthe fame of its author depends. It isstill frequently acted ; and, from thevery felicitous manner in which it ismodelled after the older dramatists,stands almost unrivalled among ourimitative plays.MORTON, (THOMAS,) was born atDurham, about 1770, and losing hisfather whilst young, was taken care ofby his uncle, an eminent stock-broker,who placed him at the Soho Academy,in London. Here the part he took inthe annual exhibitions of the school-plays,gave him such a taste for dramaticcomposition, that, though subsequentlyentered a law student ofLincoln's Inn, he devoted the principalpart of his time to play-writing,and produced, in 1792, a historicalplay, called Columbus. This met withlittle success ; but his next piece, TheChildren of the Wood, had a run ofmore than seventy nights, and is stilla stock play. Thus encouraged, hebecame one of our most regular dramaticauthors, and produced, in succession,his comedies of The Way toGet Married. A Cure for the HeartAche, Secrets Worth Knowing, TheSchool of Reform, Town and Country,Education, and Speed the Plough.His other pieces are, the popular operaof The Slave ; the play of Zorinski ; amusical piece, called The Knight ofSnowdon ; besides several dramatictrifles, which he has adapted and alteredfor the stage. Speed the Plough is thebest performance of Mr. Morton, ofwhose talents as a dramatist it may besaid, that, if not of a transcendent character,they are such as place him aboveall comparison with the herd of scribblerswhose productions have, of late years,supplanted the less obtrusive, butmore genuine, effusions of genius.HOOK, (JAMES,) the son of thewell-known musical composer of thesame name, was born on the 16th ofJune, 1771. He received the rudimentsof education at a school at Baling,and was afterwards sent to Westminster,where he distinguished himselfamong the boys by sketching portraitsand caricatures. One of these, representinga pair of scales, containing threeEtonians and three Westminster boys,of whom the latter were made to preponderate,gave rise to the followingepigram from Canning, then a scholarat Eton :What mean ye, by this print so rare,Ye nile, of Eton jealous ;But that we soar aloft in air,And ye are heavy fellows ?This appeared in a periodical of theEtonians, called The Trifler, and wasthus answered by Mr. Hook, in TheMicrocosm, the production of the Westminsterboys :Cease, ye Ftonians, and no moreWith rival wits contend ;Feathers, we know, will float in voir,And bubbles will ascend.About 1791, he entered a student ofSt. Mary Hall, Oxford, where, in 1794-5,he graduated B. A., previously to whichhe declined an advantageous appointmentin India, determining to enter thechurch. Having imbibed a strong prejudicein favour of Tory principles, hein1796, published a pamphlet, thatwent through two editions, under thetitle of Publicly, or a Sketch of theTimes and Prevailing Opinions, inwhich he satirised Paine, Home Tooke,Godwin, Thelwall, and others of thatparty, in an imaginary revolution.In 1797, he married the daughter ofSir Walter Farquhar, Bart., who, assoon as he was ordained deacon andpriest, obtained for him the small livingof Haddington, in Leicestershire, andintroduced him to the notice of theLITERATURE.most eminent. Tory politicians of theday. In 1799, he graduated M. A.;and, in 1801, he produced The Opinionof an Old Englishman, in which hetraced, with great eloquence and discrimination,the character of Pitt, fromthe beginning of his ministerial careerto that period. In 1802, he was madechaplain to George the Fourth; and,in 1803, alarmed at the progress ofBuonaparte, published, under the signatureof Publicly, his celebratedaddresses to the people, the soldiers,and the sailors, of which no less thanamillion were circulated in Englandand Wales. In 1804, he was appointedto the rectory of Hertingfordbury, andSt. Andrew's, in Hertfordshire ; afterwardsgraduated, successively, B.C.L.,and D.C.L.; and, in 1807, he obtaineda stall in Winchester Cathedral.In 1811, he published a tract, entitledNotes Explanatory of certain parts ofthe Protestant Dissenters' Catechism ;the profits of which he applied to thebenefit of the Church charity andSunday schools. In 1814, he succeededDr. Middleton as Archdeaconof Huntingdon ; and, in the courseof the two following years, publisheda succession of political pamphlets, thechief of which were entitled, PlainFacts for Plain Folks, &c., and AlHomeric, an Arabian tale, depictingthe progress of the spirit of the Frenchrevolution. In 1817, in order to concentratehis duties, he exchanged hislivings, in Hertfordshire, with Dr.Ridley, for that of Whippingham, in theIsle of Wight ; and, in the same year,he brought out, in weekly numbers,from the 1st of March till the end ofSeptember, The Good Old Times, orthe Poor Man's History of England,from the earliest period down to thepresent times, a work which was extremelypopular. Having previouslyit is said, declined an Irish bishopric,he, in 1825, accepted the deanery ofWorcester ; but ill health, which haddisabled him from preaching since1820, terminated in a liver complaintn 1827, and carried him off in theFebruary of the following year. DeanHook obtained considerable temporaryreputation as a political and polemicalpamphleteer, in which character lewwriters have surpassed him.Pie, (AMELIA,) the daughter ofDr. Anderson, an eminent physicianof Norwich, was born in that city,in 1771. At a very early period, sheevinced talents of a superior order,composing, whilst still a child, poems,descriptive pieces, and novels, thoughnone of them, with the exception ofsome poetical pieces in The MonthlyMagazine, were published before hermarriage, which took place in May,1798, with Mr. Opie, the celebratedpainter. Her first publication, TheFather and Daughter, a tale, with otherpieces, appeared in 1801 ; which at oncedrew upon its author the public attention,and it has always remained afavourite of its class. It was succeeded,in 1802, by An Elegy to the Memoryof the late Duke of Bedford, and avolume of other poems ; and, in 1804,she gave to the world her tale of AdelineMowbray, or the Mother and Daughter.This was followed, in 1806, by SimpleTales, in four volumes, duodecimo ; and,in 1808, appeared, anonymously, in twovolumes, duodecimo, her Dangers ofCoquetry; and an octavo volume, underthe title of The Warrior's Return, andother poems. Having become a widowin 1807, she published, in 1810, Memoirsof Mr. Opie, prefixed to theLectures he had read at the RoyalAcademy. Her subsequent productionsare, a novel, entitled Temper, or DomesticScenes ; Tales of Real Life ; SimpleTales; Valentine's Eve; New Fables, infour volumes ; Tales of the Heart ; andThe Black Man's Lament, in advocacyof the abolition of slavery, which appearedin 1826. The most remarkablefeature in her life since this period, isher entrance into the Society of Friends,and her retirement from society, afterhaving been one of its most cheerfulvotaries. Of all female writers of thepresent age, Mrs. Opie is the mostforcible and affecting ; in her power ofdisplaying the workings of the passions,she is very little inferior to Godwin.she falls short of Miss Edgeworth, iner descriptions of real life, and delineationof domestic character ; but inoriginality and vigour of conception,and creation of appalling interest, shesinfinitely superior. Her Father andDaughter is a harmonious piece of.lorn; stick tragedy ; though, says a writern The Edinburgh Review, " for aAPPENDIX,short and convincing proof of her power,we would refer to a little tale, entitledConfessions of an Odd-tempered Man ;contained in a collection called Talesof Real Life, and which bears someresemblance to the Adolph, of BenjaminConstant." Mrs. Opie holds nomean rank as a poetess, though herprose writings have procured her thegreatest share of approbation.CARR, (Sir JOHN,) facetiously calledthe Jaunting Car, in consequence ofhis numerous tours, and the accuracywith which he has given an account ofthem to the public, was born in Devonshire,about the year 1772. He wasbred to the law, but had scarcelycommenced practice, when ill healthinduced him to travel. A poem, calledThe Song of Discord, printed in 1813,was his first publication. It met withlittle notice ; but his Stranger in France,a tour from Devonshire to France,which appeared in the same year, was,in consequence of its agreeable style,very well received. The avidity withwhich it was read, caused him to publisha variety of similar works, for whichhis successive tours furnished him withready materials, and the result wasmuch profit to himself, and amusementto his readers. People at length beganto smile at the repeated issue of ourtraveller's journals ; and a writer inThe Monthly Review having criticisedhis Stranger in Ireland, with a jocularseventy, his tours were at last scarcelyless ridiculed than Blackmore's epics.A burlesque upon the one above-namedcompleted the destruction of their fame;and Sir John had the additional mortificationof losing an action which hebrought against the author of the Hintsfor a Right Merrier and Conceited Tour.He published, however, two other worksof a similar description ; and, in 1809,a volume of poems, with his portraitprefixed. Sir John was knighted bythe Duke of Bedford, when his gracewas Lord-lieutenant of Ireland.ELMSLEY, (PETER,) was born in1773, and educated at WestminsterSchool and the University of Oxford,where he studied for the church. Theonly preferment he ever obtained, wasto the living of Little Horkesley, inEssex, in 1798 ; after which he devotedhis time to literature. Removing to theScotch metropolis, in 1802, he becamea contributor to The Edinburgh Review,and subsequently wrote for TheQuarterly. In the former, his mostcelebrated articles are on Heine'sHomer, Bloomfield's Prometheus, andPerson's Hecuba. In 1818 and 1819,he visited Italy ; and, in the latter year,was employed, in conjunction with SirHumphrey Davy, to collect the Herculaneumpapyri. On his return toEngland, he settled at Oxford, wherehe took the degree of D. D., and wasmade principal of St. Alban's Hall. In1823, he was appointed Camden professorof ancient history ; and died onthe 8th of March, 1825. Dr. Elmsley,who was one of the first classicalscholars of his age, published, in additionto the papers above mentioned,an edition of the following tragedies ofSophocles and Euripides : OedipusTyrannous ; Charades ; Heraclitus? ;Medea; Bacchae; and Oedipus Colonels.LEWIS, (MATTHEW GREGORY,)the son of a gentleman possessing largeproperty in the West Indies, and whowas, for some time, under secretary atwar, was born in 1773. He was educatedat Westminster School ; and,afterwards, travelling for improvement,received a deep impression, whilst inGermany, from the literature of thatcountry. This he manifested, on hisreturn to England, by the publicationof several novels of peculiar interest,and particularly The Monk, which firstappeared in 1795, and subsequentlyprocured him the appellation of MonkLewis. This novel is founded on thestory of the Wanton Basis, in The Guardian; and, at the time of its appearance,excited a great deal of notice, not unmixedwith disgust, in consequence ofits licentious details. A prosecutionwas even threatened by government,which the author is said to have avoided'by a promise to recal all the earlycopies that had got into circulation, andto remodel those parts which were consideredmost offensive. He wouldseem also to have offended his familyby this publication ; for, in a letter,which was published after his death,he excuses himself to his father, by sayingthat, at the time of his publishingthe work in question, he was too youngLITERATURE.to judge properly of the impressionwhich its contents might make, thoughhis design was to benefit the cause ofreligion. He sat in parliament forTendon, for one session, and died in1818, during a. voyage to the WestIndies, occasioned, as has been reported,by poison given him by a slave,to whom he had imparted his intentionof emancipating all his slaves at hisdecease. Besides The Monk, he wasthe author of several other romanticnovels, and some dramatic pieces, ofwhich his tragedy of Adelgitha, andmelt-drames of Rugantino and Timourthe Tartar, are the most celebrated.His writings were sufficiently popular,in their time, to produce a host of imitators,who surpassed Lewis, perhaps,in licentiousness and extravagance, butwere decidedly beneath him in genius.The Monk has passed through severaleditions and translations, and, in thatclass of writing to which it belongs, theauthor will probably long remain withouta rival.ARNOLD, (SAMUEL JAMES,) son ofthe celebrated musical composer, wasborn on the 5th of December, 1774,and educated for the profession of anartist, which he abandoned for that ofauthor. His first production was themusical entertainment of Auld RobinGray, which was acted, with success, atthe Haymarket Theatre. It was followedby the Shipwreck, at DruryLane, which also became a temporaryfavourite with the public. His mostsuccessful production was the comedyof Man and Wife, or More Secrets thanOne, which was produced at DruryLane, in 1809, and had a run of thirty-ninenights. In the same year, havingobtained a license for the establishmentof an English opera, and purchased theLyceum Theatre, in the Strand, heproduced there his first great opera ofUp All Night, or the Smuggler's Cave.His new theatre was highly prosperous,and each succeeding year producedfresh efforts from Mr. Arnold's pen,among which were, the operas of Plots,or the North Tower ; The Maniac ;The King's Proxy ; The Devil's Bridge;The Americans ; Frederick the Great ;Baron de Trench ; and Broken Promises; besides a multitude of dramas,including those very successful onesTwo Words, and Free and Easy. In1812, Mr. Arnold was solicited to undertakethe management of the newDrury Lane Theatre, by the late Mr.Whitbread, after whose death he resignedhis post ; pulled down his oldtheatre, and rebuilt a new one, whichhe opened in 1816. In the meantime,Mr. Arnold gave birth to a new era inthe dramatic music of the country, bythe adaptation, and first performancein England, of Weber's celebratedopera of Der Freischiitz, which hadbeen previously refused by both thegreat patent theatres. This was followedup by others, not less successful,and including some of the finest continentaloperas. It has been said, thatMr. Arnold has distinguished himselfmore by the production of foreign, thanof English, music; but the charge issufficiently contradicted by the foregoinglist of operas, among the composersof which we need but nameH. Bishop, Kelly, Abraham, T. Cooke,and W. Hawes. In 1802-3, Mr. Arnoldmarried a daughter of Henry JamesPye, Esq., the poet laureate, by whomhe has two sons and a daughter. Mr.Arnold is a magistrate, and a fellow ofthe Royal Society ; his private characteris said to be estimable, and he has thereputation of being a most delightfuland entertaining companion.MURRAY, (ALEXANDER,) the sonof a Scotch shepherd, was born in theshire of Kirkcudbright, Scotland, onthe 22nd of October, 1775. After havinglearned to read, he was, at the age ofeight years, sent to tend sheep ; butbeing, as he says, in his autobiography,indolent, and given to books, andwriting on boards with coals," hisfather found him of little use. At length,in May, 1784, his uncle undertook toput him to school ; but ill health preventedhim from remaining there morethan three months, after which he returnedto his old employment. Hecontinued to act as a shepherd's boyuntil his thirteenth year, when he wasengaged as teacher in the families oftwo of the neighbouring farmers. Inthe meantime, he had taught himselfarithmetic and geography ; and thoughhe subsequently attended a day-schoolfor about three months, in 1790, hemay be said to have acquired, by hisAPPENDIX.own unassisted exertions, in a year anda half from that time, a knowledge ofthe Latin, French, Greek, and Hebrewlanguages. Inspired by a perusal ofMilton, Homer, and Ossian, he commenced,and wrote, several thousandlines of an epic poem, but soon discoveringhis inferiority to hit models,he threw his manuscripts into the fire.He then translated some lectures of aGerman professor on Roman literature ;and, in 1794, endeavoured to procurethe publication of them, in the hope ofrealizing a sum sufficient to enable himto enter the university. Failing in this,he attempted to publish some poemsby subscription, but was dissuaded fromcarrying his plan into execution byRobert Burns, who told him his tastewas not properly formed, and he wouldbe ashamed of his productions whenhe could write and judge better. Notlong afterwards, in consequence of therepresentation of his talents to some ofthe literary characters of Edinburgh,he was sent for to that city, and underwentan examination before the principalof the university and several professors,who were so struck with hisclassical proficiency, that they procuredhim a bursary, and admitted him tothe different classes gratuitously. Hisabilities soon enabled him to becomeindependent of his patrons, by the emolumentshe derived from teaching, andto go through the necessary course ofstudy for entering the Scottish church.In 1802, he was employed to prepare anew edition of Bruce's travels, whichappeared, in seven volumes, three yearsafter ; and, about the same time, heleft Edinburgh, in order to officiate, asclergyman, at Burr, in Durnfrieshire.In 1812, he returned to the Scotch metropolis,on his election to the universityprofessorship of oriental languages ; butsurvived his appointment only ninemonths, dying on the 14th of April,1813, in his thirty-eighth year. Afterhis death, appeared his History ofEuropean Languages; a work which,even in the unfinished state he hasleft it, remains a splendid monumentof his ingenuity and learning, and isone of the most important contributionsthat philological literature has, formany years, received. The acquirementsof Murray may be called marvellous:by the end of his life, inaddition to his other attainments,scarcely one of the oriental or thenorthern tongues remained uninvestigatedby him ; indeed, a more wonderfulinstance of self-taught genius hasnever, perhaps, been recorded.KENNEY, (JAMES,) was born inIreland, about 1776 ; and, after havingreceived his education in that country,was, for some time, it is said, a clerk inthe banking-house of Messrs. Berries,Farquhar, and Co. In 1802, he publishedSociety, a poem, in two parts,with other poems ; and, soon after,turning his attention to the drama,commenced his career by the productionof his admirable farce of Raisingthe Wind. In 1804, he producedMatrimony, an opera, which was followed,in 1805, by his Too many Cooks,a musical farce ; and, in 1807, appearedhis Ella Rosenberg, a melo-drama;and False Alarms, or My Cousin, acomic opera. In 1808, he brought outThe World, a comedy, which was succeeded,in 1812, by his excellent andlaughable farce of Turn Out. In 1814,appeared his Debtor and Creditor, acomedy ; in 1815, his piece entitledThe Portfolio, or the Family of Anglice,a drama; and, in 1817, he producedThe Touchstone, or the World as itgoes. In 1820, he printed a poem, entitledValde, or the Libertine's Son ;and, in 1826, a drama which was playedwith but indifferent success, entitledBenyowski, or the Exiles of Kams-chatka. Of our modern farce writers,Mr. Kenney is undoubtedly at the head ;and in that species of dramatic composition,his Raising the Wind is withoutan equal. His recent productionsare not to be compared with his earlierefforts, which have probably securedfor him a permanent station among theminor dramatists of our country. Heis said to have married the widow ofthe celebrated Holcroft, some time previousto 1823, but whether he has survived,or had any issue by her, we areunacquainted.LAMB, (CHARLES,) better knownby his literary appellation of Elia, andso celebrated for his essays under thatname, is a native of London, and waseducated at Christ's Hospital. In earlylife, he was intimate with Southey,LITERATURE,581-Coleridge, and Lloyd ; and made hisfirst appearance in print, as an authorof some blank verse, by himself andCharles Lloyd. In the same year, (1798,)he published A Tale of Rosamond Greyand Old Blind Margaret; in 1802, atragedy, called John Woodville ; and,in 1807, two small volumes of Talesfrom Shakspeare. About the sametime, he brought out an unsuccessfulfarce at Drury Lane, entitled Mr. H.An edition of all his works, up to thattime, appeared in 1818. Mr. Lambheld, for some years, a situation in theaccompany-general's office at the Indiahouse, and was long: connected withThe London Magazine, to which hecontributed numerous articles of greatoriginality* His poetry is quaint, andsomething in the style of Coleridge, inits philosophical simplicity, if we mayuse the term ; but between them, aspoets, there is no other resemblance.As a prose writer for a periodical work,Mr. Lamb stands at the head of hisclass. Indeed, the Essays of Elia maybesaid to have formed an era in magazineliterature.GALT, (JOHN,) was born at Irvine,in Ayrshire, on the 2nd of May, 1779.He was educated at Greenock, and, atan early age, displayed those talentsfor literature which circumstances subsequentlybrought to maturity. Mechanics,gardening, and music, wereamong his favourite pursuits ; and hemade sufficient progress in the last tobe able to compose vocal music. Theair of Lord Byron's Lochnagar is afavourable specimen of his productions.On leaving school, he was placed in amerchant's counting-house, where hewas equally remarkable for his industry,ability, and probity. On the death ofhis father, he became entitled to asmall inheritance, which he immediatelyresigned in favour of his motherand sister. After he had been sometimein business at Greenock, he cameto London, and entered into partnershipwith a Mr. M'Lachlan, but had themisfortune soon to be made bankrupt,in consequence of the failure of someother houses for whom his own hadbecome liable. He then entered himselfof Lincoln's Inn, with a view ofgoing to the bar; but, on his returnfrom a tour abroad, in the course ofwhich he became acquainted with LordByron, he renounced the law, publishedhis travels, and recommenced commercialpursuits. A plan which he hadcommunicated to government for conveyinggoods from the Levant to thecontinent, by way of Turkey, havingbeen taken no notice of, he went toGibraltar as agent to a Scotch mercantilehouse. His views, however, beinginterrupted by the progress of thepeninsular war, and by ill health, hereturned home in a short time ; and,after various employments, was appointedagent for the Canada claims.On his return from America, wherehe seems to have had a very difficultand thankless task to perform,he resumed his literary pursuits. Heproduced, in succession, Laurie Todd,Southern, Lives of the Players,Bogle Cornet, Life of West, and was,for some time, editor of The Couriernewspaper. His other acknowledgedworks are, Stanley Buxton. EbenErskine, The Stolen Child, Life ofLord Byron, and Life of CardinalWolsey. He published, anonymously,The Ayrshire Legatees, Annals of theParish, The Parrot, The Spaewife,Rothelan, &c. besides a vast number oftales and essays in different periodicalpublications and annuals. Most of Mr.Gait's novels have some foundation infact, and are all full of interest andtruth. His style is, upon the whole,pleasing, though it is free almost tocarelessness, and occasionally as obscureand pedantic, as it is, in general, boldand simple.MACDIARMID, (JOHN,) the sonof a Scotch clergyman, at Seems, inPerthshire, was born there in 1779 ; and,having completed his education at theUniversities of Edinburgh and St. Andrew's,acted for some years as tutor inagentleman's family. He was destinedfor the church, but wishing to try hiscareer in literature, came to London in1801, and obtained the editorship of theSt. James's Chronicle. In 1805, hepublished an Inquiry into the Systemof Military Defence in Great Britain,in which he asserted the superiority ofa standing army, with a limited term ofservice, to militia and volunteers. Thiswas followed by his Inquiry into theNature of Civil and Military Subordi-APPENDIX,nation, one of the best works extanton the subject. His last work, Livesof British Statesmen, was undertakenwhen he was in a state of poverty andill health; and " often," says M. Disraeli," the day passed without a meal,but never without a page." Though aparalytic stroke, brought on by overstudy and exhaustion, interrupted hisprogress, he just lived to complete thisproduction ; so that, as M. D' Israeli observes," it was written with the blood ofthe author." He died at the early age oftwenty-seven, having acquired deservedreputation for the manner in which hehad executed the work last-mentioned.SMITH, (Horatio,) was born aboutthe year 1780, and, as well as his brotherJames, followed the profession ofan attorney, at the time of the publicationof their celebrated Rejected Addresses,in 1812. This work became sopopular, as to go speedily through fourteeneditions ; and encouraged the authorsto print their Parodies on Horace,which had previously appeared in TheMonthly Mirror. In 1813, Mr. Smith produceda successful comedy, called FirstImpressions, and a farce, that failed,called The Absent Apothecary; and, notlong afterwards, two novels, called TheRunaway, and Trevanion, or MatrimonialErrors ; each in four volumes. Histhree next productions, are well known,Brambles House, Tor-Hill, andReuben Apsley : the first obtained alarge and merited share of popularity,and was considered not unworthy of theauthor of Waverley. Mr. Smith is afrequent contributor to the periodicalsand annuals ; and, in light literature,is one of the most entertaining writersof our day.Cotton, (CALEB,) was born about1780, and received his education atEton and Cambridge, where he graduatedB.A. in 1801, M.A. in 1804, andobtained a fellowship. Having takenorders, he was presented to the livingof Tiverton, in Devonshire ; and, subsequently,to that of Kew and Petersham.Though this, together with hisfellowship, produced him a handsomeincome, either his eccentricity or necessitiesinduced him to take up his residencein a garret, at a marine storeshop, where he composed his celebratedwork, Bacon. The success of this productionhaving gained him considerablereputation, his disappearance at theperiod of the murder of Weare, withwhom he was supposed to have hadsome gambling transactions, caused arumour to be spread of his assassination; but it afterwards appeared thathe had fled the country to avoid hiscreditors, who had struck a docketagainst him as a wine merchant. Afterpassing two years in America, he proceededto Paris, where he occupiedhimself in the quintuple employmentsof a gamester, picture-dealer, wine-merchant,author, and Parisian correspondentof The Morning Chroniclenewspaper, under the signature ofO. P. Q. He had, in the meantime,been deprived of his church livings, fornon-residence, but he is said to havemore than supplied the loss of his income,by his success at the gamblingsaloons of Paris, where he still resides.Mr. Colton's other productionsare, a poem, called Napoleon ; a Narrativeof the Sandford Ghost, in whichhe avows his belief of supernaturalagency j Remarks on the Talents ofLord Byron, and the tendencies of DonJuan ; and The Conflagration of Moscow,a poem. As an author, his Baconentitles him to a high rank in literature,and, upon the whole, may be considereda work of no less originality thangenius, though the germs of many ofhis ideas are to be traced in Burton'sMaterials for Thinking, and Bacon'sEssays. In person, Mr. Colton hasthe appearance of a military man ; andwhen asked if he is in the army, invariablyreplies, " No ; but I am anofficer of the church militant." Uponthe whole, his countenance is prepossessing; though, occasionally, from intensityof reflection, rather than cynicalseverity, his keen grey eye isovershadowed by an inflection of thebrow, amounting to a scowl. A friend,who visited him at his lodgings in London,describes it as the most singularand ill-furnished apartment he everentered. He kept no servant, lightedhis own fire, and had but one chair fitto sit upon ; yet to this place he wouldinvite a friend, without the least apology,and regale him with what healways had by him, some excellentwieland sears. Notwithstanding hisLITERATURE.extraordinary conduct, he is said to beazealous advocate of virtue, and a sincereadmirer of those writers who haveused the pen in its cause. He was onceso affected by witnessing the death-bedof one of his parishioners, that, onascending his pulpit a few minutesafterwards, he poured forth such anunusual flow of eloquence, that Iriscongregation were agreeably surprised ;but, alas ! says the relator of the anecdote,he was observed, after church, toput his fowling-piece and dogs into hiscabriolet, and drive away to a friend'shouse, to be ready for the next day'sshooting.TAYLOR, (JANE,) born in London,on the 23rd of September, 1733, wasthe daughter of an engraver, who alsoacted as pastor to a dissenting congregationat Colchester, where the subjectof our memoir was educated, and learntthe rudiments of her father's business.Her poetical talents, which she developedat a very early age, were firstmade known to" the public in a workcalled The Minor's Pocket Book, whereher poem of The Beggar Boy appeared,in 1804. The approbation it met withencouraged her to proceed, and sheproduced, in succession, several otherpoems, among which Original Poemsfor Infant Minds, and Rhymes for theNursery, in both of which she wasassisted by her sister, are still popular.In 1815, she produced a work, in prose,entitled Display ; which was shortlyafterwards followed by her last work,entitled Essays, in Rhyme, on Moralsand Manners ; written with taste, elegance,and feeling. Having removed,with her family, to Ongar, in 1810, shedied there, of a pulmonary complaint,in April, 1823. Miss Taylor's worksare almost all composed with a view tothe mental and moral improvement ofyouth, and as such, are deservedlyreckoned among the first and mostuseful of their class.PORTER, (JANE,) daughter of anofficer of dragoons, and the eldest sister01 the late Sir Robert Er Porter, wasborn at Durham, about the year 1784;arid at a very early age began to Jjn"-^trial of her powers of coni f s : o 'f' t hecontributions to the PglKi- oh rnday. About 1800. 'weser, she producedThe Spirit of the Elbe, in threevolumes, a novel of considerable merit,but far inferior to her Thaddeus ofWarsaw, which appeared in 1803, andat once placed her by the side of themost popular novelists of that day. Itwent rapidly through numerous editions,and still maintains its place inpublic favour. Her next novel of TheScottish Chiefs, added greatly to herprevious popularity ; but The Pastor'sFireside, by which it was followed, wasnot quite so successful, though, certainly,above the ordinary run of novels.Miss Porter has also published two volumesof Aphorisms of Sir Philip Sidney,with Remarks; but it is as a novelistalone that she is at all celebrated. Inthis character, she has justly acquired ahigh share of reputation, and is eminentlydistinguished among the writersof fiction, by a lofty tone of thought andfeeling, with which the reader cannotfail to find his heart improved, and hismind elevated.PORTER, (ANN A MARIA,) was bornsome time after the birth of her sisterJane. Her genius was precocious;and, when only thirteen, she producedher Artless Tales, a small work thatgave indications of that fertility of invention,and ease of narration, whichdistinguished her subsequent productions.She next published, in succession,her novels of Walsh Melville, andOctavia ; in the former of which she issaid to have related some incidentsthat occurred to herself. Her succeedingnovels were entitled, The HungarianBrothers ; Don Sebastian, or the Houseof Braganza ; The Recluse of Norway ;The Village of Mariendorft; and TheFast of St. Magdalen ; besides whichshe has published a volume of balladsand romances, and some poems. As anovelist, though, perhaps, inferior toher sister, Miss Anna Maria Por f "will hold a distinguished place - oho "gas that branch of literati" Jsight she col , oquial portion of[eels have all the charm of well-turnedconversation; and, indeed, bothin matter and style, her writings fullywarrant the applause and popularitywhich they have obtained.APPENDIX.HUNT, (LEIGH,) son of the Rev.Isaac Hunt, an American refugee, bya sister of the celebrated painter, West,was born in 1784, and educated atChrist's Hospital. Whilst at school, heshewed his talent Cor poetry by someclever contributions to The JuvenilePreceptor. The chief part of these hepublished, under the title of Juvenilia,in 1801, at which time he was underarticles of clerkship to an attorney ; buthe resigned both the law and a placeunder government, to which he wassubsequently appointed, to engage innewspaper concerns. The first paper,for which he became a regular writer,was The News, in which his dramaticcriticisms were particularly admired.In 1808, he started, in conjunction withhis brother, The Examiner newspaper,which he conducted for many years inamanner that obtained for it a veryextensive sale. The independence andspirit which pervaded its pages, however,more than once exposed him toprosecution by government ; and for alibel on the Prince Regent, he wassentenced to two years' confinement inCheesemonger Lane gaol. In 1810,he commenced a quarterly magazine,called The Reflector; but it was notmore successful than The Liberal, whichhe subsequently published, in conjunctionwith Shelley and Lord Byron ;with the former of whom he had becomeacquainted during his confinementin prison. As a poet, he ischiefly known by his Story of Rimini,a tale of impulse and power," as aneminent writer in The New MonthlyMagazine has called it, " from the beginningto the end, discovering, at thesame time, a delightful play of fancy."There is, however, a mannerism abouthis verse which becomes extremelywearisome ; and amid many simpleBeauties, much common-place mattere ; -* one of themwith a degree of ndicu. . , . , 'yoked the author to a reply* 1 P,we think he succeeds better aT ^essayist than a poet, though his performancesin the former character arecomparatively few. The chief of themwill be found in a collection called TheRound Table, written in conjunctionwith Hazlitt, and, more recently, in TheCompanion and the Indicator, periodicalswhich failed after Mr. Hunt had publisheda few numbers. His Critical Essayson the Performers on the LondonTheatres, appeared in 1808, subsequentto which period he has published, besidesthe works mentioned, Classic Tales,selected from authors of distinguishedgenius; Feast of the Poets ; The Descentof Liberty, a mask ; Foliage, or poems,original and translated; a translationof Tasso's Aminta ; The LiteraryPocket Book; Reminiscences of LordByron and his contemporaries, andsome others of minor importance. Thislast produced no good feeling on thepart of the public towards him, in consequenceof the freedom with which hespoke of the failings of Lord Byron,after having received certain pecuniaryassistance from him during the noblepoet's lifetime.KNOWLES, (JAMES SHERIDAN,)whose father was a teacher of elocution,and a cousin of the author of The Schoolfor Scandal, was born in Cork, aboutthe year 1785. At the early age oftwelve, he is said to have commencedplay-writing, and at fourteen, he wrotethe once favourite little song, entitledThe Welch Harper, and beginningOver the sunny hills I stray." Atsixteen, he composed a tragedy, calledThe Spanish Story ; and at twenty-six,another, entitled The Gipsey, in whichKc-an played the hero, at Waterford,and afterwards, it is said, told theauthor he would have given anythingto have known where he was, in orderthat he might have used it for his first jappearance in London. This was succeededby Brien Boroighme, alteredfrom a piece by a Mr. Mara, which hadextraordinary success at Belfast. Thenext play was Pains Gracchus, performedin the same town, which wasfollowed, in succession, by Virginius,acted first at Glasgow; William Tell;and The Beggar's Daughter of Retinal ,Green, which failed the first night of jits representation. The popularity of jthe preceding plays is still unlimited; and amidst the present dearthi*" r' n Al dramas, Mr. Knowles'sproduct these ' rv ely esteemed.Allowing Win; , ^ f h -poetical delineations ', horace andLITERATURE,ingenious display of stage effect, wearedisposed to consider his plays-as aspecies of refined melo-drama, ratherthan belonging to genuine tragedy. Healways interests and affects us, but heis neither powerful nor sublime ; andin his efforts to catch the style of theelder dramatists, he sometimes shows ushis own defects without recalling to ourminds the beauties of his models. Inperson, Mr. Knowles is of the middlesize, with a ruddy, rough, and jovialaspect ; and is said to be a good-naturedand cordial companion.CUNNINGHAM, (ALLAN,) the sonof humble parents, was born in Scotland,about 1786 ; and, after having receivedan ordinary school education,was apprenticed to a stone mason, andlor some years, followed that business.His poetical taste, which he early developed,attracted the notice and patronageof Sir Walter Scott; and hewas already favourably known to thepublic as an author, when he was selectedby Mr. Chantry, as a sort ofsuperintendent and assistant in thestudio of that eminent sculptor. Mr.Cunningham's principal works are, SirArmature Maxwell ; The Mermaidof Galloway ; The Legend of RichardFaulderj and twenty Scottish songs;four volumes of Songs of Scotland,ancient and modern, with introductionand notes; and Lives of the BritishArchitects, Painters and Sculptors.WILSON, (JOHN,) was born in thenorth of England about 1786; andbeing sent to complete his education atMagdalen College, Oxford, he gainedthe Newgate prize for poetry, in1806. After having graduated B. A.in 1807, and M. A. in 1810, he wentto reside on his estate, near theLake of Windermere, and there cultivatedthe muses with no ordinary devotion.In 1812, he published, atEdinburgh, his celebrated Isle of Palms,and other poems ; a volume that atonce placed him by the side of some ofour most elegant modern poets. Hewas, some time after, appointed professorof moral philosophy in the Universityof Edinburgh, an office he stillholds ; and, in 1818, appeared his Cityf the Plague. He is, however, lesscelebrated for his poetry than for hisconnexion with Blackwood's EdinburghMagazine, of which he is one ofthe most distinguished writers. ProfessorWilson is a man of great learningand ability, possessing considerablejudgment and powerful discriminationas a critic, and the information of ascholar with the taste and imagination ofa poet. He is said to possess equalpowers of mind and body ; to use thesingle-stick with as much vigour as hedoes his pen ; and to be fond of fieldsports, and the exercises of boxing andfencing.LEE, (SAMUEL,) whom his biographer,Archdeacon Corbett, comparesto the admirable Crichton, was bornabout 1788 ; and, at the age of twelve,apprenticed to a carpenter and builder.In the course of six years, during whichtime he worked steadily at his trade, hecontrived to make himself master ofthe Latin, Greek, Hebrew, Chaldee,and Syriac languages, without any otherassistance than was afforded him bysuch books as he picked up at oldbook stalls. Shortly after the expirationof the period above-mentioned, hewas appointed superintendent of acharity-school ; and, in a few months,acquired a knowledge of the Persianand Arabic. Whilst holding this situation,he became acquainted with Dr.Jonathan Scott, to whom, says Mr.Corbett, we may attribute Mr. Lee'ssubsequent engagement with the ChurchMissionary Society ; his admission atQueen's College, Cambridge; and hisordination as a minister of the establishedchurch. His progress in mathematicswas rapid and wonderful ; buthe still directed his principal attentionto the study of oriental languages, andwas, in 1819, made professor of Arabicto the university ; on which occasion,the degree of M. A. was conferred onhim by royal mandate ; and he subsequentlyproceeded B. D. His" services,however, have not been confinedto his duty as a professor ; for, besideshaving translated the Scriptures intoseveral of the oriental languages, andbeing employed by the university tocollate their oriental manuscripts intheir public library, he has published aHebrew grammar, and various otherelementary works connected withoriental studies. He also tdued the RevAPPENDIX.Henry Martyn's Controversial Tractson Christianity and Mohammedanism ;and is the author of a volume forming apart of Messrs. Livingston's TheologicalLibrary, Illustrations of Eastern Manners,Scripture Phraseology, &c.PEAKE, (RICHARD Brindled,) sonof Richard Peake, who was, for fortyyears, in the treasury office of DruryLane Theatre, was born in Gerard Street,Soho, February 19th, 1792. He wasarticled to James Heath, the engraver,with whom he remained eight years ; butrelinquished the arts for the professionof writing for the stage. Mr. Peake'sprincipal dramatic pieces are, The Duel;Hundred Pound Note; ComfortableLodgings; The Haunted Inn; Master'sRival; Wanted a Governess; Amateursand Actors; Walk for a Wager;Gordon the Gypsy; Presumption, orthe Fate of Frankenstein ; Jonathan inEngland; Before Breakfast; CornishMiners; Bottle Imp; Middle Temple;and Spring Lock. He has also writtenthe chief portion of Mr. Mathews's celebratedentertainments of At Home. Inprivate life, Mr. Peake is highly respected,and no less celebrated for hisconversational bons mots. Sir GeorgeSmart, dining, one day, with Barley,was seriously alarmed by a suddenflush of lightning ; Barley relating thisin the green-room : " Ah," said Peake,I do not wonder at Sir George's apprehensionat the lightning, as he wasfully aware that he was a conductor"On a bitter cold day in December,Peake was dining with a friend at theTable d' Hole, at Maurice's, at Calais :when the conversation turning on thesuperiority of French manners, avery frenchified Englishman abused hisown countrymen, and stated, that ingood breeding we were very muchbehind the French. Before the clothwas removed, every foreigner drew hischair round the fire, and completelysh lit out Peake and his friend. Peakevery coolly resumed the argument, andassured the company, that he was notquite satisfied as to the boasted goodbleeding of the French ; but that heand his friend now czna\i\\y found themselvesvery much behind them.HEMAXS, (FELICIA,) was bornabout 1795, ;ind is said to have givenearly proofs of those abilities whichhave since acquired for her productionssuch deserved popularity. Not longafter her debt as an author, she wasresident in Liverpool, where she wasintroduced to Mr. Roscoe, the celebratedauthor of The Lives of the Medici,in whose presence, at an appointedinterview, she is said to have appearedand continued veiled, but from whatcause is not stated. She was united toan officer in the army some time after1829, and is, we believe, now a widow.Her poems, of which the first was publishedin 1806, are, The Restoration ofthe Works of Art to Italy ; Tales andHistoric Scenes, in verse ; The Sceptic ;The Siege of Valencia ; The Last Constantine;The Forest Sanctuary; Recordsof Women, and Songs of theAffections. She has also contributedlargely to the Annuals, and otherperiodicals; and particularly, during thelast two or three years, to the pages ofBlackwood's Magazine. Mrs. Hemans'spoetry is of a melancholy cast, yetpleasing, elegant, and tender ; and, bothin style and feeling, touching and delicate.There is a monotony, however,in her thoughts and expressions, whichbecomes tedious when her compositionsare collected into a volume ; and shetherefore appears to better advantagein a magazine. Among her minorpoems, The Distant Ship may be mentionedas a favourable specimen ; and,indeed', all her smaller compositionsmay be read, separately, with pleasure.A writer in The Edinburgh Reviewhas justly observed of her poetry,that " it may not be the best imaginable,and it may not indicate thevery highest or most commandinggenius ; but it embraces a great deal ofthat which gives the very best poetryits chief power of pleasing."KEATS, (JOHN,) was born in Moor-fields,at a livery-stable, kept by hisgrandfather, on the 29th of October,1796. After having received his educationat a school at Enfield, he wasapprenticed to a surgeon, in Edmonton,and afterwards attended St. Thomas'sHospital, but soon abandoned his profession,and devoted himself to poetry,for which he had early developed anextraordinary capacity. Being encouragedby Mr. Leigh Hunt andLITERATURE.others, he, in 1817, published a volumeof poems ; in the following year, Endymion,a poetic romance ; and, in 1820,his last work, entitled Lamia, Isabella,and other poems. These were all receivedwith general applause, but wereattacked by one review with a virulencewhich was painfully felt by Keats, who,at the time, laboured under other perplexities,besides lying ill of a rapidconsumption. With a full conviction ofhis approaching death, he left Englandfor Italy, and died at Rome, in theNovember of the year last-mentioned ;having observed, a short while previouslyto his dissolution, that he feltthe daisies growing over him. He washandsome in person, and, notwithstandinghis physical weakness, and sensitivenessof mind, is said to have possessedgreat personal courage, and amanly, though' somewhat proud, andindependent spirit. His poetry is ofan original and peculiar cast, thoughunlikely to meet with admirers in anynot possessing, in an equal degree, thesensibility and imagination manifestedby himself. It abounds both withfaults and beauties, but the latter prevail; and, in the opinion of somecritics, are such as to render Keats superiorto any young poet that thiscountry has produced. His fragmentof Hyperion, was highly commendedby Lord Byron, and has been compared" to those bones of enormouscreatures which are occasionally dugup, and remind us of extraordinarytimes."Needle, (HENRY,) son of a mapand heraldic engraver, was born inLondon, on the 29th of January, 1798.After having received the rudimentsof education at an academy at KentishTown, he was articled to an attorney ;and, previous to the expiration of hisclerkship, published a volume of poems,of which Dr. Nathan Drake observes,they cannot but be deemed very extraordinaryefforts indeed, both of tasteand genius ; and as conferring no slightcelebrity on the author, as the namenext to be pronounced, perhaps, afterthose of Chatterton and Kirkee White."In the latter end of 1826, having completedA Series of Lectures on EnglishPoetry, from the days of Chaucer downto those of Cowper, he delivered thewhole of them, first, at the Russell, andsubsequently, in 1827, at the WesternLiterary Institution. His last workwas The Romance of History, and wasso well received, that the publisher,although originally intending that eachperiod of history should be illustratedby a different author, employed Mr.Neele to commence another series, forwhich he had written Blanche of Bourbon,a short while previous to his death,an event which took place on the 7thof February, 1828, when he was foundlifeless in his bed, having committedself-destruction with a razor. The personof Mr. Neele was so short as to beremarkable ; his head singularly large,and his countenance far from handsome;his features, however, had anexpression pleasingly cheerful and vivacious,and his eyes vividly denoted theactive intelligence of his mind, and theardent vigour of his feelings and imagination.The peculiar spirit of melancholywhich breathes throughout hispoems, and was probably the cause ofhis death, was known only to himself;as in society he was particularly animated; his conversation replete withmirth, wit, and gaiety ; and his heart,apparently, the lightest in company.Mr. Neele had some peculiarities : oneof which was that he never ate anyother meat but pork. In addition tothe works already enumerated, he hadcommenced editing a new edition of theplays of Shakspeare, an author forwhom he entertained an enthusiasticreverence ; but the work was given upby the publisher, after a few numbers,in consequence of its not obtaining sufficientcirculation. He also wrote anadmirable essay, under the title ofShakspeare's Supernatural Characters ;which, with several other pieces, proseand poetical, are to be found in hisLiterary Remains, a work publishedshortly after his death.Vandyke, (HARIIY Stone,) wasborn in London, about the year 1798.He was educated at Westmaas, nearRotterdam, and returned to London in1821, principally dependent for supporton remittances from his brother, aplanter in Demerara. He at firstthought of appearing on the stage, butliterature became his ultimate pursuit,though it afforded him but a scantyAPPENDIX.subsistence. His publications are, apoem, called The Gondola; Songs Setto Music ; Theatrical Portraits ; a volumeentitled Batavia Anthology,translated from the Dutch, in conjunctionwith Mr. Boring ; and miscellaneouscontributions to several periodicalworks. He died of consumptionon the 25th of December, 1827. Hispoetry is pleasing and original ; and, asasong writer, though at a considerabledistance from Moore, he, in the presentdearth of poets in this style of composition,certainly comes next after him.Buller, (EDWARD EARLE Lytton,)son of General Bulwer, and descendedfrom an ancient and wealthyfamily in Norfolk, was born in thatcounty, in 1803. His father 'dying in1806, the care of his early youth devolvedupon his mother, who sent him, to completehis education, at the University ofCambridge, where he gained a prize forapoem on sculpture. His first productionwas entitled Weeds and WildFlowers, a collection of poems, publishedin 1826; and was succeeded, in1827, by another metrical attempt,O'Neill, or the Rebel. Neither these,nor his first prose work, a novel, entitledFalkland, which appeared in 1827, attractedparticular notice ; but his Pelham,in 1828, was much read, andgained the author great celebrity. Hehas since published The Disowned,Devereux, and Paul Clifford, all novelsof power and interest, but still inferior,on the whole, to Pelham. There is,however, a certain pedantic coxcombryin his style, which, with some otherdefects, must be got rid of, before Mr.Bulwer can claim to be considered inany other light than, what he undoubtedlyis, a very clever and accomplishedwriter.NORTON, (CAROLINE ELIZABETHSARAH,) grand-daughter of RichardBrinsley Sheridan, was born about1806 ; and, on the 30th of July, 1827,married the Hon. George ChappieNorton, son of the Hon. FletcherNorton, a celebrated Scotch baron ofthe Exchequer, and brother to thepresent Lord Grantly. Independentlyof several miscellaneous pieces in verse,Mrs. Norton is principally known byher two poerns of The Sorrows ofRosalie, and Isbal, or the Undying One.The first, though written when she wasvery young, contains some passagesof beauty, but nothing either verystriking or original. The UndyingOne has procured her some reputation,though we think it has been overrated,even by those reviewers who havemixed up a tolerable degree of censurewith their praise. We should say, however,that it contains many of the ingredientsof poetry, if not poetry itself;and that, considering the age of the fairauthoress, whose personal attractionsare said to equal her mental abilities,something of a much higher order maybeanticipated from her pen than anythingshe has yet given to the public.END OF VOL. III.VittV.ty, Bnnsk* an* Co. Flat Sir. ft, London.