THEGEORGIAN ERA:MEMOIRSOF THE MOST EMINENT PERSONS, WHO HAVEFLOURISHED IN GREAT BRITAIN,FROM THE ACCESSION OF GEORGE THE FIRST TO THEDEMISE OF GEORGE THE FOURTH.IN FOUR VOLUMES.VOLUME I.THE ROYAL FAMILY ;THE PRETENDERS AND THEIR ADHERENTSCHURCHMEN ; DISSENTERS ;AND STATESMEN.LONDON :VIZETELLY, Cranston AND CO. FLEET STREET.MDCCCXXXII.,hs~\v-/PRINTERS,tlKT ITRKET.PREFACE.BIOGRAPHY is generally admitted to be one of the most amusingand instructive subjects in the whole range of literature. It illustrateshistory ; reveals the trifling causes of great events ; renders us familiarwith the character and habits of eminent individuals ; displays theconsequences of human conduct, under its various modifications ; andcombines the fascinations of romance with the sober dignity andsterling value of truth.A strong, and perfectly natural curiosity is felt, even as to thebiography of illustrious persons who have flourished at remote periods,or in foreign climes : but their lives are destitute of that peculiarinterest which is attached to those of our cotemporary fellow-countrymen,and immediate predecessors. Under this conviction, thepresent work has been undertaken. Its object is, to present aluminous view of men and measures during a recent and most importantperiod of British History namely, from the accession ofGeorge the First to the demise of George the Fourth.In comparison with the ELIZABETHAN or the MODERN AUGUSTAN,(as the reign of A nne has been designated,) that which may be appropriatelytermed THE GEORGIAN ERA, possesses a paramount claim tonotice : for not only has it been equally fertile in conspicuous characters,and more prolific of great events, but its influence is actuallyfelt by the existing community of Great Britain. It is renderedmemorable by the accession of a new family to the throne ; by theintrigues and daring exploits the final discomfiture, romantic adventures,and great sufferings, of the Pretenders and their adherents ;by the revolt of the American colonies, and the foundation of amighty empire in the East ; by the awful struggles of this countrywith nearly all the nations of Europe, and the domestic excitementproduced by the French Revolution ; by the mutiny of the fleet,Preface E.the rebellion in Ireland, and the alarm of an invasion ; by thedazzling career of Napoleon, his final overthrow at Waterloo, and thecapture of Paris ; by the military achievements of Granny, Wolfe,Elliott, Conte, Albemarle, Clive, Lake, Cornwallis, Abercromby,Wellington, Moore, Anglesey, Hill, and other distinguished commanders; by the naval victories obtained by Rodney, St. Vincent,Howe, Hawke, Duncan, Hood, and Nelson ; by the successfullabours of 'Cook, Anson, Carteret, Bruce, and other voyagers andtravellers, and the spirited endeavours made to find a north-westpassage ; by the astonishing advance of science in all its branches ;by the discovery of vaccination ; by extraordinary improvementsin manufacture, the vast extension of commerce, the increasedspirit of speculation, the fluctuations of public credit, the SouthSea Scheme, and the Bubble Companies of 1825 ; by controversies ofsingular interest among the dignitaries of the established church, andthe important foundation of Methodism ; by political contests ofalmost unprecedented bitterness, many of them marked by the circumstanceof the heir-apparent supporting the opposition ; by the closeimprisonment of one Queen Consort, and the introduction of a billof pains and penalties against another ; by the repeal of the Testand Corporation Acts, the emancipation of the Catholics, and thestrenuous exertions made to obtain a change in the representation ofthe people ; by the number of masterly productions in literature andthe arts, and by the rapid advancement of general knowledge.The present Work includes memoirs of the most eminent personsin every influential class of life, who have flourished within this importantperiod; and these are properly classified, and chronologicallyarranged in their respective divisions, so as to display a sketch of theprogress of National Events and Public Affairs, Theology and Jurisprudence,Naval and Military Operations, Philosophy and Science,Political and Rural Economy, Inland and Maritime Discovery,Literature, Music, Fine Arts, aid the Drain, not only during thewhole of the GEORGIAN ERA, but for a considerable period previous toits commencement, a retrospective view being necessarily taken ofthe career of those who were living at the accession of the Brunswickfamily to the throne of Great Britain, to which event many of themwere conspicuous accessories, while the memoirs of eminent characters,still in existence, or recently deceased, are, of course, broughtdown only to the termination of the Era, namely, the demise ofGeorge the Fourth.Preface E.By any other system, than that which has been pursued inthese volumes, it would be impossible, perhaps, to deal justly withsuch a vast number of lives in so comparatively limited a space. Inamore extensive work, a biographical dictionary, for example, thememoirs of contemporaries, of fellow-countrymen, of associates inarms, in enterprise, or in policy, are, on account of the alphabeticalarrangement, posited far apart ; the compiler is, therefore, necessarilycompelled to repeat at length the narrative of those public transactions,in which they individually bore a share : while, in these volumes, thelives being classified, general circumstances, after having been statedfully, in the memoir of that individual who has contributed chiefly totheir consummation, are noticed briefly, whenever it becomes necessaryto allude to them again.A few memoirs of eminent persons, accidentally omitted in thebody of the work, are located in Appendices to the respective classes,at the end of each volume, among summary sketches of those whohave been mere satellites to their more illustrious contemporaries.All the lives have been originally compiled, and entirely rewritten; and many of the memoirs, particularly those of recentworthies, are, in the strictest sense of the term, original ; so that,however brief they may appear, they compose all that can begathered, worthy of record, relative to the individuals of whom theytreat.Every possible exertion has been made, both on the part of theEditor and his assistants to elucidate doubtful points, to reconcile conflictingauthorities, and to rectify the errors of preceding writers. Nopublic event, or private anecdote, of interest or importance, has beeneither negligently omitted, or wilfully concealed ; so that, it is hoped,the volumes may be said to form at once a work of entertainment andreference. Reliance has never been placed on any single biography;various authorities have invariably been consulted, and existingmemoirs of cotemporary characters have been corrected by carefulcomparison with each other. A judicious use has also been made ofthe valuable diaries, autobiographies, and original letters of eminentpersons, which have recently been brought to light. Wherever informationwas suspected to lurk, there it has been diligently sought :in addition to the more grave and obvious sources, anecdotal, miscellaneous,and periodical works, even fugitive pieces, and foreignliterature, have been adventurously explored. In many cases,6 PREFACE.reference has been made, with material advantage, to the existingrelatives of departed worthies ; and, in some, an inspection of importantfamily papers has been obtained.The Editor fearlessly asserts an unimpeachable claim to strictimpartiality ; in summing up the characters, he has acted under noinfluence but that of his own judgment. Not only has he spurned anytruckling to party feeling, but that lamentable transmission of error,as well with regard to opinion as matter of fact, from generation togeneration, which arises from the ready faith reposed in the statementsof distinguished authors, he has, in numerous cases, successfullychecked. Laurels, originally awarded by private friendship, bigotedadmiration, or political partisanship, are, in the present Work, tornfrom the brows of the undeserving, and transferred to those of suchmeritorious individuals as have been visited with obloquy, eitherthrough ignorance of their merits, personal pique, public clamour,or party bitterness. Many persons of great abilities have met withno literary advocates ; while others, of doubtful claims, have had theirnothings monster " by adulatory biographers, although treatedwith apathetic indifference by those who were most competent tojudge of their qualities : an attempt has been made to remedy suchevils in these volumes; the judgment pronounced on each individual,being, it is sincerely hoped, commensurate with his merits,however it may differ from his standard reputation.London,January, 1832.CONTENTS.THE ROYAL FAMILY.PageAdelaide, Duchess of Clarence 135Adolphus Fred. Duke of Cambridge 139Alfred, Prince 473Amelia, Princess 141Amelia Sophia, Princess 54Anne, Princess of Orange 53Augusta, Duchess of Brunswick . . 62Augusta, Duchess of Cambridge . . 139Augusta, Princess of Wales 47Augustus Frederick, Duke of Sussex 139Caroline Augusta, Princess 473Caroline Matilda, Queen of Denmark 1 03Caroline, Princess 473Caroline, Queen of George II 29Caroline, Queen of George IV 105Charlotte, Princess, of Saxe Coburg 141Charlotte, Queen of Wirtemberg . . 137Edward Augustus, Duke of York. . 100Edward, Duke of Kent 138Elizabeth Adelaide, Princess 473Elizabeth Caroline, Princess 55Elizabeth Caroline, Princess 473Elizabeth, of Hesse Homberg 473Elizabeth, Princess 473Ernest Aug. Duke of Cumberland. . 138Frederica Charlotte, Duchess of York 129Frederica, Duchess of Cumberland 138PageFrederick Augustus, Duke of York 129Frederick, Prince of Wales 47Frederick William, Prince 473George the First 17George the Second 29George the Third 63George the Fourth 105George Frederick, Prince 473George, Prince 473George William, Prince 473Henry Fred. Duke of Cumberland 101Louisa Anne, Princess 103Louisa, Queen of Denmark 61Mary, Duchess of Gloucester 140Mary, Princess of Hesse 61Octaves, Prince 473Sophia Charlotte, Q. of George III. 63Sophia Dorothea, Queen of George I. 17Sophia Dorothea, Queen of Prussia 46Sophia Matilda, P. of Gloucester. . 473Sophia, Princess 473Victoria, Duchess of Kent 138Victoria, Princess 473William Aug. Duke of Cumberland 55\Villiara Fred. Duke of Gloucester 140William Henry, Duke of Gloucester 101William Henry, Duke of Clarence. . 135CON TENTS.THE PRETENDERS AND THEIR ADHERENTS.Anderson, Robert 478Balmeriuo, Lord 179Bernard), John 474Berwick, Duke of 474Cameron, Archibald 186Cameron, James, of Cochlea 1 85Yarmouth, Earl of 175Coppice, Thomas 478Cromartie, Earl of. 192Pau son, James 479Derwent water, Earl of 182Dickson, Serjeant i 478Forbes, Lord 1 79Forster, Thomas 175Grant, Colquhoun 479Johnstonee, Chevalier de 478Keith, James 476Kenmure, Viscount 1G5Kilmarnock, Earl of. 188Lovat, Lord 1CS)Macdonald, Angus, of Keppoch. . 477Macdonald, Flora 480PageMacgregor, Malcolm 478Mackintosh, Brigadier 1 78Mar.Earlof 172Marischal, Earl 171Murray, Lord Charles 476Murray, Lord George 189Nairn, Lord 166Nithisdale, Earl of. 187Ormond, Duke of 166Perth, Earl of. 192Radcliffe, Charles 184Stewart, Andrew, of Inverhayle . 476Strathallaii, Viscount Ib2Stuart, James Frederick Edward . . 145Stuart, Charles Edward 103Tullibardiue, Marquess of 475Wharton, Duke of 477Widdriugton, Lord 187Wilton, Earl of ItalWoman, Nicholas . . 474York, Cardinal 164THE CHURCH.Atterbury, Bishop of Rochester . . 204Balguy, John 496Balguy, Archdeacon of Winchester 504Barrington, Bishop of Durham 510Bate, Julius 503Bathurst, Bishop of Norwich. 5 1 6Benson, Christopher SL'.sBennett, Bishop of Cloy ne 514Berkeley, Bishop of Cloyue 219Merrimac, William 498Blackburne, Archdeacon of Cleveland 237Bl jmiield, Bishop of London 2U4Bold, John 494Boulter, Archbishop of Armagh . . . 492Burgess, Bishop of Salisbury 520Burnet, Bishop of Salisbury 196Burnet, Thomas 483Burton, John 500Butler, Bishop of Durham 224ChUhull, Edmund 491CONTENTS.Clarke, SamuelCleaver, Bishop of St. AsapbConybeare, Bishop of BristolFolkestone, Bishop of LlandaffCrewe, Bishop of DurhamCumberland, Bishop of Peterboro'Daubeny, Archdeacon of Sarum . .Dawes, Archbishop of YorkDelany, Dean of DownDurham, WilliamDisney, JohnDodd, WilliamDoyle, GeorgeEdwards, ThomasFisher, Bishop of SalisburyFleetwood, Bishop of ElyGibson, Bishop of LondonGisborne, ThomasGrey, RichardGrey, ZacharyHare, Bishop of ChichesterHawker, Robert.Heberr, Bishop of CalcuttaHerring, Archbishop of CanterburyHildesley, Bishop of Sodor and AlanHinchcliffe, Bishop of PeterboroughHoadly, Bishop of WinchesterHolmes, Dean of WinchesterHooper, Bishop of Bath and WellsHome, Bishop of NorwichHorsley, Bishop of St. AsaphHowley, Archbishop of CanterburyHurd, Bishop of WorcesterJackson, Dean of Christchurch. . . .James, Bishop of CalcuttaJones, WilliamJortin, Archdeacon of LondonKate, Bishop of LincolnPagePageKept, Henry. 522Kennett, Bishop of Peterborough . . 203Kennicott, Benjamin 241King, Richard. 518Kirwan, Dean of Killala 259Langton, Bishop of Exeter 495Law, Bishop of Carlisle 234Law, William 497Lloyd, Bishop of Oxford 626Loath, Bishop of London 238Loath, William 486Maddox, Bishop of Worcester 501Magee, Archbishop of Dublin 523Mansellll, Bishop of Bristol 518Mantt, Bishop of Down and Connor 525Marsh, Bishop of Peterborough 521Middleton, Conyers , 218Middleton, Bishop of Calcutta 524Milner, Joseph 512Moss, Dean of Ely. 490Newton, Bishop of Bristol 236Newton, John 506O'Beirne, Bishop of Meath 616Ogden, Samuel 505Paley, Archdeacon of Carlisle 255Pearce, Bishop of Rochester 222Porteus, Bishop of London 249Pott, Archdeacon of London 522Potter, Archbishop of Canterbury 211Powell, Archdeacon of Colchester 505Kennel, Thomas 527Richmond, Legs 525Romaine, William 240Rutherford, Archdeacon of Essex 503Sacheverell, Henry 210Scott, Jaraes 509Scott, Thomas 515Seeker, Archbishop of Canterbury. . 225CONTENTS.Sherlock, Bishop of London 215Shipley, Bishop of St. Asaph 504Shipley, Dean of St. Asaph 514Smalbroke, Bishop of Lichfield 493Smalridge, Bishop of Bristol 487Snape, Andrew 492South, Robert 482Backhouse, Thomas 495Sutton, Archbishop of Canterbury 261Sykes, Arthur Ashley 221Talbot, Bishop of Durham 486Tenison, Archbishop of Canterbury 195Thomas, Bishop of Salisbury 499.Tomline, Bishop of Winchester 519Toady, Augustus Montague 511Johnson, Archdeacon of Richmond 504Travis, Archdeacon of ChesterTucker, Dean of GloucesterVan Milder, Bishop of Durham . .Wake, Archbishop of CanterburyWarburton, Bishop of Gloucester .Waterland, DanielWatson, Bishop of Llandaff.Welchman, Archdeacon of CardiganWells, EdwardWesley, Samuel, the elderWesley, Samuel, the youngerWhiston, WilliamWhitby, DanielWilson, Bishop of Sodor and ManWoolston, ThomasPageTHE SENATE.Althorpe, Viscount 565Auckland, Lord 541)Barnard, Sir John 535Barrel Colonel 544Barrington, Viscount 540Bath, Earl of 285Bathurst, Earl 635Beckford, William 537Bedford, Duke of 539Bexley, Lord 397Bollngbroke, Viscount 281Burdett, Sir Francis 409Burke, Edmund 318Bute, Marquess of. 307Camden, Marquess of 560Canning, George 401Carlisle, Earl of 554Chandos, Duke of 634Charlemont, Earl of 544Chatham, Earl of 300Chesterfield, Earl of 296Colchester, Lord 558Combe, Harvey Christian 556Coningsby, Earl of 530Courtenay, John 548Craggs, James 536Reeves, Thomas 562Dartmouth, Earl of 557Donoughmore, Earl of 557Duigenan, Patrick 546Elliott, Sir Gilbert, Baronet 556Fitzpatrick, Richard 553Fitzwilliam, Earl 553Fox, Charles James 345Francis, Sir Philip 336Goderich, Viscount 417Gordon, Lord 555Grafton, Augustus, Duke of 330CONTENTS.Grafton, Charles, Duke ofPage39S. 563Peel, Sir Robert413Granville, Earl of298Grattan, Henry391Pitt WilliamPortland Duke of334Grey, EarlGuildford, Earl of547Halifax, Earl ofRigby, Richard543548Rockingham, Marquess of329550Hill, Sir Richard, BaronetRussell, Lord JohnSandwich, Earl of420541Holland, Henry Richard, Lord539Seville, Sir George, Baronet .542Huskisson, William542Hutchinson, John HeldSheridan, Richard Brindled .364533Lansdowne, William, Marquess ofLansdawne, Henry, Marquess of. .. 530377Liverpool, Charles, Earl ofLiverpool, Robert Banks, Earl of532559Stanhope, Earl of267Sunderland, Earl of270378Townshend, Viscount268To wnshen d, Charles309Trumbull, Sir William529Methuen, Sir PaulWaithmau, Robert561Wilberforce, WilliamWilkes, John812Norfolk, Duke ofWhitbread, Samuel . . .Onslow, ArthurWhit worth, Earl550Orford, Earl ofWindham, William369Oxford and Mortimer, Earl ofPalette, LordWood, Matthew5G3Wyndham, Sir William636CONTENTS.DISSENTERS.PerHa*.5/8580Hill, Rowland574Bradbury, Thomas568671Jay, William4fi7Calamy, Edmund424Chalmers, Thomas582671}4 9 8Lindsey, Theophilus44yClarke, Adam4Q9Clarke, MatthewNeal, DanielDoddridge, Philip4''9Orton, JobEvans, John. 570Pomfret, SamuelRobinson, RobertFleming, CalebFletcher, John William579577Watts, Isaac. 425Furneaux, PhilipS77Gale, JohnWhitefield, GeorgeGib, Adam . .Williams, DanielGill, JohnHall, RobertTHE ROYAL FAMILY.THE ROYAL FAMILY.GEORGE THE FIRST, AND HIS CONSORTSOPHIA DOROTHEA.THE ancestors of the illustrious Houseof Brunswick may be traced, by the genealogist,up to the year of our Lord390 : they were connected, at an earlyperiod with the royal family of England,by the marriage of Henry, surnamedthe Lion, to Matilda, daughter of Henrythe Second, from whom George the Firstwas lineally descended. His grandfather,George, was one of the sevensons of William, Duke of BrunswickLuxemburg ; who, on the demise of theirfather, in order to support the dignityof their family, resolved that only oneof them should form a matrimonial connexion; the issue of which, it was determined,should eventually succeed toall the honours and possessions of theirhouse. The brothers decided by lotwhich of them should marry ; and thechance fell upon the sixth brother,George. He was accordingly united toAnna Eleanor, daughter of the Landgraveof Hesse Darmstadt; and his son,Ernestusus Augustus, in 1680, becamesole heir to his father and uncles ; thelatter having kept the fraternal compactso faithfully, that Achmet the First said,it would be worth making a journey forthe purpose of beholding them.Ernestusus Augustus, the first Duke ofHanoverian married, in 1658, to Sophia,daughter of Frederick, King of Bohemia,by Matilda, the daughter of Jamesthe First, King of England. This princess(Sophia) was a woman of uncommonbeauty and masculine intellect.At seventy-three, according to a cotemporarywriter, she possessed all thecomeliness and vigour of youth, had notawrinkle in her face, and read withoutspectacles. The chairs of the presence-chamber,and the ornaments of theelectoral chapel, were all embroideredwith her own hands. She was the firmfriend and protector of Leibnitz andother learned men of her day. Shespoke five languages, including English,so well, that by her accent it was doubtfulwhich of them was her native tongue.Her wit was sprightly, her judgmentsolid and penetrating, and her pietyexemplary. The succession of herfamily to the throne of this countryhad long been her darling object; andher death has been attributed to thechagrin she felt at her son's intendedvisit to England being strongly deprecatedby Queen Anne. In the eveningof the 8th of June, 1714, she was caughtin a violent shower of rain, while inher orangery ; and hastening to getunder cover, her attendant remindedher that she was walking too fast,as she had been indisposed for a day ortwo : " I believe I am," she replied,and immediately dropped down andexpired. This event took place whenthe electress was in the eighty-fourthyear of her age.Her son, George Lewis, was born atHanover, on the 28th of May, 1660.Judging from the greataccomplishmentsof his mother, the reader might expectthat his education would have beencareful and complete ; but the contrarywas the fact. His father, Ernestusus,though a man of some talent, feelingno admiration for scholastic acquirements,probably connived at his inattentionto study, which must have beengross indeed, as he never even acquiredthe language of the people, over whom,by the provisions of the act for securingTHE ROYAL FAMILY.a protestant succession, he expected toreign. His morals were most culpablyneglected : he was permitted to abandonhimself to licentious pleasures, apparentlywithout the least restraint ; andhis habits and ideas at length becameirrevocably depraved. It is but justiceto add, that this dissolute young man,at an early period of his life, was, it issaid, so good-natured, as to have beenincapable of wilfully inflicting pain onany human being.Inthe twenty-second year of his agerewas united, against his inclination, to thePrincess Sophia Dorothea, who was thenabout sixteen. Of the causes which ledto this imprudent match, and its unfortunateconsequences, the following is abrief narration : The princess beingthe only child of the Duke of Hell byhis Duchess Leonora D'Emeirs, (awoman of comparatively mean birth,but great beauty,) and the acknowledgedheiress to his dominions, heruncle and aunt, the Elector of Hanoverand his wife, were desirous of formingan union between her and their sonGeorge Lewis, so that the whole Duchyof Luxemburg might devolve upon theirdescendants. Proposals for a marriagewere consequently made by the elector,which met with the decided approbationof the Duke of Hell : but the youngprincess and her mother felt a strongobjection to the alliance; the one, becauseshe disliked her ambitious sister-in-law,the electress, and the other, onaccount of her attachment to a youngPrince of Wolfenbiittel. Nor was theproposed bridegroom himself at allfavourable to the match ; he having, aswell as the princess, set his heart onanother object. The paternal authorityover these young victims to the Molochof political expediency was, however,irresistible ; and they were united onthe 21st of November, 1682.The unfortunate princess was neglected,if not hated, by her husband,almost from the day of their marriage.The palace in which she resided, eitherby his permission or connivance, wasconstantly polluted by the presenceof his mistresses; and, for a period oftenyears, during which she gave birthto two children, afterwards George theSecond, King of England, and SophiaDorothea, Queen of Prussia, she is saidto have endured a series of indignities,which were as irritating as they wereunmerited. The sympathy of her ,Prince Philip, afforded hergreat consolation ; but it unhappilyinvolved her still more deeply in misfortune.Count Philip de Koenigsmarck,who had previously acquired an infamousnotoriety in England, by instigatingsome wretches to assassinate aMr. Thynne, was selected, either by theprince or his sister-in-law, to be thebearer of messages between them. Theimprudent Sophia treated this vainand ambitious man with so much familiarity,as to excite suspicions derogatoryto her honour ; which were considerablyincreased by a report, thatKoenigsmarck had boasted of his peculiarinfluence over her, during adrunken frolic, at the court of Denmark.On his return to Hanover, he wasnarrowly watched, by command of theelector ; who, discovering that stoleninterviews actually took place betweenhis daughter-in-law and the count,peremptorily ordered the latter to joinPrince Philip in Hungary. The count,however, prevailed on the princess toallow him a farewell audience, and hewas admitted to her bed-chamber atmidnight. The elector, by means ofhis emissaries, received immediate intelligenceof the circumstance ; and, inaparoxysm of rage, he placed two ofhis guards in a passage which led tothe apartment of the princess, withorders to intercept Koenigsmarck's retreat,and despatch him on the spot.They, accordingly, stabbed the countto the heart as he attempted to retire,and threw his body into the commonsewer of the palace. The princess wasshortly afterwards placed in confinementat the castle of Fallen, whenceshe was, some time after, removed, onthe approach of a French army, andsent home to her father and mother;but after a year's residence at Hell,notwithstanding the importunities ofher parents that she might remain withthem, she was taken back to Fallen,where she died, a few months onlybefore her husband. She was neveracknowledged by George the First ashis queen ; being, for the last twentyyears of her life, spoken of only asPrincess of Hell.It has been asserted, that the soleobject on her part, in her interviewsGEORGE THE FIRST.with Koenigsmarck, whatever mighthave been his motives, and notwithstandingthe familiarity with which shetreated him, decidedly was to makearrangements for her flight from theelectoral palace, where she was constantlyinsulted by the presence of herhusband's concubines, to seek an asylumin France ; pursuant to the advice of herfriend, Prince Philip, communicated toher through their mutual confidant, thecount. That her crime was merelyimprudence, has been surmised fromthe alleged fact, that George twice madeproposals of reconciliation to her : first,on his father's death; and, secondly,on his accession to the English crown.She, however, indignantly refused hisoffers, saying, " If I am guilty, I am notworthy of him : if I am innocent, he isnot worthy of me !"The taste exhibited by the prince,in the selection of his mistresses, wasoutrageously bad. One of them, MademoiselleSchulemberg, maid of honourto his mother, and afterwards Duchessof Kendal, was so destitute of charms,that one evening, while she was waitingbehind the chair of the electress at aball, the latter said, in English, toMrs. Howard, afterwards Countess ofSuffolk, and one of the mistresses ofGeorge the Second, " Look at that tallmawkin, and think of her being myson's passion !" By this lady, Georgehad a daughter, the Countess of Walsingham,afterwards married to LordChesterfield ; and some reasons exist forsupposing that he was actually unitedto her, by what is denominated,in Germany, a left-handed marriage,which imparts none of the privilegesof royalty to the wife, nor the rights ofinheritance to her children. His otheracknowledged mistress, Madame ,Countess of Platen, afterwardscreated Countess of Darlington,by whom he also had a daughter, thefuture Lady Howe, was an absolutelygigantic figure, as corpulent and ampleas the duchess was long and emaciated.She is described as having had large,fierce, black eyes, rolling beneath loftyarched eye-brows, two acres of cheeksspread with crimson, an ocean of neckthat overflowed and was not distinguishablefrom the lower part of herbody, and no portion of which was restrainedby stays.On the death of his father, in 1698,George succeeded to the electorate;and rather a favourable change tookplace in his character: so that he acquireda degree of respectability which,from his previous follies, could scarcelyhave been anticipated. He was placedat the head of the imperial army, afterthe battle of Blenheim ; but the jealousiesof his confederates induced himto give up his command, after havingretained it during three campaigns.He did not, however, on this occasionwithdraw his own forces from theallied army. iAttached to his native country, andcontented with his electoral dignities,he seems to have viewed his splendidprospects, as the successor to the throneof Great Britain, with remarkable indifference,and to have left his intereststo the gratuitous protection ofhis adherents. Queen Anne, who hadlong been in a declining state, wearied,or to speak more properly, tortured,by the cabals of a divided cabinet, somemembers of which favoured her ownlatent wish for the restoration of herbrother, while the remainder were furiouspartisans of the House of Hanover,at length sunk into a lethargic condition,which terminated in her death, onthe 1st of August, 1714 : and the electorwas immediately proclaimed by thename of George the First.Late in the evening of the 5th ofAugust, Lord Clarendon, the Englishambassador at the court of Hanover,having received an express announcingthe royal demise, repaired with all possiblehaste to the palace of Herenhausen ;at two hours after midnight he enteredthe chamber of the elector, and, kneeling,saluted him King of Great Britain :but the ambassador's homage, it appears,was received with mortifyingserenity.The sovereign appeared to be exceedinglysecure of nis new subjects;for, when some one in his presencespoke of the dangerous principles of thepresbyterians, and alluded to the deathof Charles the First, he replied, with apleasant indifference, " I have nothingto fear, for the king-killers are all on myside." He seemed in no haste to leaveHerenhausen ; nor did he commencehis journey till the 31st of August. Onthe eve of his departure, he ordered theTHE ROYAL FAMILY.excise on provisions to be abolished,and the insolvent debtors throughoutthe electorate to be discharged. Hereached the Hague on the 5th of September,but did not embark until the16th, and arrived at Greenwich on the18th of the same month. He made hispublic entry into London on the 20th ;and his coronation took place withthe usual solemnities on the 20th ofOctober.At the first court which he held, hetreated some of the late queen's ministerswith marked contempt, and otherswith coldness. Lord Oxford was permittedto kiss the king's hand, but receivedno further notice. ChancellorHarcourt,wbo had prepared and broughtwith him a patent for creating theking's eldest son Prince of Wales, wasforthwith turned out of his office. TheDuke of Ormond, who was captain-general,and had come with greatsplendour to pay his court, was informedthat the king had no occasion forhis services, and was not allowed evento come into the royal presence.Pursuant to an order, despatched by theking previously to his departure fromHanover, Bolingbroke had already beendismissed; and his majesty appearedbent on depressing, as much as possible,all the open and secret enemies of hishouse.In the early part of his reign, or, atleast, on his arrival in this country,George the First was far from unpopular; but his decidedly foreign appearanceand manners, when they becameknown, lowered him materially in publicestimation. His two German mistresses,who were created Duchess of Kendal,and Countess of Darlington, shortlyafter his accession, became seriouslyoffensive to the people, by whom theywere satirically called the may-pole andthe elephant and castle. It is relatedof one of these ladies, that being abusedby the mob, she put her head out ofthe coach, and cried, in bad English,"Good people, why you abuse us?We come for all your goods." " Yes,d n you," answered a fellow in thecrowd, " and for our chattels too!"Nor does the king appear to havebeen infinitely delighted with his newsubjects : he sighed for his belovedelectorate, and spoke and acted like aman ill at ease, in a strange house, andlonging to be at home again. " This isa very odd country !" said he : " the firstmorning after my arrival at St. James's,I looked out of the window, and saw apark with walls, and a canal, which theytold me were mine. The next day,Lord Chetwynd, the ranger of my park,sent me a brace of fine carp out of mycanal ; and I was told 1 must give fiveguineas to Lord Chetwynd's man forbringing me my own carp out of myown canal in ;/. // own park !"Of oysters he was remarkably fond ;but, for some time, he could not reconcilehis palate to those of this country." The cursed English oysters," heexclaimed pettishly, " have such a veryqueer taste !" It was at length discovered,by means of a German page, thatoysters, in Hanover, being necessarilyconveyed a considerable distance overland,were always tainted : stale oysters,were, therefore, at once procured, which,it seems, proved exceedingly grateful tothe sovereign's palate.One of the most important circumstancesin the early part of this king'sreign, was the impeachment of someof the Tory leaders for the share theyhad taken in the treaty of Utrecht :and their conduct was visited, in theopinion of a still large and powerful party,with unnecessary rigour. Inflammatorypapers were circulated, to a greatextent, against the new monarch ; oneof these, in allusion to the white horsein the Hanoverian arms, had for itsmotto the following passage from thebook of Revelations : " I looked, andbeheld a pale horse, and his name thatsat on him was Death; and Hell followedwith him !"Various parts of the country wereagitated by tumults; and, at length,about the middle of September, in 1715,the Earl of Mar proclaimed the Pretender,as James the Third, at Castle-townin Scotland. He soon collected anarmy of ten thousand men, and an insurrectionfollowed in Northumberland,under the Earl of Derwentwater ; butthat nobleman was compelled, in theearly part of November, to surrender,with many of his partisans. On the sameday, a bloody, but indecisive battle wasfought at Sheriffdom, between Mar andthe Duke of Argyle. On the 25th ofDecember, the Pretender landed atPeterhead ; but he displayed so littleGEORGE THE FIRST.judgment, his plans were so ill arranged,and the insurrection in his favour metwith such faint support from the EnglishJacobites, that in the February followinghe found it prudent to re-imbark forFrance.A terrible scene of blood and vengeanceensued : the meaner throng ofprisoners suffered without exciting muchsympathy ; but on the condemnationof the Lords Derwentwater, Nithisdale,and Nairnee, with many other noblemen,an universal sentiment of compassionprevailed. In consequence of diverspetitions presented to the house ofpeers, a motion was made, and carriedby a majority of five voices, that thehouse should address the throne to reprievesuch of the condemned lordsas really deserved mercy. But theking haughtily answered, that on thisand all other occasions he would dowhat he thought most consistent withthe dignity of the crown and the safetyof the people. The Countesses of Derwentwaterand Nithisdale, and LadyNairnee, threw themselves at his feet,and with affecting earnestness imploredhim, but in vain, to extend his clemencytowards their unhappy husbands.The Earl of Nithisdale, however, escaped,and some of the other prisonerswere ultimately released, but their pardoncame too late to be graceful. Whenthe great Lord Somers heard of therigour displayed towards the Jacobites,he shed tears, and asked of his informant,if the proscriptions of Marius andScylla were about to be revived.Notwithstanding the severities of theearly part of his reign, some anecdoteshave been adduced to show that theking entertained no feelings of enmitytowards the unfortunate Stuartss ; andthat he was even capable of generouslyexcusing those who evinced attachmentto the exiled family. In oneof his Hanoverian journeys, accordingto Walpole, his coach broke down, andhe sent for aid to a neighbouring chateau.The possessor conveyed the kingto his house, and begged he would acceptof some refreshment. Whilerepast was preparing, George amusedhimself by looking at some paintings ;'and, perceiving among them a portraitof an unknown person, in the robesand with the regalia of the kings ofEngland, he asked whom it represented.His host, with some embarrassment,replied, that in his journeysto Rome, he had become acquaintedwith the Chevalier, to whom he wasindebted for the picture in question.The king instantly removed the distressand confusion of his host, by saying :Upon my word, it is very like thefamily."A military officer, who had beenparticularly intimate with him in Hanover,abstained from paying his usualvisits, as soon as George became Kingof England ; and, on being asked thereason of his absence, said, " I will stillsmoke a pipe with him as Elector ofHanover, but I cannot admit that he isSovereign of Great Britain." Georgenever resented this message, but oftenlamented the loss of his old companion'ssociety.Previously to the king's arrival inthis country, a proclamation had beenissued, offering, in case the Pretendershould land in any part of the Britishisles, the sum of 100,000 for his apprehension.At the first masqueradewhich the king attended in this country,an unknown lady, in a domino, invitedhim to drink a glass of wine at one ofthe side-tables ; he readily assented, andthe lady filling a bumper, said, " Here,mask, the Pretender's health !" Thenfilling another glass, she presented it tothe king, who received it with a smilesaying, " I drink, with all my heart, tothe health of every unfortunate prince."Soon after his accession, the Duchessof Buckinghamshire, natural child ofJames the Second, having been refuseda passage in her carriage through St.James's park (a privilege confined tomembers of the royal family, and thegreat officers of state), wrote a letterto the king, affirming that he was anusurper ; that his claims to the privilegeof going through the park were inferiorto her own ; and otherwise abusing himin very gross terms. Far from beingseriously offended at this epistle, Georgelaughed, and said, " Oh la folle ! lafolle ! qu'on la laisse passer !"Peccadillos like these, it would have^ been not merely undignified but absurdto have visited with the royal displeasure: they occurred too, it seems probable,before any open attempts weremade by the Pretender to deprive theking of his new dominions: and, inTHE ROYAL FAMILY.fact, these anecdotes prove nothing, butthat he pardoned what it would havebeen ridiculous in him to have seriouslynoticed. The offenders were, in twocases, foreigners, over whom, perhaps,he had no power; and in the others,women. The fault of one of them, whodoes not appear to have been even asubject of George the First, consistedin his having a picture of an acquaintance,who happened to be his royalguest's enemy : the others wrote orspoke a few words, not to the Jacobites,but to the king himself. To those whobore arms against him after the Pretenderhad been openly proclaimed inhis dominions, he certainly exhibitedno exalted mercy. Phlegmatic as hehad appeared on taking possession ofthe throne, he suddenly evinced a sanguinetemperament on his rights beingdisputed ; and although, by the laws ofthe land, he was not unjust, he seems tohave been rather ignobly ungenerous.He did not seize the glorious opportunity,which his good fortune, and wemay add, the justice of his causeafforded him, to be greatly lenient to avanquished and prostrate enemy ; butendeavoured to secure his new kingdomby an effusion of blood, which, as itevidently tended to aggravate ratherthan extinguish the discontents of theJacobites, might have been spared withequal security to himself, and advantageto his successor.In 1716 the disaffection to the Houseof Brunswick induced its staunch adherents,the Whigs, who were in office,to propose the famous septennial act ;by which a power was assumed, notmerely of increasing the duration offuture parliaments, but even of prolongingthe existence of that assembly bywhich it was enacted ; so that, althoughonly elected by the nation for threeyears, it conferred on itself the powerof sitting for seven. This iniquitousand totally indefensible bill, after a longand violent struggle, was passed, andof course received the royal assent.In 1717, the king and his ministerswere exceedingly unpopular. Oakenboughs worn on the 29th of May, andwhite roses on the 10th of June, thebirth-day of the Pretender, were thebadges of the disaffected. Oxford, andespecially the University, was the focusof disloyalty ; and it was deemed expedientto send a military force there, inorder to prevent any seditious or treasonableattempts. Cambridge beingmore complaisant, received a royalpresent of books ; and Dr. Trapp wrotethe following epigram on the occasion :Our royal master saw, with heedful eyes,The wanuof hii two Universities:Troops he to Oxford sent, as knowing whyThat learned body wanted loyalty ;But books to Cambridge gave, as well discerningHow that right loyal body wanted leaning.Sir William Browne, retorted, as itwas said, impromptu :The King to Oxford sent a troop of hone,For Tories know no argument but force :With equal care, to Cambridge books he sent,For Whigs allow no force but argument.In this year, during the king's visit toHanover, the Prince of Wales was leftguardian of the realm, in which stationhe acquired such popularity as appearedto revive those feelings of animosity,which his father had exhibited towardshim on previous occasions. He wasordered to remove from St. James'spalace to a private residence; theprincess had permission to accompanyhim, but their children were retainedunder the king's roof. Shortly after,the sovereign forbad all such personsas should visit the prince to enter hispresence. His feelings on this subjectcarried him so far, that he couldlisten to schemes for the exclusion ofhis heir-apparent from the throne,and the consequent restoration of thebanished family. It is even asserted byWalpole, in his Reminiscences, andelsewhere, that Queen Caroline found,in the cabinet of George the First afterhis death, a proposal from Lord Berkeley,for securing the prince, and conveyinghim secretly to America. Areconciliation ultimately took placebetween George the First and his son ;but it appears to have been equallyinsincere on both sides.In 1718, a plan was formed to assassinatethe king, by a political fanatic,named James Shepherd, a youth undernineteen years of age. He had imbibedfrom childhood the highest principlesof monarchical right; and regardingGeorge the First as an usurper, he hadcoolly resolved to put him to death. Onthe 24th of January, he wrote to oneLeake, a conjuring clergyman, that heGEORGE THE FIRST.was certain, if the reigning prince wereremoved, the true king (meaning thePretender) might be restored withoutbloodshed. He offered to invite hismajesty home ; and on his arrival, promisedto smite the usurper in hispalace. He owned the chance of hissuffering a cruel death ; and that hemight the better support it, desired toreceive the holy sacrament daily untilhe made the attempt. Leake, muchalarmed, carried the letter to a magistrate,and Shepherd was apprehended.He gloried in his design, and said ithad been three years in his contemplation.On his trial he disdained tomake any defence, but owned the truthof the charge, and declared he died awilling martyr to his principles. At theplace of execution, he was publicly absolvedby Arne, conjuring priest, anddied with great firmness. His politicalfanaticism seems to have amounted soclearly to positive insanity, that a cell inamadhouse would have been much moreproper for him than a halter at Tyburn.Few circumstances, in the reign ofGeorge the First, were more remarkablethan the formation and bursting of theSouth Sea bubble. ( On the 7th ofApril, 1720, an act was passed, investingthe South Sea Company with powerto take in, by purchase and subscription,both the redeemable and unredeemabledebts of the nation, to theamount of thirty-three millions, at suchrates as should be settled between thecompany and the respective proprietors.In return, the company consented thatthe interest on their original capital ofnine millions four hundred thousandpounds, as well as the interest on thepublic debt, should, after Midsummer,1727, be reduced to four per cent, and beredeemable by parliament. Exclusive ofthis reduction, the company were topay into the exchequer four years anda half purchase of all the long and shortannuities that should be subscribed,and one year's purchase of such longannuities as should not be subscribed ;amounting to seven millions sterling:for raising which sum they were empoweredto open books of subscription,to grant redeemable annuities, and toconvert the money so raised into additionalstock. The dangers of the projectsoon appeared : a wild spirit ofspeculation seized the whole nation ;the successive subscriptions filled withamazing rapidity ; and the directorsdeclared a dividend of thirty per cent,for Christmas, 1720, and fifty per cent,for the next twelve years. The transferprice of stock rose, in a very short time,from one hundred and thirty to onethousand ; so that those who were inthe secret of the plot, were enabled torealize vast fortunes before the bubbleburst. In a few months the stock fellwith greater rapidity than it had risen;and the victims, awaking from theirgolden dreams, found themselves reducedto a deplorable state of distressand ruin. The king, being in Germanywhen this catastrophe happened, wassent for, express, to discuss with hisministers, the means of quelling thedisturbances it had occasioned, and ofrestoring public credit which it hadalmost destroyed. A committee of thehouse of commons proceeded, withgreat diligence, to investigate this disastrousaffair, which was styled, in thereport, a train of the deepest villanyand fraud, hell ever contrived for theruin of any nation. It appeared, thata great number of the parliamentarysupporters of the bill had been bribedby its unprincipled projectors ; and theprofits of the company were found toamount to thirteen millions. Some ofthe guilty parties were heavily mulcted,and many judicious steps were takento relieve their dupes; but the publiccredit had sustained an injury whichit did not recover for many years. Itis curious that France had but just recoveredfrom the effect of a similarmisfortune, in the rise and fall of theMississippi Company, projected by thefamous Law.In 1721, a bill was proposed forthe suppression of blasphemy, whichenacted, that words spoken against thebeing of God, the divinity of Christ,or the Holy Ghost, or the doctrine ofthe Trinity, should be punished, byimprisonment, for an indefinite term,unless the offender would renounce hiserror ; but, after various animated debates,it was rejected. In the samesession, provision was made for payingoff a debt of 550,000, on the civil list,which had been incurred by the profligateexpenditure of some of the ministers.The king, however, declaredit to be his intention to cause a re-THE ROYAL FAMILY.frenchmen to be made in all his futureexpenses.In 1722, the partisans of the Pretenderbegan once more to bestir themselvesin his favour, on the supposition,doubtless, that the shock produced bythe failure of the South Sea projectwould be favourable to their designs.The measures of government, however,were at once so judicious and prompt,that the conspiracy was crushed inembryo. Several noblemen were arrestedon suspicion : Bishop Atterburywas exiled for life ; but only one person,Christopher Layer, a barrister of theTemple, suffered capital punishment.He was convicted of high treason, inenlisting men for the service of thePretender. At this period, a very disgracefultax of 100,000 was levied onthe estates of Roman Catholics.In 1725, a royal message was deliveredto parliament, requiring the sum of500,000, to discharge the debts of thecivil list. This enormous arrear hadbeen incurred in the short space ofthree years ; because, as the messagestated, his majesty had found it impossibleto make any considerable retrenchments.The nation were amazedat this demand, but the money wasvoted by a large majority.In May, 1725, George the First revivedthe ancient Order of the Bath,which had lain dormant since the coronationof Charles the Second, andcelebrated the installation of the newknights, with great pomp, in WestminsterAbbey.In January, 1726, the King encountereda violent storm at sea, on hisreturn from his yearly visit to Hanover ;he was in great danger for two days,and landed, with extreme difficulty, atRye, in Sussex. It would be difficultto give a stronger proof of his attachmentto the electorate, than the alacrityhe displayed in hastening to his belovedcountry the moment he coulddetach himself from the burthen ofpublic business. These visits naturallyexcited discontent in England, andproduced several satirical effusionsagainst the monarch, his ministers, andhis mistresses ; among which, was apoem entitled The Regency, writtenby Samuel, brother of the celebratedJohn Wesley. Of this production, whichappears to have obtained more noticethan it deserved, the following is a specimen:At soon as the wind it came fairly about,That kept the king in, and his euemie* out,lie determined no longer confinement to hear,And thus to the duchess his mind did declare :Quoth he, my dear Kenny, I've been tired a longwhile,With living obscure in this poor little isle ;And now Spain and Pretender have no more mines tospring,I 'in resolved to go home and live like a king.The duchess, in reply, approves of themonarch's intentions ; and after ludicrouslydescribing the Regency, bywhich the kingdom was to be governedduring his absence, she says,On the whole, I'll be hang M, if all over the realm,There are thirteen such fools to be put to the helm jThey haven't sense to sell you, nor are worth beingbought.Tis for that (quoth the King, in very bad French,)I chose them for my Regents, and you for mywench ;And neither, I'm sure, will my trust e'er betray,For the devil won't take you, if I turn you away.Notwithstanding the danger whichhad attended his return from Germanyin 1726, in the following summer, althoughnow an old man, the king determinedon visiting his electorate. He, accordingly,embarked at Greenwich onthe 3rd of June, and landed in Holland onthe 7th. In the progress of his journey,he was attacked with a kind of lethargicparalysis, which he foresaw would bespeedily mortal, and exclaimed to hisattendant, " I am a dead man." Buthis desire to reach his electoral capitalwas so great, that he caused himself tobe carried on to Osnaburg. Havinglost all sense and motion on his arrivalat that place, his further progress wasimpossible; and he died on the llth ofJune, 1727, in the sixty-eighth year ofhis age, and the thirteenth of his reign.He was buried at Hanover, on the 3rdof the following September.The person of the king, says Walpole,is as perfect in my memory as if I sawhim but yesterday: it was that of an elderlyman, rather pale, and exactly likehis pictures and coins ; not tall, of anaspect rather good than august, with adark tie wig, a plain coat, waistcoatand breeches, of snuff-coloured cloth,with stockings of the same colour, anda blue riband over all.In his old age, the king was guiltyGEORGE THE FIRST.of the wickedness and folly of takingan additional mistress. This personwas Anne Brett, eldest daughter, byher second husband, of the repudiatedwife of the Earl of Macclesfield, theunnatural mother of Savage, the poet.We learn from Walpole, that Miss Brettwas very handsome, but dark enough,by her eyes, complexion, and hair, foraSpanish beauty; and that a coronetwas to have rewarded her compliance,had not the king died before it could begranted.He often dined, after shooting, at SirRobert Walpole's house on RichmondHill ; where he indulged his partialityfor punch to such an extent, that theDuchess of Kendal enjoined the Germanswho usually accompanied him,to restrain him from drinking toomuch : but they went about their taskwith so little address, that the kingtook offence, and silenced them bythe coarsest epithets in their mothertongue.He was particularly reserved, andhated the parade of royalty. When hewent to the opera, it was in no state ;nor did he sit in the stage box, or forwards,but behind the Duchess ofKendal and Lady Walsingham, and inthe second box, afterwards allotted tothe maids of honour. His favouriteplay was Henry the Eighth : one nighthe attended closely to the scene inwhich Henry commands Wolsey towrite letters of indemnity to thosecounties, in which the payment oftaxes had been disputed; and he noticed,particularly, Wolsey's whisper toCromwell,Let it be noised,That through our intercession, this retirementAnd pardon comes.You see, George," said he, turningto the Prince of Wales, " what youhave one day to expect !"He appears to have entertained avery low opinion of the political integrityof his courtiers, and the honestyof his household. He laughed at thecomplaints made by Sir Robert Walpoleagainst the Hanoverian, forselling places; and would not believethat the custom was not sanctioned byhis English advisers and attendants.Soon after his first arrival in this country,a favourite cook, whom he hadbrought from Hanover, grew melancholy,and wanted to return home.The king having inquired why hewished to quit his household, the fellowreplied, " I have long served yourmajesty honestly, not suffering anythingto be embezzled in your kitchen;but here, the dishes no sooner comefrom your table, than one steals a fowl,another a pig, a third a joint of meat,a fourth a pie, and so on, till the wholeis gone ; and I cannot bear to seeyour majesty so injured !" The king,laughing heartily, said, " My revenueshere enable me to bear these things ;and, to reconcile you to your place, doyou steal like the rest, and mind youtake enough !" The cook followedthis advice, and soon became a veryexpert thief.The following curious circumstance,with regard to church preferment inthis reign, has been related : The kingwas very partial to Dr. Luckier, andseeing him one day at court, desiredthe Duchess of Lancaster to ask him tojoin his evening party. The doctor,however, declined the honour, sendinghis duty to the king, and hopinghe might be excused just then, as hewas soliciting preferment from the ministers,and feared it might do himharm, should it be known that he hadthe honour of keeping such good company.George laughed, and said, hethought he was right. In a few weeks,Dr. Luckier kissed hands for theDeanery of Peterborough ; and, as herose from kneeling, the king good-humouredlywhispered in his ear,Well, now, doctor, you will not beafraid to come in the evening, I hope."He was equally partial to Dr.Younger, who, when abroad upon histravels, had spent some time at thecourt of Hanover. On his accession,George the First found his reverendacquaintance was deputy-clerk of thecloset. The king eagerly renewed theintimacy that had previously subsistedbetween them ; and in the closet, asthe doctor waited behind the royalchair, the king often talked with himin high Dutch. He used to call himhis little dean ; and was so condescendingto him, that the deputy-clerkwas looked upon as a favourite,and likely to gain higher preferment.This was disagreeable to the ministers,THE ROYAL FAMILY.Dr. Younger being suspected of toryism; and they sent him an officialdischarge. The king soon missed him,and asked what had become of hislittle dean. " He is dead, sir," wasthe reply. " Dead!" said his majesty,I am sorry for it, for I meant to havedone something for him." Shortlyafter, the king went a progress into thewest of England, and, among otherplaces, visited Salisbury ; where, perceivingDr. Younger in the cathedral,he called to him eagerly, and said, " Mylittle dean, I am glad to see you alive ;they told me you were dead : but wherehave you been all this time, and whathas prevented my seeing you as usual ?"The doctor replied, that he had beendismissed from his office ; and that, afterhe had received an official letter, statingthat the king had no further occasionfor his services, he thought that it wouldhave ill become him to have given hismajesty any further trouble. " Oh !"said the king, warmly, " I perceivehow this matter is ; but," added he,with an oath, " you shall be the firstbishop that I will make" It happened,however, that Dr. Younger died beforeany of the bishops, so that he was notbenefited by his sovereign's intentions.Such a barefaced imposition, as isrecorded in the foregoing anecdote,would scarcely have been practised,even on such a king as George theFirst, had he understood the languageof this country ; his knowledgeof which, up to the last day of his life,was exceedingly limited. Prince William,afterwards Duke of Cumberland,when a child, being carried to hisgrandfather on his birth-day, the kingasked him at what hour he rose. " Whenthe chimney-sweepers go about," repliedthe child. " Vat is de chimney-sweep?"inquired the king. " Haveyou been so long in England," said theboy, "and do not know what chimney-sweepersare? Why," continued he,pointing to Lord Finch, afterwardsEarl of Winchelsea, who was a remarkablyswarthy man, " they are likethat man there." Sir Robert Walpole,says Lord Oxford, governed Georgethe First in Latin, his majesty notspeaking English, and his ministers noGerman, nor even French.The king is said to have possessedsome relish for humour. He derivedamusement even from the coarse drolleries,by which his predilection for theelectorate was held up to ridicule by thepoetasters of the day. He once jocoselyasked Doctor Savage why, during hislong stay in Rome, he did not convertthe pope. " Because, sir," replied thedoctor, " I had nothing better than thepapacy to offer his holiness." In theearly part of this reign, a gentleman,living in the city, had been severaltimes brought before the council, on suspicionof Jacobitism, but nothing conclusivecould be proved against him.When the rebellion broke out, the suspectedperson wrote to the secretary ofstate, intimating, that, as of course, atsuch a critical period, he should be apprehendedon a charge of Jacobitism,he begged the favour of being arrestedin the course of a day or two, for inthe following week he intended goinginto Devonshire. The king, on beingasked what he would have done withthis individual, replied, " Pol ! pol !there can be but little harm in one whowrites so pleasantly."About a year before the king'sown death, that of his unfortunateconsort, the Princess of Hell, tookplace : and her royal husband, mostiniquitously, caused her will, togetherwith that of her father, the Duke ofHell, to be burnt; in order, as it wasbelieved, to deprive his own son, thePrince of Wales, of some importantbequests. Walpole declares, that hehad this fact from Queen Caroline.A female fortune-teller had warnedGeorge the First to take care of his wife,as he would not survive her a year ; andthe king gave such credit to the prediction,that, on the eve of his last departureto the continent, he took leaveof his son, and the Princess of Wales,with tears, telling them that he shouldnever see them more. It was certainlyhis own fate that melted him, saysWalpole, not the thought of quittingfor ever two persons he hated. He didhis son the justice to say, " II estfougueux, mais il a de honneur;" butfor Caroline, he termed her, to his confidants," Cette diablesse, madame laprincesse 1"About the same period, in a tendermood, he promised the Duchess ofKendal, that if she survived him, andit were possible for the departed toGEORGE THE FIRST.return to this world, he would makeher a visit. The duchess, on his death,so much expected the accomplishmentof this engagement, that a large raven,or some black fowl, flying into one ofthe windows of her villa, at Isleworth,she was persuaded it was the soul ofher departed monarch, so accoutred,and received and treated it with greatrespect and tenderness.Among the few acts of munificence,or intercession on behalf of the unfortunate,attributed to George the First,are the following : Dining at Guildhallwith the Lord Mayor, a few days afterhis coronation, he ordered 1000 to bepaid into the hands of the sheriffs, forthe relief and discharge of poor debtors.In 1718, several galley slaves, whohad been condemned solely for theirreligion, were liberated at Marseilles,owing to his urgent representations ; andduring the royal progress in 1722, hegave orders for releasing many criminals,and all the prisoners confined fordebt in the gaols of the towns throughwhich he passed, at his own expense.In 1724, he sent a letter to each of theUniversities, declaring his intention toestablish professorships of modern history,with a yearly salary of 400 each :and he further ordered, that his almonershould select twenty-four preachers,from the two Universities, to officiate,alternately, in the chapel at Whitehall,with a stipend of thirty pounds a yeareach.Notwithstanding he professed neverto forsake a friend, to endeavour todojustice to every person, and not tofear any man, on the whole, this monarch'scharacter was the reverse ofadmirable. With scarcely one positivevirtue, he possessed numerous vices. Hisyouth was profligate, his manhood unprincipled,and his old age libidinous.He was upon bad terms with his mother; inflicted the most irreparableinjuries on his wife; and treated hisonly son with malicious harshness.Although he is reported to have saidto a German nobleman, who had congratulatedhim on being sovereign ofGreat Britain and Hanover, " Rathercongratulate me on having such asubject as Newton in the one, and asLeibnitz in the other ;" and notwithstandinghis foundation of the professorshipsof modern history, his donationof the Bishop of Ely's library, whichcost him six thousand guineas, to theUniversity of Cambridge, the inclinationhe exhibited, but which was, itappears, thwarted by his ministers, topresent Defaulters with a valuableliving, and the notice with which hehonoured Vertue, on that artist havingengraved his portrait, from a picture byKneller, George the First evidentlypossessed no taste, either for literatureor science. If genius flourished duringhis reign, it was not on account of royalpatronage. His military talents appearto have been respectable ; and the mannerin which he managed his electoratebefore he became King of England,was highly creditable to his judgment.Toland says, in a pamphlet publishedabout the year 1705, I need give nomore particular proof of his frugalityin laying out the public money, thanthat all the expences of his court, as toeating, drinking, fire, candles, and thelike, are duly paid every Saturdaynight ; the officers of his army receivetheir pay every month, and all thecivil list are cleared every half year.He was greatly annoyed by the wantof confidence in his economy, displayedby his British subjects; lamenting tohis private friends that he had left hiselectorate to become a begging king ;and adding, that he thought it veryhard to be constantly opposed in hisapplication for supplies, which it washis intention to employ for the benefitof the nation.The various treaties in which heengaged, are so numerous and uninteresting,that it would be needlesslytrespassing on the reader's patience, todetail the whole of them. The chiefobjects of his foreign policy seem tohave been the enlargement of his electoraldominions, and the counteractionof attempts threatened, or made, bycontinental powers, in favour of thePretender. After having entered intotreaties of defensive alliance withFrance, Holland, and the Emperor, in1715 he purchased, from Denmark, theDuchies of Bremen and Verdenn, whichthat power had conquered from Sweden.One of the articles of this bargain was,that George the First, as Elector ofHanover, should declare war againstthe Swedish monarch, Charles theTwelfth ; who, on his part, formed anTHE ROYAL FAMILY.alliance with the Czar, one of theobjects of which avowedly was to seatthe Pretender on the throne of GreatBritain. On the death of Charles theTwelfth, the Swedes entered into apacific negotiation with George theFirst, which terminated in the cessionof Bremen and Verdenn to Hanover,for a million of rix-dollars.Prior to this treaty, England hadbecome involved in a war with Spain,arising out of the discontent of thelatter power, at the arrangements madeby the quadruple alliance, with regardto Sicily and Sardinia. The Spanishfleet had been nearly destroyed by anEnglish squadron, under Byng; andLord Cobham had made a descent onSpain, captured Vigo, and destroyedtwo line-of-battle ships, with an immensequantity of naval stores. Spain,on the other hand, had despatched sixthousand troops under the commandof the Duke of Ormond, to raise thestandard of the Pretender, in Scotland ;but the ships, in which they were embarked,received so much damage in astorm off Cape Finisterre, that onlytwo frigates, containing about threehundred men, reached their destination.On landing, they were joined bya few Highlanders ; who, however, weresoon compelled to disperse by theking's forces, and the Spaniards surrenderedthemselves prisoners of war.Humbled by her defeats, Spain, in1721, entered into a treaty of peacewith this country, Secret articles were,at the same time, concluded betweenFrance, Spain, and England, by whichthe latter engaged not to oppose theviews of Spain on Italy, while Spain andFrance guaranteed the possession ofBremen and Verdenn to Hanover. Toinduce Spain to enter into this arrangement,George the First is said to havedeclared his intention of abandoningGibraltar, in a letter, written with hisown hand, to the Spanish king. In1725, when the famous treaty of Viennawas concluded, he suspected, but as itwould seem erroneously, that, bysecret articles between Spain and theemperor, force was to have been employedto put the former in possessionof Gibraltar, and measures taken forsupporting the Pretender's views onthe British crown. That the latter wasone of the objects of the treaty ofVienna, he asserted, in a speech tohis parliament ; but the imperial residentin London denied the allegation,and boldly charged the king withstating a falsehood.Meanwhile, George the First hadformed new defensive alliances withsome of the continental powers; and,supposing Russia to have entered intothe views of Spain and the emperor,he had sent a squadron, under SirCharles Wager, to block up her fleetin the port of Revel ; a measure whichso provoked Russia, that she openlyacceded to the obnoxious treaty ofVienna. Admiral Hosier had also beendespatched to the West Indies, with apowerful fleet, to prevent the Spanishgalleons from quitting their harbours ;but, as he was not authorized to commitany direct hostilities, unless the galleonsput to sea, he remained in a stateof tantalizing inaction, while the Spaniardsremoved their treasures overlandto Panama. Most of the men employedin this absurd expedition, and AdmiralHosier himself, fell victims to the climate.Spain, on the other hand, hadactually attacked Gibraltar, which wasso ably defended by Lord Portmore,that, after the trenches had been openedfour months, no progress was made bythe besiegers. At length the court ofMadrid, at the intervention of that ofVersailles, acceded to terms of accommodation,and the preliminaries of ageneral peace were signed, at Parisonthe 20th of May, 1727.In these transactions, George theFirst acted with no great dignity as amonarch ; and, apparently, with' butlittle feeling for the welfare of hisBritish subjects. Hanover was hishobby : and, by tracing the course ofevents, it will be seen, that the greaterpart, if not all, of the quarrels betweenthis country and foreign powers, duringhis reign, may be attributed, either directlyor remotely, to the king's passionfor the aggrandizement of his trumperyelectorate.GEORGE THE SECOND.GEORGE THE SECOND, AND HIS CONSORT CAROLINE.GEORGE AUGUSTUS, King ofGreat Britain, was the son of Georgethe First, and the unfortunate SophiaDorothea, of Luneburg-Zell. He wasborn at Hanover, on the 30th of October,1683. The Electress Sophia, his grandmother,had the chief direction of hiseducation, which does not appear tohave been better than usually falls tothe lot of princes. Though far from abigot in religion, he was yet superstitious.He is said to have been a firmbeliever in the existence of vampires,and to have been more than once angrywith Sir Robert Walpole, for speakingirreverently of those imaginary bloodsuckers.In 1705, the young prince marriedWilhelmina Dorothea Carolina, eldestdaughter of John Frederick, Margraveof Brandenburg Anspach, by whomhe had several children. During thecampaign of 1708, he served, as a volunteer,under the command of Marlborough; at the battle of Oudenarde,he charged the enemy, at the head ofthe Hanoverian dragoons, with greatbravery, and had his horse killed underhim. Possessing, in a high degree,both the courage and avarice whichadorned and disgraced his militarytutor, the young prince seems to haveimbibed but a very small portion of theduke's professional skill. Prior to thedeath of Queen Anne, the friends ofhis family, in this country, were desirousthat he should make his publicappearance at the English court; butthe queen, it appears, sent the Earlof Clarendon, ambassador to Hanover,to persuade the elector not to permithis son to come over. The electorthought fit to obey the queen's pleasure,though greatly against the will ofhis mother ; which that princess, it isadded, (but the fact is very doubtful,)who was a high-spirited woman, laidso heavily to heart, that she fell sick,and died in a few days after.On the accession of his father to theBritish throne, he was so elated, thathe said, to an English nobleman, " Ihave not one drop of blood in myveins which is not English, and at theservice of my father's subjects." Thisdeclaration was, probably, a genuineeffusion of feeling ; for, although itsubsequently appeared that his politicalaffections were by no means confinedto England, he ever seemed desirousof governing it in a constitutional spirit,according to the measure of his abilityand knowledge.The prince accompanied his fatherto England ; he was shortly afterwardscreated Prince of Wales ; and, duringthe king's visit to Hanover, in 1716,was appointed guardian of the realm.In this situation, however, he excitedthe jealousy of his father. Reports ofhis affability and condescension to allparties were circulated, with an intentionto contrast them with the coldnessand reserve of the king, over whomhe had the great advantage of beingpartially acquainted with the Englishlanguage ; which he is said to havespoken correctly, though with a strongGerman accent. The great popularityof the Princess of Wales also contributedto alienate the king's affectionfrom his son ; and their disagreementand separation formed a tolerably accurateprototype of that which afterwardsoccurred between George the Secondand Prince Frederick.During the differences between Georgethe First and his son, Walpole, and theother leaders of that sub-division of theWhig party, which was out of power,rallied round the prince. It was notlong before Walpole discovered, as hethought, a mode of achieving a triumphover the ministers ; but he objectedagainst the particulars of the schemebeing laid before the prince, " because,"said he, with his usual coarseness, " thefat , his wife, would betray thesecret, and ruin all." This expressionwas afterwards repeated to theprincess ; and, it is said, she naturallyfelt much incensed against Walpole, forspeaking of her in such a manner ; butthe crafty statesman found means topacify her, before she had it in herpower materially to thwart his politicalTHE ROYAL FAMILY.designs. At length, through his interposition,an apparent, although not areal, accommodation of the differencesbetween George the First and theprince was effected. The king gave astrong proof that his jealousy was notextinct, by never again consigning tohis son the government of affairsduring his absence : the prince, however,from the period of the reconciliation,seldom formally opposed hisfather's government, but passed histime chiefly in the society of a fewselect friends; of whom, the Earl ofScarborough, and Sir Spencer Compton,were the most favoured.At the time of his accession, whichtook place on the death of his father,June the llth, 1727, George the Secondbore the character of a prince of highintegrity, honour, and veracity. It isrelated, that on the morning after thenews arrived of the demise of Georgethe First, Lady Suffolk was surprised,on visiting the new queen, to observethe portrait of a lady, in royal robes,hanging up in her majesty's dressing-room; and, in the bed-chamber, a half-lengthof the same person, neither ofwhich Lady S. had ever seen before.They were portraits of the king's mother,which he had hitherto kept concealed,not daring to produce themwhile his father lived. One of themhe is supposed to have afterwards sentback to Hanover; and it may here bementioned, to his credit, that he wasscrupulously exact in keeping in eachcountry whatever belonged to it. Hecaused a knife, fork, and spoon of gold,formerly belonging to Queen Anne,which he well remembered to haveseen on his first arrival in England,to be sent back from Hanover, wherehe discovered them during his first visitto the continent, after he had becomeKing. It is a curious fact, that he couldnot recollect having noticed any thingof consequence, appertaining to the deceasedqueen, about the palace, besidesthose comparatively trifling articles ;such a clearance having been made ofher majesty's jewels, or so rapidly hadthey been distributed by George theFirst among his German mistresses,that the Princess Caroline obtainedonly a pearl necklace.The account of the death of Georgethe First was first brought to Walpole,in a despatch from Townshend, whohad accompanied that monarch to thecontinent. The minister instantly repairedto the palace at Richmond. Thenew king had then retired to take hisusual afternoon nap. On being informedthat his father was dead, he could scarcelybe brought to put faith in the intelligence,until told that the minister waswaiting in the ante-chamber with LordTownshend's despatch. At length, hereceived Walpole, who, kneeling, kissedhis hand, and inquired whom he wouldplease to appoint to draw up the addressto the privy council. " SirSpencer Compton," replied the king,an answer which signified Sir Robert'sdismissal. Sir Spencer was a worthy,formal character, so destitute either ofambition or ability, that on receivingthe king's commands, he actually besought,and availed himself of, Walpole'sassistance in preparing the draft. Theking, during the latter part of hisfather's life, had taken such offence atSir Robert's conduct, as to have frequentlydeclared, that if he came tothe throne, Walpole should never holda post in the administration. SirRobert had, also, as we have alreadyrelated, seriously offended the queen,while Princess of Wales ; but he wonher entirely to his interest, at thiscritical period, by privately acquaintingher, that if he were not turned outof office he would procure her a settlementof 100,000 per annum, to becomepayable on the king's demise.Sir Spencer Compton having publiclyspoken of 60,000 a year as the intendedjointure, her majesty saw thepolicy of forgetting the affront she hadreceived from Walpole, and exertingher powerful influence over the king,in his behalf. " Tell Sir Robert," saidshe, to the messenger who had broughthis proposals, " that the fat hasforgiven him." To the astonishmentof the public, Walpole so completelytriumphed on this occasion, that allthe ministers remained in office, exceptthe Earl of Berkeley, first lord of theadmiralty, who resigned in favour ofAdmiral Byng, Sir Robert's personalfriend.At the first council held by the newsovereign, Dr. Wake, Archbishop ofCanterbury, produced the late king'swill, and delivered it to George theGEORGE THE SECOND.Second ; concluding that, of course, itwould be opened, and publicly read.The monarch, however, quietly put thewill in his pocket, and walked out ofthe room without uttering a word. Thepoor prelate was so astonished, that hewanted either courage or presence ofmind to demand the publication of theinstrument, or, at least, that it shouldbe registered. No one present waswilling to seize an honour which thetrustee declined ; and, as the king neverafter mentioned the will, whispers only,by degrees, informed the public thatit was burnt ; or, at least, that itsinjunctions were not fulfilled. Whatits contents were, has never been positivelyascertained ; but it was reported,that the royal testator had bequeathed40,000 to the Duchess of Kendal, anda large legacy to his daughter, theQueen of Prussia. Of the latter, demandswere said to have been afterwardsfrequently and roughly made byher son, the great Frederick ; betweenwhom, and his uncle, George theSecond, much animosity existed. LordChesterfield, who had married the Countessof Walsingham, the Duchess ofKendal's niece and heiress, resentinghis own proscription at court, was believedto have instituted, or, at least,to have threatened, a suit, for the recoveryof the supposed legacy to hiswife's aunt ; and it was confidentlyasserted, that he received 20,000 indischarge of the claim. Horace Walpole,from whom we have these particulars,further states, that Lady Suffolk madethe only plausible shadow of an excusethat could be offered, for George theSecond's conduct in this affair: shestated, that his father had burnt twowills in his favour ; probably those ofhis maternal grandfather and grandmother,the Duke and Duchess of Hell ;or one of them might, perhaps, havebeen that of his mother. Walpole properlyadds, that the crime of the firstGeorge could only palliate, not justify,the criminality of the second ; for thelatter did not punish the guilty, but theinnocent.The day after the arrival of the newsof the late king's death, the parliamentmet in conformity to the act ofsettlement, and was prorogued by commissionto the 27th. On that day thenew monarch came to the house ofpeers ; and in his speech from thethrone gave the usual assurances oflove for the constitution, and of a determinationto secure the civil andreligious rights of the people. Theopposition was probably paralyzed bythe re-appointment of the old ministers,and business proceeded with but littleimpediment. The entire revenue ofthe civil list, which produced about1 30,000 a year more than the 700,000granted to George the First, was settledon the king for life ; and a jointure of100,000 per annum was voted to thequeen in case she should survive herconsort. On the 17th of July, after aspeech, in which the king expressedhis gratitude for their zeal and affection,parliament was prorogued and shortlyafter dissolved.As the same men were continuedin office, of course the same publicmeasures were pursued as during thelatter part of the preceding reign. Theinterposition of the queen, in politicalaffairs, appears to have operated beneficiallyfor the country. She was notunacquainted with the English constitution;and often prevailed upon theking to consent to measures which heatfirst opposed, because they clashedwith his native predilections for Hanover,or his passion for military glory.Notwithstanding the various amours inwhich he was engaged, he appears tohave loved her as much as he wascapable of loving any woman : a distinctionwhich she well merited ; forshe united much of the gentleness ofthe female character to a masculinestrength of understanding, which oftencame in aid of the king's feebler intellect,and quietly indicated the rightcourse of action, without assuming anymerit for the service. She had the raregood sense to see and acknowledge herown errors, without feeling, or seemingto feel, any distaste towards those whoopposed them. She once formed adesign of shutting up St. James's Park,and asked Sir Robert Walpole what itwould cost to do it. " Only a crown,madam," was the reply ; and she instantlyowned her imprudence with agood-natured smile. When, during theking's absence on the continent, shefound her authority as regent insulted,by the outrageous proceedings of theEdinburgh mob, who had violently putTHE ROYAL FAMILY.Captain Porteus to death, she expressedherself with great indignation, not onlyagainst the authors of the tragedy, butthe magistrates who had suffered it totake place. " Sooner," said she, to theDuke of Argyle, " than submit to suchan insult, I would make Scotland ahunting field!" "In that case, madam,"answered the high-spirited nobleman,I will take leave of your majesty, andgo down to my own country to get myhounds ready." Such a reply wouldhave irritated a weak mind, but itcalmed that of the queen. She disclaimedthe influence she really possessedover her husband, always affecting,as Walpole relates, in the king'scompany, if any one were present, toact the humble, ignorant wife. Evenif the prime minister came on businesswhich had previously been settled betweenhim and the queen, she wouldrise, curtsey, and offer to retire. " There,you see," the king would exclaim, " howmuch I am governed by my wife, asthey say I am ha, ha! it is a finething to be governed by one's wife !"To this the queen would reply, " Oh !sir, I must be vain indeed to pretend togovern your majesty." Thus, by anaffectation of humility, may a strongmind govern a feeble one, which would,perhaps, rebel against any obviousassumption of control.Her political influence excited littleless surprise than did the retention ofthe old ministry, which was the firstinstance of its exertion. As the kingwas known to have a mistress, it wasconsidered by the opposition a matterof course that his wife was a merecypher; and all female power and influencewas supposed to be lodged withMrs. Henrietta Howard, afterwardsCountess of Suffolk. This lady was adaughter of Sir Henry Hobart, ofBuckling, in the county of Norfolk, andthe wife of Charles Howard, who, althougha younger son, eventually succeededto his father's title of Earl ofSuffolk. About the close of QueenAnne's reign, Howard and his wifewent to Hanover with a view of conciliatingthe favour of their futuresovereign. England, however, had nooccasion to mourn for the gold theycarried to Germany, for so limited weretheir circumstances, that Mrs. Howardis said to have sacrificed her beautifulhead of hair to defray the expenses ofa dinner, which her husband found itexpedient to give the Hanoverian ministers.This was at a time when enormousfull-bottomed wigs, which oftencost twenty or thirty guineas each, werein fashion. Mrs. Howard was very muchin favour with the intelligent ElectressSophia, and on her son's accession tothe crown, she was appointed womanof the bedchamber to the Princess ofWales ; whose royal husband, however,does not appear to have entertained anyparticular partiality for Mrs. Howarduntil some time after this period. Themost promising of the young lords andgentlemen of the Whig party in power,and the liveliest and loveliest of theyoung ladies, formed the new court ofthe Prince and Princess of Wales, ontheir arrival in this country. Theapartment of the bed-chamber womenin waiting consequently became thefashionable rendezvous of the mosteminent wits and beauties of the day.Distinguished for universal admiration,even among this 'galaxy, was MissBellenden, one of the maids of honour,whom Horace Walpole describes ashaving a charming air, face, and person,with such agreeable manners, thatshe was afterwards invariably mentionedby her contemporaries as themost perfect creature they had everknown. The prince frequented thewaiting-room, and soon felt a strongerinclination for Miss Bellenden than hehad ever entertained for any otherfemale except his wife. But hisgallantry was indelicate, and his avaricedisgusting. One evening, while sittingby her, he took out his purse andcounted his money over, until the giddygirl lost her patience, and cried out,Sir, I cannot bear it! If you countyour money any more I will go out ofthe room." In fact, her heart was engaged,as the prince, finding his lovefruitless, at length suspected. He waseven so generous as to promise her,that if she would discover the object ofher choice, and would engage not tomarry without his knowledge, he wouldconsent to the match, and be kind toher husband. She gave him thepromise he exacted; and then, lest heshould throw any obstacle in the way,married, without his knowledge. ColonelCampbell, one of the grooms of hisGEORGE THE SECOND.bed-chamber ; and who, long afterwards,succeeded to the title of Duke ofArgyle. The prince never forgave herfor breaking her word ; and whenevershe went to the drawing-room, as fromher husband's situation she was sometimesobliged to do, though tremblingat what she knew she had to undergothere, the prince always stepped up toher and whispered some harsh reproachin her ear.Mrs. Howard now became the prince'sfavourite : it is not probable that lovefor his person had any share in the sacrificeshe made of her virtue ; andGeorge, although amorous, took untohimself a mistress rather to prove he wasnot governed by his wife, and from asilly idea, that gallantry was becoming,than from a fondness for variety. Mrs.Howard would probably have preferredthe advantages of her situation to itseclat ; but secresy would by no meanshave answered the prince's purpose : thelady's husband, of course, became acquaintedwith the intrigue, to which hegave additional publicity, by vociferouslydemanding her before the guardsand other persons, in the quadrangle ofSt. James's palace. He afterwards wrotea letter to her, which he procured theArchbishop of Canterbury to place in thehands of the princess, who was thus affordedthe pleasure of delivering it personallyto her husband's mistress. Someapprehensions, it seems, were entertainedthat Howard would attempt totake possession of his frail spouse byforce ; for, when the usual time arrivedfor the prince and his court to removeto Richmond, as Mrs. Howard, beingonly woman of the bedchamber, couldnot, according to etiquette, be permittedto ride in the same coach with theprincess, where, it was presumed, shewould have been safe, the Duke ofArgyle and his brother took her totheir house at Richmond, several hoursbefore the departure of the prince andprincess from their town residence.Shortly afterwards a negotiation wascommenced with the obstreperoushusband, which ended in his sellinghis wife for a pension of twelve hundreda year.Walpole describes this lady as havingbeen of a just height, well made, extremelyfair, with the finest light brownhair, and features regular and agreeablerather than beautiful. She wasremarkably genteel, and always dressedwith taste and simplicity. Her personalcharms had suffered but little diminutionup to the period of her death, atthe advanced age of seventy-nine. Hermental qualifications were by no meansshining; her eyes and countenanceshowed her character, which was graveand mild. She preserved uncommonrespect to the end of her life, and fromthe propriety and decency of her behaviour,was always treated as if hervirtue had never been questioned ; herfriends even affecting to suppose thather connection with the king had beenconfined to pure friendship.Through the king's disinclination togrant any favours to a mistress, and thequeen's ascendancy over the ministeras well as her consort, Mrs. Howard'sinfluence was so limited, that she succeededonly in very subordinate recommendations,except in procuring a baronyand a good place for her brother.The king had seen and lamented thathis father had been governed by hismistresses, and was so extremely cautiousto avoid a similar error, that theCountess of Yarmouth, the only oneamong his own concubines who possessedany real influence over him,once requested an influential person toprocure a trifling place for one of herservants, but charged him not to mentionto the king that it was at her request; " because," she added, " if it beknown that I have applied, I have nochance of succeeding."Considering her situation, as the establishedmistress of a sovereign, Mrs.Howard's pecuniary acquisitions werebut moderate ; and it appears, althougha rigid economist, she found herselfstraitened for money after her retirementfrom court, on account of thelapse of some annuities which she hadobtained on the lives of persons whomshe survived. Even during the zenithof her favour she was not only subjectto mortifications from the queen, but toinsult from the king, and a slavish attendanceon both. Although the queenused to call her " My good Howard,"she took a malicious pleasure in employingher in the most servile officesabout her person. One day while Mrs.Howard was engaged in putting on thequeen's handkerchief, the king cameTHE ROYAL FAMILY.in, and snatched it off, exclaiming, " Becauseyou have an ugly neck yourselfyou wish to hide her majesty's." Itwas his custom to visit her every eveningat nine ; but with such dull punctuality,that he frequently walked abouthis chamber for ten minutes with hiswatch in his hand, if the stated minutehad not arrived.Mrs. Howard had been early affectedwith deafness ; but the kingappears to have made little or no objectionto her on this score, while shewas young; but after she had passedthe meridian of life, he said, in a letterto the queen, who dreaded his contractingan attachment for a moreblooming beauty, and had even preventedMrs. Howard from leaving thecourt as early as she wished to do,I don't know why you will not letme part with a deaf old woman, ofwhom I am weary." She retired fromher unenviable situation in the palaceabout the year 1735, and her firsthusband being dead, married a Mr.George Berkeley, whom she survived.The remainder of her life was spentin retirement, chiefly at a villa nearTwickenham.We turn with pleasure, from theprivate life of the king, to public affairs.The new parliament assembledon the 23rd of January, 1728, and ministerssoon found that the election hadprocured an accession to the number oftheir supporters in the house. Themembers had hitherto been divided intoTories, Hanoverian, and Jacobites ; butthese appellations were now dropped,and only two political sects were spokenof, namely the court party and thecountry party.Throughout the greater part of thisreign, there seem to have been twopoints of controversy, on which thestrength of ministers was put to theproof in every session ; these were thenational debt and the standing army.The former, on the accession of Georgethe Second, amounted to thirty millions,which was then deemed an enormousamount ; its constant increaseformed a reasonable ground of complaintand alarm ; while demands fornew supplies were made, and invariablygranted, session after session, notwithstandingthe remonstrances of the countryparty, who protested, that governmentincurred large expenses withoutprescience or necessity; and, that therapid increase of the national debt,would, by multiplying the taxes, soonbecome an intolerable burthen, especiallyon the lower classes of the community.In the month of April, 1728, theking paid a visit to Cambridge, with alarge retinue of persons of rank ; andafter dining in the hall of Trinity College,he so far overcame his naturalparsimony, as to present the sum of2,000 to the university, to defray theexpenses of his entertainment.Shortly afterwards, Sir CharlesGotham was sent to Berlin, as ministerplenipotentiary, to propose a marriagebetween the Prince of Wales andthe eldest daughter of his uncle the Kingof Prussia ; and another between theheir-apparent to the throne of Prussia,and the King of England's seconddaughter. His Prussian majesty insisted,in reply, that his heir-apparent wasquite as worthy of the Princess Royalof England, as George the Second'seldest son was of the Princess Royalof Prussia : and that, although he hadno objection to one of the proposedunions taking place, he would not consentto both. The negotiation terminatedby no means amicably betweenthe two monarchs, whose personal enmity,at length, arose to such a height,that they seriously thought of settlingtheir disputes by a duel. George theSecond being at Hanover, and hisroyal brother-in-law at Saltzdahl, nearBrunswick, it was determined that theterritory of. Hilderheim should be theplace of meeting. His Britannic majesty'sintended second was BrigadierGeneral Sutton ; and Colonel Derscheimwas selected to fill that important officeon the part of the King of Prussia.Bock, Frederick's ambassador to thecourt of St. James's, from which hehad been abruptly dismissed, immediatelyrepaired to his master, at Salts; but finding him in a terriblerage with his royal brother-in-law, hedeemed it prudent to feign approbationof the intended combat, and offered tobe the bearer of a challenge. Butshortly afterwards, the king havingbecome a little calmer, he ventured toaddress him in the following manner :Sire, I allow that your majesty'sGEORGE THE SECOND.quarrel is not to be terminated anyother way than by a duel ; but yourmajesty being just recovered from amost serious illness, and your healthnot being yet by any means re-established,a relapse may occur on theday before, or, perhaps, at the veryhour of the important meeting ; and inthat case, what would the world say ?How the King of England would boast !What scandalous constructions mightbe put on the circumstance ! What anodious suspicion of your majesty'scourage might ensue ! Therefore, Iask, if you do not think it would bebetter to take no steps in the affair forafortnight?" The king is said to havereluctantly acquiesced in the proposeddelay ; the challenge was not sent ; andthe ministers on both sides gained sufficienttime to effect a reconciliationbetween the royal disputants.In November, 1730, we find it recorded,that the king and queen, returningfrom Kew Green to St. James's,were overturned in their coach, nearLord Peterborough's, at Parsons' Green,about six in the evening; the windhaving blown out the flambeaux, sothat the coachman could not see theway ; but their majesties received noinjury.In 1732, Sir Robert Walpole broughta bill into parliament, for an extensionof the excise, which excited so violenta clamour, that the proposed measurewas abandoned. Public rejoicing tookplace on this occasion : Walpole wasburned in effigy by the populace ; andthe opposition, elated with their success,soon after made an attempt to repealthe septennial bill, and bring backtriennial parliaments, as settled at therevolution. The motion was rejectedby the majority ; but as on this occasionthe country party seemed to havegained strength, ministers thought properto dissolve the parliament, and tocall another by the same proclamation.In 1736, Frederick, Prince of Wales,was married to Augusta, Princess ofSaxe-gotha, and, soon afterwards, veryserious differences occurred between thesovereign and his son, principally, althoughother grave causes of offenceexisted, on account of the prince havingomitted to acquaint his royal parentswith the pregnancy of the princessuntil the month in which her accouchementtook place ; and having hurriedher, at a most critical period, fromHampton Court to St. James's palace,where she was delivered of the PrincessAugusta two hours after her arrival.The king considered this conduct as aninsult to himself and the queen, andordered his son to quit the palace withhis family as soon as the Princess ofWales could safely be removed. Theheir-apparent accordingly, soon after,retired to Norfolk-house, and became sopositively identified with the opposition,that the king, at length, issued an orderforbidding all those who visited thecourt of the prince and princess to appearin his majesty's presence at anyof the royal palaces.About this period, an English nobleman,who had more than once quietlyendured a gross affront from a peer ofequal rank, was a very assiduous talebearerof the improprieties of the princeto his father, and once even had theaudacity to call the heir-apparent afool ; upon which the king turned shortupon him, and said, " My lor duke, bygar me no tank you for van fine speechof fool ; and learn from me, dat do dehues of Brunswick may have producedas many fools as any van sovereignhues in Europe, it never yet vans knownto produce van coward or poltroon, mylor duke !"In 1737, Walpole brought in a bill tolimit the number of playhouses, and toplace dramatic writings under the censorshipof the lord chamberlain; which,although it was powerfully opposed byLord Chesterfield, as an infringementon the liberties of the press, was carriedthrough both houses of parliament.On the 20th of November in thisyear (1737), Queen Caroline died ofan inflammation in her bowels, andwas buried on the 17th of the followingmonth, in Westminster Abbey. Shehad for some time been ruptured, butuntil her last illness nobody was awareof the fact, except the king, her Germannurse, and one other person. Althoughlabouring under such a dangerouscomplaint, which she was exceedinglyanxious to conceal, she made it so invariablea rule never to refuse a desireof the king, that when the royal familywas at Richmond, she walked severalmiles with him every morning; andmore than once, when she had the-'HiTHE ROYAL FAMILY.gout in her foot, dipped her whole legin cold water to be ready to attend him.The pain, adds Walpole, her bulk, andthe exercise, threw her into such fitsof perspiration as vented the gout ;but those exertions hastened the crisisof her distemper.George the Second always preferredthe queen to any other woman; nordid he ever describe his idea of abeauty, but he drew the picture of hiswife. Sir Robert Walpole, who knewhim well, asserted that the king lovedQueen Caroline's little finger betterthan Lady Suffolk's whole body. Sheis described as having been very handsomeat the time of her marriage, nordid the small pox, which she afterwardstook, materially affect her beauty.Her countenance was indicative either ofmajesty or mildness, as she pleased : hereyes were very expressive, her voicecaptivating, and her hands beautifullysmall, plump, and graceful. In thebeginning of his amour with Madamede Walmoden, the king, who invariablyconfided his attachments to the queen,often said, in his letters from Hanoverto her majesty, " I know you will lovethe Walmoden, because she loves me ;"and so notorious was her acquiescencein his intrigues, that, about this time,Blackburn, the Archbishop of York,told her one day, that he had beentalking to her minister, Walpole, aboutthe new mistress, and was glad to findher majesty was such a sensible womanas to like her husband should diverthimself. In her epistles to the king,who complained of their brevity whenthey were nineteen pages long, she approvedof his incontinence, for which shefurnished him with the excuse that shewas old and unworthy of him. By thusconsenting to, or rather encouraging,his ruling vice, she preserved her influenceover him undiminished, andmade herself the mistress of his mistresses.For some years, however, previouslyto her last fatal illness, the queen'sconstitution seemed gradually to giveway, and she lost much of her habitualcheerfulness, on account, perhaps, ofher constantly struggling to conceal hervexation at the open and shamelesslicentiousness of the king; which, accordingto Walpole, rendered her miserable,notwithstanding her apparentcontent. Her immoral and disgustingacquiescence in her husband's amours,by which, for the sake of securing herown influence over him, she allowedthe palace to become a brothel, hasinduced a suspicion that she had nolove for the king ; and was, therefore,invulnerable to jealousy. The Dukeof Grafton insisted that she loved nobody; and hearing a tale of a Germanprince, for whom she was said to haveentertained an affection before her marriage,he exclaimed, " G d ! madam,I wish I could have seen the man youcould love." " Why," said she, " don'tyou think I love the king?" " G d !madam," replied the duke, " I wish Iwas King of France, and I would besure whether you do or do not."She appears to have taken great delightin ornamental gardening : QueenCaroline, says Daines Barrington, threwa string of ponds, in Hyde Park, intoone, so as to form what is called theSerpentine River, from its being notexactly straight, as all the ponds werebefore. She is likewise well known tohave planted and laid out the gardens,both of Richmond and Kensington,upon a larger scale, and in better tastethan we have any instance of beforethat period. She seems, also, to havebeen the first introducer of expensivebuildings in gardens, if one at LordBarrington's is excepted. The kingdid not interfere with his wife in thesepursuits ; as, he said, he did not carenow she flung her own money away.After her death, however, it was discovered,that she was in debt to thetreasury, to the amount of ,20,000 orupwards.To her eldest son, Frederick, Princeof Wales, notwithstanding the aversionhe displayed towards her, she behaved,for some time, with great kindness ;but, at length, felt so indignant at hisconduct, that she refused to admit himinto her presence, even when she knewherself to be at the point of death.This is an additional proof, to thosealready given, of the stern resolutionwhich has been generally attributedto Queen Caroline by her contemporaries.Her good sense and kindnessof disposition are strikingly exemplifiedin the following anecdote: Oneof the princesses having, without theleast occasion, suffered a lady in wait-georgeTHE SECOND.3Ving to stand by her chair for a considerabletime, when the royal offendercame, as usual, to read to her majestyin the evening, the queen would notpermit her to sit down, but kept herstanding, until she was nearly exhausted; and then, alluding to themanner in which the princess hadtreated the lady in waiting, observed,You are now, my dear, capable offeeling how improper it is, unnecessarilyto make those who are aboutyou the victims of etiquette."She was one of the earliest supportersof inoculation in this country ; having,when Princess of Wales, permitted Dr.Mead, immediately after the success ofthe operation had been ascertained onsome condemned criminals, to inoculatetwo of her daughters.Gay's opera of " Polly " gave hersuch extraordinary offence, that theDuchess of Queensberry, who, out offriendship for the author," thought properto defend it, was ordered to quit thecourt. On this occasion, her gracestated, by letter, to their majesties, thatshe was surprised, and well pleased, atreceiving so agreeable a command asforbidding her the court, where shenever came for diversion, but to bestowa very great civility upon the king andqueen.To the study of divinity, she is saidto have been extremely partial. Shetold Sale, the celebrated oriental scholar,that, during breakfast, she amused herselfby reading Butler's Analogy ofReligion to Human Nature; a bookwhich Hoadly, Bishop of Winchester,said, always gave him the head-ache ifhe only looked into it. She was, however,accused of affecting a fondness forlearning which she did not possess, andher religious opinions were suspectedof having been far from orthodox. Itis even asserted, that she refused totake the sacrament, when ArchbishopPotter went to her for the purpose ofadministering it. The courtiers in theante-room crowded round the prelate,it is added, as he retired, anxiouslyinquiring, " My lord, has the queen received?"but he eluded the question, byreplying most devoutly, "Her majestywas in a heavenly disposition!" Stillit must not be concealed, that she is saidto have died in a manner worthy of aChristian. When very near her end,she inquired of one of the physiciansin attendance, " How long can thislast?" " Your majesty will soon beeased of your pains," was the reply.The sooner the better," said thequeen: and she then most ferventlyengaged in extempore prayer. Shortlyafterwards, she twice desired that coldwater might be thrown over her, to supporther strength, while her family putup a final petition in her behalf. " Prayaloud," said she, " that I may hearyou." She then faintly joined them inrepeating the Lord's prayer ; and, atits conclusion, calmly laid down, wavedher hand, and expired.The king, it appears, duly appreciatedthe loss he sustained by thedeath of his consort. During her illness,he had watched by her bed-side,with unabated attention, and couldscarcely be prevailed on to take anyrest or refreshment. As soon as thefirst emotions of grief had subsided, hedelighted to talk of her, to recount hervirtues, and conjecture how she wouldhave acted on occasions of difficulty.He continued the salaries of all herofficers and nominal servants who werenot taken into his own household, andcommanded a list of her numerousperiodical benefactions to be laid beforehim ; saying, it was his intention thatnobody should be a sufferer by her deathbut himself. Shortly after her demise,Walpole had an interview with theking, who, with a flood of tears gushingfrom his eyes, gave a confidential detailof the inimitable virtues of his royalconsort ; he particularly dwelt on thegreat relief and assistance which hehad found from her noble and calm disposition,in governing so humoursomeand inconstant a people as the English ;adding, that he must, for the future,lead a helpless, disconsolate, and uncomfortablelife, and that he did notknow what to do, nor which way toturn himself.Some time afterwards, one morningbefore his hour of rising, the king saidto Baron Brinkman, one of his Germanattendants, " I hear you have a pictureof my wife, which she gave you, andwhich is a better likeness than any inmy possession ; bring it to me." Whenit was brought, the king seemed greatlyaffected ; and, after a short pause, hesaid, " It is very like ; put it upon theTHE ROYAL FAMILY.chair at the foot of my bed, and leaveit till I ring the bell." At the end oftwo hours, the baron was summoned,and the king said to him, " Take thispicture away ; I never yet saw thewoman worthy to buckle her shoe."Madam de Walmoden, afterwardsLady Yarmouth, who had been theking's mistress at Hanover, duringhis latter visits to his continental dominions,came over to England shortlyafter the death of Queen Caroline.She had two sons, both of whom boreher husband's name, but the youngerof them was suspected to have been theking's child, and consequently obtainedconsiderable homage from the courtiers.Lord Chesterfield, on going to the palaceto kiss hands, when lie was appointedsecretary of state, found a fairyoung lad in the antechamber, whomhe concluded to be Lady Yarmouth'ssupposed son by the king; the earl,accordingly, began to be profuse in hisattentions to the boy, and prodigal inexpressions of prodigious regard for hismamma. When he had done, the ladsaid, " I suppose your lordship takes mefor master Louis ; but I am only SirWilliam Russell, one of the pages."Hitherto, the nation, during the reignof George the Second, had been atpeace ; but it was doubted whetherthe blessing had not been secured bysome sacrifice of public honour. Thisfeeling was so prevalent, that in 1739,the ministry, in spite of their pacificpolicy, were compelled to enter into awar with Spain, on the ground of theinsults and injuries offered to Britishsubjects and their commerce, in SouthAmerica. The first act of open hostilityon our part proved eminentlyauspicious; Admiral Vernon having,with a force deemed very inadequate tothe enterprize, attacked and destroyedthe fortifications of Porto Bello. Thisexploit rendered the war exceedinglypopular ; and supplies were cheerfullygranted for carrying it on with vigour.Anson was sent with a squadron todistress the enemy in the South seas.After an absence of three years, hereturned in his only remaining ship,with which he had gallantly engagedand taken a richly laden Spanish galleon.A powerful armament was alsofitted out against Cartagena, which,as it appears, through gross mismanagement,entirely failed in its object, andtended materially to accelerate theoverthrow of Walpole and his coadjutors.The public voice was againstthem, and the Prince of Wales threwall his influence into the scale of theiropponents. At length, on the 28th ofJanuary, 1742, they were in a minorityof one, on a question relating to theChippenham election; on the 2nd ofFebruary their defeat was more signal ;on the 3rd the house was adjournedto the 18th ; and in the interval Walpoleresigned, and was made Earl ofOrford. When he went to take leaveof the king, his majesty was affectedeven to tears, and frequently sought hisadvice on public affairs, during thebrief period between the minister's politicaldownfal and decease.The king's old and inefficient favourite,the Earl of Wilmington, wasplaced nominally at the head of the newgovernment, with the title of first lordof the treasury; Mr. Sandys was madechancellor of the exchequer, and LordCarteret (afterwards Earl of Granville)one of the secretaries of state. Thesewere the principal changes in office, andthe policy, both internal and external,of the new ministers was soon foundnot to differ materially from that oftheir predecessors.The people had now become disgustedwith naval operations ; theysighed for a renewal of the victoriesin Flanders, and the king warmlysympathized with them in their inclination.Accordingly, on the deathof Charles the Second, France andother foreign powers having conspiredto divest his daughter, Maria Theresa,of her inheritance, George theSecond.who had been guarantee of thepragmatic sanction, sent a body ofBritish and Hanoverian troops intoFlanders to oppose her enemies ; butthe national expectation was most bitterlydisappointed through want of skillin the commanders. A gleam of glory,however, with no permanent advantage,resulted from the battle of Dettingen,which was fought in 1743. The French,in order to prevent the junction of theAustrian and British forces, assembledan army of sixty thousand men uponthe east side of the river Mayne. TheEarl of Stair, to whom the commandof his Britannic majesty's troops hadGEORGE THE SECOND.been entrusted, suffered himself to besurrounded by the enemy, near thevillage of Dettingen ; and had theFrench acted with prudence, the Britishand Hanoverian troops must have beencompelled to surrender. The enemy,however, rashly ventured on making adirect attack, which was so vigorouslyand resolutely met that they were drivenback across the Mayne, with considerableloss. The king himself was presentat this battle, and behaved with his accustomedbravery. He rode a viciouscharger, which carried him, against hiswill, out of the heat of the conflict, to aconsiderable distance : at length, withthe assistance of Ensign, afterwardsGeneral, Trepan, he succeeded instopping the horse, and dismounted,exclaiming, with ludicrous but trulycharacteristic energy, "Aha! now datI am upon mine own legs, I am sure datI sal not run away !" During this battlethe French gens d'armes were repulsedwith great slaughter, in an attack onthe Scotch Greys ; and, many yearsafter, the king, having highly extolledthe martial appearance of some troops,at a review, was sneeringly asked by theFrench ambassador, who was present,if he had ever seen the gens d'armes ;No," replied the king, " but I can tellyou, and so can dey, dat my Greyshave."An ode, in honour of the success ofthe British arms, in 1743, was set tomusic, and frequently performed in thegreat council chamber, at St. James's,before the king and court. His majesty,on these occasions, invariably arrayedhimself in the dress, including the hatand scarf, which he had worn whenserving under Marlborough, at the battleof Oudenarde. In this suit, whichhad become obsolete through the changeof fashion, the king strutted about thecircle, to the great amusement of hiscourt. One day, while thus absurdlyexhibiting himself, some person presentgave utterance to the followinglines :Sure such a day was never known !Such a king ! and such a throne !This couplet was so much relished bythe assembly, as to be repeated in fullchorus. The king, of course, heard it,but had not sufficient acuteness to perceiveits irony ; and one of the courtiershaving applauded it, a general clappingof hands ensued, which so pleased hismajesty, that he expressed himself asbeing highly flattered at the complimentarycouplet, and the civil mannerin which it had been received.The interference of the king at thebattle of Dettingen, so disgusted theEarl of Stair, that he resigned his command,which his majesty subsequentlyconfided to his second son, William,the celebrated Duke of Cumberland,who, in the following year, (1744,) wasdefeated at Fontenoy, with considerableloss ; and the French, during the remainderof the war, maintained a triumphantascendancy over the Britishand Hanoverian troops in Flanders.In 1745, the northern Jacobiteshaving invited the young Pretender toraise his standard in Scotland, CharlesEdward embarked in a French frigate,and landed at the head of a few followers,sometime in the month ofJuly. Having been joined by severalHighland clans, he routed the royaltroops at Preston-Pans, boldly marchedover the borders, and advanced as faras Derby ; but the king's forces, underthe Duke of Cumberland, who hadcome over from Flanders for the purposeof being placed at their head, encounteringthe insurgents at Culloden,on the 16th of April, 1746, obtaineda decisive victory, by which the Pretender'scause was utterly ruined. Theduke acted with horrid barbarity afterthe battle, against the Jacobites, somany of whom were also subsequentlyexecuted, that George the Second, inaspirit of humanity, which does himmuch credit, on being requested to signthe death-warrant of Dr. Cameron, anadherent of the exiled family, exclaimed," Surely too much blood hasalready been spilled for this cause !"The young Pretender escaped withdifficulty to the continent, after a seriesof exceedingly romantic adventures : inone of which, after a reward of 30,000had been proclaimed for his capture,he sought and obtained the protectionof a poor Highlander, named Mac Jan,who was afterwards convicted, and executedat Inverness, for stealing a cowanoffence, it is said, of which he hadbeen guilty, to relieve the dreadful distressof his family. George the Secondfelt much chagrined, when he wasTHE ROYAL FAMILY.made acquainted with the fidelity andfate of poor Mac Jan : and declared,that had his conduct to Charles Edwardbeen communicated to him in time, theHighlander should have been placedabove the necessity of committing thecrime for which he had suffered.The young Pretender is said to havesubsequently visited this country onmore than one occasion, for the purposeof ascertaining the state of public feelingin his favour. The king, it is related,one day asked Lord Wilderness,then secretary of state, where CharlesEdward was? " Upon my word, sire,"was the reply, " I don't exactly know ;I suppose in Italy ; but I'll consultmy last despatches." " Pol, pol !man," said the king, " don't troubleyour head about despatches ; III tell youwhere he is : he is now at No. , inthe Strand, and was last night at Lady's rout. What shall we do withhim ?" Lord Holdernesse proposed callinga council ; but the king said, " No,no ; we can manage the business withouta council. Let him stay where heis at present ; and when the poor manhas amused himself with looking aboutLondon, he will go home again."While the rebellion was raging, hewent one day to the council-board,some time after the members had assembled,and on asking the subject ofdeliberation, he was told, that they wereconsidering how to take care of hissacred person. " Gentlemen," said hismajesty, " take care of yourselves ; formyself, I am resolved to die King ofEngland."Had not the Duke of Cumberlandbeen successful, it is positively asserted,that the king would have personallytaken the field against the rebels ; andno doubt exists, but, had need been,he would have fought for his crown,with courage equal to that displayedby Richard Plantagenet, at the battleof Bosworth.Although he was not destined to drawhis sword, it is stated, that despicableas literature was, in his opinion, he actuallywielded a pen in support of hisrights ; having corrected the proofs forDress, of a pamphlet against the Jacobites,written, at Earl Gower's request,by Dr. Webster.Before the battle of Culloden, additionaltroops being required to actagainst the rebels, the king was exceedinglydesirous of strengthening hisforces in the north by those regimentsof the guards which had recently arrivedfrom the continent ; where, althoughthe campaign was by no means fortunate,they had eminently distinguishedthemselves ; but he felt some delicacyin calling upon them to march againstan enemy, so recently after their fatiguesand exploits abroad. In this dilemma,by the advice of an experienced general,he called a military levee, at whichthe principal officers of the guardsattended, to whom he delivered thefollowing brief but exceedingly busi-ness-like speech: "Gentlemen, youcannot be ignorant of the present precarioussituation of the country ; andthough I have had such recent instancesof your exertions, the necessity of thetimes, and the knowledge I have of yourhearts, induce me to demand your servicesagain. All of you who are willingto meet the rebels hold up your righthands ; all you who may, from particularreasons, feel it an inconvenience,hold up your left." In an instant, everyofficer elevated his right hand ; and theking was so affected at their alacrity,that he burst into tears and immediatelyretired. The next day the guardsmarched to Finchley ; and Hogarth, asit is well known, some time afterwardspainted a humorous picture on thissubject, which he had determined todedicate to George the Second, butaltered his resolution on account of thefollowing dialogue, which took place betweenthe king and a nobleman in waiting: " Who is dis Hogarth ? "inquiredthe king. " A painter, my liege," wasthe reply. " I hate painting, and poetrytoo," quoth the sovereign ; " eider deone nor de oder ever did any good."The picture, please your majesty, mustundoubtedly be considered as a burlesque."" What, a painter burlesque asoldier ! He deserves to be sickened forhis insolence. Away wit his trumpery !"Dull as George the Second evidentlywas, he does not appear to have beenaltogether inaccessible to broad humour.On one occasion, during his returnthrough Holland from Hanover, hiscarriage broke down, and he wascompelled to seek shelter and refreshment,with Lord Delaware, and three orfour of his servants, at a Dutch publicGEORGE THE SECOND.house, the master of which chargednearly a hundred pounds for the royalentertainment, which merely consisted ofcoffee for the king and his lordship, andgin for the attendants. " Are coffee andgin very rare articles in these parts?"inquired Lord Delaware. " No, but kingsare," replied the Dutchman. The kinglaughed at this reply, called the fellow aclever rogue, and ordered the bill to bepaid. After he had ceased to attendthe theatres, Macklin's farce of Love ala Mode having been acted with muchapplause, he sent for the manuscript,and had it read to him, by a sedateold Hanoverian gentleman, who, beingbut little acquainted with English, spenteleven weeks in puzzling out the author'smeaning. The king, however, it issaid, was much pleased with the piece,and highly enjoyed the Irishman's gettingthe better of his rivals, and gainingthe lady's hand. He is reported, also,to have had his risibility greatly excitedby the following ludicrous circumstance:Heidegger, who was a sort ofreformer of masquerades and operas,and who is celebrated in the Taller asthe Swiss Count, having been purposelymade drunk at an entertainment givenby the Duke of Montague, at the DevilTavern, near Temple Bar, he was laidon a bed, in a state of insensibility ; andMiss Salmon was introduced to take amould of his face, from which an excellentcast was afterwards made, and colouredin imitation of life. The dukenext procured a suit of clothes exactlyresembling Heidegger's ; in which, withthe assistance of the mask, a person ofHeidegger's height and bulk was engagedto personate the latter, at a masquerade,conducted by Heidegger, andhonoured by the presence of his majestyand the Countess of Yarmouth.No sooner was the king seated, thanHeidegger ordered the musicians toplay the national anthem; but immediatelythat his back was turned,the false Heidegger appeared, andcommanded them to strike up the Jacobitemeasure of " Over the water toCharley." AH who were not in theplot felt woefully dismayed. Heideggerstamped liked a madman, and the kingand the countess, who had, doubtless,been let into the secret, laughed immoderately." God save the King" wasre-commenced, and Heidegger againretired; but he had only proceeded tothe next room, when his malicious facsimileappeared in the gallery, and,imitating Heidegger's voice and manner,swore at the musicians, and enjoinedthem on pain of his displeasureto resume "Over the water toCharley." The orchestra obeyed, and arepetition of the previous scene ensued.At, length the duke told the amazedHeidegger that the king was in aviolent passion ; and that he had bettergo to his majesty and beg pardon for themusicians, who were evidently mad.Heidegger accordingly approached theking, and was about to make a humbleapology, when the counterfeit advanced,and protested that the obnoxious tunehad not been played at his instigation.It is clearly," said he, pointing tothe true Heidegger, " the work of thatdevil in my likeness." Heidegger, whohad not seen his imitator before, stared,turned pale, and could not utter a word.The counterfeit was then directed toterminate the hoax by taking off hismask.The king felt very indignant at beingopposed, as he frequently was, by hisministers, and sometimes obstinatelypersisted in having his own way. Perceivingthat the name of a general,whom he admired, was omitted in alist of promotions, his majesty inquiredfor what reason that particular person'sname had been so unaccountably passedover. " The man is mad," replied theminister. " Oh ! is he ?" said the king,then let him be advanced and employed,so that he may have an opportunityof biting a few of my othergenerals."A somewhat similar instance of theking's opposition to the wishes of hisministers, with regard to a military promotion,has been recorded. An officer,named Otway, having the rank of colonelin the service, was advised by hisfriends to present a statement to theking, complaining that several juniorcolonels had been appointed to regimentsover his head. He accordinglyemployed the chaplain of his corps todraw up the necessary petition to hismajesty, which concluded with the usualwords," " And your petitioner shall everpray," &c. The colonel objected to thisphrase, and said to the chaplain, " Youhave ended the petition as though itTHE ROYAL FAMILY.were your own." The chaplain in vaincontended that the conclusion was regular; the colonel insisting that, as thepetition came from a soldier, and not aclergyman, fight ought to be substitutedfor pray ; and it was eventuallyforwarded to the king with this termination: " And your petitioner shallever fight," &c. The king was muchpleased at the oddity of the expression,and soon afterwards gave Otway a vacantregiment, which the ministers wereexceedingly desirous of bestowing onone of their supporters in parliament.We find another case, in which a bravesoldier was, perhaps, as much indebtedto his ludicrous ignorance, as to hisservices, for the king's favour. At thetermination of that glorious battle, inwhich Wolfe expired in the arms ofvictory, a gallant Scot, named DonaldMacpherson, sat down by a heap of theenemy who had fallen victims to hisprowess, and after wiping the perspirationfrom his sunburnt brow, regaledhis nostrils with a hearty pinch of snuff.The king having heard of the circumstance,on the regiment's return fromCanada, expressed a desire to see thevaliant old highlander, who was accordinglytaken to court by his captain,and introduced to the royal presence.The king graciously presented his handfor Donald to kiss ; but the old soldier,being totally ignorant of the ceremoniesof a palace, thought his majesty wantedsnuff, and thrust his horn into the royalhand, to which he gave a very heartysqueeze. The sovereign laughed, tooka pinch from the horn in great goodhumour, and, as it appears, withoutasking any one's leave, made Donalda lieutenant, with liberty to retire onhalf-pay for life.A young lieutenant of marines, whohad lost both his legs at the siege of FortSt. Philip, having in vain memorializedfor some addition to his half-pay, atlength represented his case to theking, who not only presented himwith 500 smart money, but insistedon his being granted a pension of 200a year.In the contest of obstinacy betweenthe king and his "faithful servants,"the latter, however, were frequentlysuccessful. A lucrative office havingbecome vacant, his majesty promisedit to one of his personal friends ; but hisministers determined that it should begiven to an adherent of their own. Theking was made acquainted with theirresolution, and when Lord Chesterfieldwent to him with the blank appointmentfor the purpose of asking, as amatter of form, in whose name it shouldbe filled up, the king exclaimed pettishly," Give it to Beelzebub, if youlike. " Would it please your majesty,"asked the earl, taking up a pen, " thatthe document should be addressed asusual, ' To our trusty and well-belovedcousin?' " The king smiled, andLord Chesterfield, who had come preparedfor an angry discussion, carriedhis point without difficulty.Soon after the rebellion, the king feltso disgusted at the conduct of the ministry,who, he stated, held him completelyin thraldom, that he solicited the Earlof Bath's assistance in re-modelling theadministration. The earl, rather reluctantly,consented, and some stepswere taken to further the sovereign'swishes; but the ministers, having obtainedinformation of what had transpired,before the king's plans werematured, threw him into a state of thegreatest consternation by unexpectedlyresigning their offices. In a few daysthey were recalled, although the king,whom circumstances had placed in theirpower, felt so indignant against them,that he begged the Earl of Bath to exposethe whole transaction in a pamphlet." Rub it in their noses," said he,and if it be possible, make themashamed." An account of the affairwas accordingly written, but neverpublished, the manuscript having been,either accidentally or designedly, burntby the author.In 1748, the war, from which Englandhad derived neither honour nor advantage,was terminated by the treatyof Aix-la-chapelle.The long enmity that had subsistedbetween George the Second and hisson Frederick, Prince of Wales, wasterminated by the death of the latterin 1751. The king was playing cardswhen he received intelligence of thisevent, and we have two opposite versionsof his behaviour on the occasion.According to one of them, he evinced noemotion or grief, but rose calmly fromhis seat, and leaning over the chair ofLady Yarmouth, whispered to her inGEORGE THE SECOND.German, " Freddy is dead." Accordingto the other account, he approachedthe countess, looking extremely paleand shocked, and said to her, in a lowtone, " II est mort!" Walpole states,that, a few days after, the king went tosee the princess, when a chair of statebeing placed for him he refused it, andsat down on the couch by her side andwept with her. His subsequent behaviourto the princess, was, on thewhole, much more kind and affectionatethan probably she had anticipated. Althoughno precedent existed for theappointment of a female to the regency,on the death of a reigning sovereign,during the minority of the heir-apparent,and notwithstanding the chagrinof the king's son, William, Duke ofCumberland, who appears to have fullyexpected the important trust wouldhave been confided to him, one of theearliest measures of government, afterFrederick's demise, was a legislativeenactment, by which the princess dowagerwas named regent, in the eventof the king's demise before the heir-apparentshould have attained the ageof royal majority.In 1755, serious disputes occurredbetween Great Britain and France, relativeto their respective possessions inCanada, which produced hostilities betweenthe two nations in the followingyear. Although the fall of Majorca, thelamentable affair of Admiral Byng, thecapitulation of an Hanoverian army,which had been placed under the commandof the Duke of Cumberland, andthe consequent loss of the electorate,were very inglorious to this country, thewar, at length, under the spirited administrationof the great Pitt, afterwardsEarl of Chatham, was prosecuted withsuch vigour, that the British arms weretriumphant in every quarter of theglobe. France lost her power in theEast Indies ; Guadaloupe and Senegalwere taken ; the battle of Minded, insome measure, retrieved the nationalhonour in Germany; an expedition,under the gallant Wolfe, was eminentlysuccessful at Quebec, and the whole ofCanada yielded to the British troops.On account of his long opposition togovernment, which had rendered himobnoxious to the king, Pitt found it rathera difficult task to achieve his ascendancy;and the more so as George the Secondhad conceived a very early and violentantipathy to that great minister's nominalcoadjutor, the Duke of Newcastle ;particularly on account of his grace'sdeficiency in method and exactness,which the king considered as cardinalvirtues in a statesman. He said, onone occasion, to a confidant, " You seeI am compelled to take the Duke ofNewcastle as my minister, who is not fitto be chamberlain in the smallest courtof Germany."At one period, while his grace was inpower, many serious complaints weremade relative to the settlement of publicaccounts. The king, at length, becameacquainted with the alleged grievances,and warmly remonstrated with the dukeon his carelessness and inattention ; protestingthat he was determined, at oncefor his own satisfaction and that of hisaggrieved people, to look into thepapers himself. " Is your majesty inearnest ?" asked the duke. The kingreplied in the affirmative, and the dukepromised to send him the accounts.At an early hour on the followingmorning, the king was disturbed by anextraordinary noise in the court-yardof his palace, and, looking out of thewindow, he perceived a cart or a wagonladen with books and papers, which, oninquiry, he found had been sent by theDuke of Newcastle. Shortly afterwardsthe minister himself appeared, and theking asked him what he meant bysending a wagon-load of stationery tothe palace. " These are the documentsrelative to the public accounts,"replied his grace, " which your majestyinsisted on examining ; and there is noother mode of forwarding them exceptby carts or wagons. I expect a secondload will arrive in a few minutes."Then, my lord duke," replied theking, " you may make a bonfire ofthem for me. I would rather be agalley-slave than go through the rubbish; so away with it, and countermandthe cart which you say is coming ; butpray let me hear no more complaints onthis subject."On another occasion, he sent, in a fury,for the duke's brother, Mr. Pelham,and inquired, in a coarse and angrymanner, why the civil list had not beenpaid. Pelham replied that he had beencompelled to use the money for somepublic and more important purpose.THE ROYAL FAMILY.The king, however, would not admitof this excuse ; and swore, if the arrearswere not instantly paid, he would getanother minister. " I am determined,"said he, " not to be the only master inmy dominions who does not pay hisservants' wages." One day, it appears,that he was actually without a shillingin his pocket; for it is related that ahalf idiot labourer, while the king wasinspecting the progress of some repairsat Kensington, having asked his majestyfor something to drink, the king,although offended, was yet ashamed torefuse the fellow, and put his hand intothe usual receptacle of his cash ; but,to his surprise and confusion, found itempty. " I have no money," said he,angrily. " Nor I either," quoth thelabourer ; " and for my part, I can'tthink what has become of it all."The latter years of George theSecond's life were passed as regularly asclock-work. At night he had cards inthe apartment of his daughters, thePrincesses Amelia and Caroline, withLady Yarmouth, two or three of thelate queen's ladies, and as many of themost favoured officers of his own household.Every Saturday in summer, hecarried that uniform party, but withouthis daughters, to dine at Richmond.They went in coaches and six, in themiddle of the day, with the heavyhorse-guards kicking up the dust beforethem, dined, walked an hour in thegarden, and returned in the same dustyparade ; and his majesty fancied himselfthe most lively prince in Europe.But although willing to be consideredgallant to the last, it seems the kingwas too wise to take a young wife inhis old days. When he was in Germany,in 1755, the Duchess of BrunswickWolfenbiittel waited on him withher unmarried daughters j the elder ofwhom was so handsome and accomplishedthat the king wished his grandson,the heir-apparent, to marry her;who, however, influenced by his mother,declined the match. The king, on thisoccasion, told Lord Waldegrave, withgreat eagerness, that had he been onlytwenty years younger, she should nothave been subjected to a refusal fromthe Prince of Wales, for he would atonce have made her Queen of England.Shortly before the king's death, anembarrassing accident happened atcourt. The Duchess of Hamilton, previouslythe beautiful Miss Gunning, waspresented to his majesty on her marriage:the king was greatly pleased withher natural elegance and artlessness ofmanner, and indulged in a long conversationwith her, in the course ofwhich he inquired what striking publicsights she had witnessed. " Oh !" saidthe thoughtless duchess, " I have seenso much, that there is only one sight inthe world which I wish to behold, andthat is a coronation." The lady was notconscious of the slip she had made, tillthe king took her hand, and, with a sigh,exclaimed, " I apprehend you have notlong to wait ; you will soon have yourdesire."On the 25th of October, 1760, he roseabout his usual hour of seven, withoutany apparent indisposition. He calledhis page, drank his chocolate, and inquiredthe direction of the wind, as ifanxious for the arrival of the foreignmails : he then opened the window, andsaid he would walk in the gardens. Thispassed while the page attended him atbreakfast ; but shortly after leaving theroom, the page heard a deep sigh, immediatelyfollowed by a heavy fall, andreturning hastily, found the king haddropped from his seat, as if in attemptingto ring the bell ; he said faintly,Call Amelia," and then expired. Hewas instantly raised, and laid upon thebed ; the princess came as quickly aspossible, and was told, on entering theroom, that her father was no more ; butbeing a little deaf, she did not understandwhat was said ; she, therefore, ranup to the bed-side, and stooped tenderlyover the king, thinking he might wishto speak to her in a low voice, but thendiscovered, to her horror and astonishment,that he was dead. On openingthe body, all the vital parts appeared tohave been in a decaying state, but theimmediate cause of his death was arupture of the right ventricle of hisheart.At his accession, he is described ashaving had a pleasing and expressivecountenance, prominent eyes, and aRoman nose. In person he was well-proportioned,but below the middle size ;which circumstance, a popular balladof the day, alluding to Richard, afterwardsLord Edgecumbe, who was verydiminutive, thus notices :GEORGE THE SECOND.When Edgecumbe spoke, the prince, in sport,Laugh'd at the merry elf;Rejoic'd to see within his courtOne shorter than himself.I'm glad," cried out the quibbling squire,My howbeit makes your highness higher."The character of George the Secondrequires no nicety of delineation : itsmain features are broad, and glaringlyobvious. His abilities were scarcelyabove mediocrity. He was decidedlybrave, but possessed a very limitedportion of military skill. Incontinencywas his predominant failing, but henever suffered his sexual attachmentsto interfere materially with the publicinterest. His love of uniformity was soremarkable, that Lord Hervey said ofhim, " He seems to think his havingdone a thing to-day an unanswerablereason for his doing it tomorrow."He neither felt nor affected the leastadmiration for art, science, or literature.He occasionally attended thetheatres, but his dramatic taste wascontemptible. When he attended therepresentation of Richard the Third,although Garrick supported the principalcharacter, he thought the man whoplayed the lord mayor was by far thebest actor in the company ; and saidrepeatedly, during the latter part of theperformance, to one of his attendants,Will not dat lor mayor come again ?I like dat lor mayor; when will hecome again?" One night he went tosee The Mayor of Garrett acted at theHaymarket Theatre: on alighting atthe entrance, he was received by Foote,grotesquely dressed for the part ofMajor Sturgeon. Perceiving so extraordinarya figure bowing and stumpingabout before him, the king turned tohis lord in waiting, and, with amazementdepicted in his looks, inquiredwho the man in regimentals was, andin what corps he served.Few men were more deeply impressedwith the value of money, although heoccasionally startled those about him,by being unexpectedly liberal, as in thecases of his donation to the university ofCambridge, and his submitting to theextortion of the Dutch inn-keeper. Oneevening, while passing by a closet inwhich wood was kept for the use of thebed-chamber, he dropped some guineas,one of which having rolled under thedoor, he said to the page in waiting,We must get out this guinea : let usremove the fuel." In a short time, withthe attendant's aid, he found the guinea,which, however, he gave to his fellow-labourer,as a reward for the exertionsof the latter, in helping him to take thewood out of the closet, observing, " I donot like any thing to be lost, but I wishevery man to receive the value of hiswork."He was strongly attached to etiquette ;but on many occasions, as in the precedingand following instances, he appearsto have liberated himself, almostunconsciously, and with amusingoddity, from its trammels. One afternoon,a person who had been passingan hour or two with some of the royalservants, in an upper apartment of thepalace, on his return, slipping down aflight of steps, burst open the door ofa room at the foot of them, with suchinvoluntary violence, that he fell, completelystunned, on the floor. Whenhe recovered his senses, he found himselfextended on the carpet, in a snugapartment, under the hands of a neatlittle old gentleman, who washed hishead very carefully with a towel, andapplied sticking-plaster to the cutswhich he had received in his fall.When this was done, the little oldgentleman picked up the intruder's wigand placed it properly on the headof its owner ; who now rose, and wasabout to express his gratitude for thekindness which had been shewn to him,but his benefactor, with a dignifiedfrown, pointed to the door, and the manretired in amazement The room intowhich he had fallen was the royal closet ;and the good Samaritan, it is scarcelynecessary to add, was the king himself.Of the hastiness of George theSecond's temper, several examples havebeen given : but it was never, perhaps,more ludicrously displayed than in hisfirst interview with Dr. Ward. Theking, having been afflicted for sometimewith a violent pain in his thumb,for which his regular medical attendantscould afford him no relief, he soughtthe assistance of Ward, whose famouspills and drops were then in great estimation.The doctor, being aware ofthe king's complaint, went to the palace,at the time commanded, with, it is said,a specific concealed in the hollow of hishand. On being admitted to his ma-theROYAL FAMILY.jest's presence, he, of course, proceededto examine the royal thumb ; which hesuddenly wrenched with such violence,that the king called him a cursed rascal,and condescended to kick his shins. Hesoon found, however, that the doctor, hadas it were, magically relieved his thumbfrom pain : and so grateful did he feelto Ward, whom he now termed his Aesculapius,that he prevailed on him toaccept a handsome carriage and horses,and shortly afterwards, presented hisnephew, who subsequently became ageneral, with an ensigncy in the guards.Like his father, George the Secondhad a strong predilection for his continentaldominions ; which was sometimesthwarted, and occasionally takenadvantage of, by his ministers. LordGranville, wishing to procure the appointmentof Dr. Taylor to the residentiaryof St. Paul's, obtained his pointwith ease, notwithstanding the kingstarted some scruples at first, by affirming,that the doctor's learning was celebratedall over Germany /In a conversation with Waldegrave,the king said that his British subjectswere angry at the partiality he displayedtowards the electorate ; although hedesired nothing more to be done forHanover, than what we are bound to dofor any country whatever, when it wasexposed to danger entirely on puraccount. The king added the followingamong other curious remarks, on thisoccasion : he allowed the English constitutionto be a good one, and defiedany man to show that he had infringedit in a single instance ; but that as toour laws, we passed nearly a hundredevery session, which seemed made onlyto afford us the pleasure of breakingthem.SOPHIA DOROTHEA, QUEEN OF PRUSSIA.THIS princess, daughter of Georgethe First, by the unfortunate heiressof Hell, was born in 1684, and, thoughwholly neglected by her father, became,under the care of her grand-mother, theElectress Sophia, a highly accomplishedand amiable woman. She wasmarried on the 28th of November, 1706,to Frederick William, of Brandenburg,who shortly after became King ofPrussia.The queen was by no means a happywife, or a joyful mother. Her children,one of whom was Frederick the Great,were separated from her in their infancy; and, like their mother, lived inconstantdread of their father's stupidand capricious tyranny. This parsimoniousbarbarian scarcely allowed hisconsort a sufficient income for her subsistence: so that, but for a paltry althoughmost acceptable allowance, of,800 per annum, privately transmittedto her by George the Second, she wouldhave been destitute of all the comfortsand even many of the necessaries oflife.Never, says Voltaire, were subjectspoorer, or king more rich. According tothat author ( whose statements, however,must be tan cum grand sails), hebought up the estates of his nobility ata despicable price ; farmed out his landsto tax-gatherers, each of whom held thedouble post of collector and judge : sothat if a tenant did not pay his rent onthe day it became due, the collector puton his judicial robes, and condemnedthe defaulter in double the debt; andif the collector and judge did not paythe king his arrears in full, on the lastday of the month, the following morninghis majesty mulcted him in thesame ratio, as he had mulcted thelandholder. The king had an ambassadorat the Hague, who, having cut downand used for fuel, some of the trees inthe garden of Houslardick, which thenbelonged to the royal house of Prussia,his most gracious sovereign, as hewas informed by his next despatches,stopped his year's salary to defray thedamage. The poor ambassador, in afit of despair, cut his throat with theonly razor he had ; but his life wassaved by an old valet, who happened tocome to his assistance. The king had ahundred and twenty millions of crownsin the cellars of his palace ; his apartmentswere filled with articles of massivesilver; and he gave to his queen,in charge only be it observed, a cabinet,FREDERICK, PRINCE OF WALES,the contents of which were all gold.When he took his walk through thetown, after having reviewed his regimentof guards, many of whom wereseven feet high, every body fled at hisapproach. If he met a woman in thestreet he would tell her to begone home,and at the same time give her a kick,a box on the ear, or a few strokes onthe shoulders with his cane. His son,wearied with his brutality, determinedto quit the country ; but parental economyhad deprived him of the means oftravelling, even as the son of an Englishtradesman ; and he was obliged toborrow a few hundred ducats for hisintended journey. Two young men, onenamed Kat, and the other Kept, were tohave accompanied him ; but the kingobtained information of the project, andarrested the trio. Kept afterwards escaped; but Kat was executed, and theprince's head was held out of a window,by some grenadiers, at his father'scommand, in order that he might be"obliged to behold the melancholy spectacle.On another occasion, the kingordered the daughter of a schoolmaster,for whom his son had affected a passion,to be conducted round Potsdam,where she resided, by the commonhangman, and then whipped in thence'spresence. After having regaledim with this spectacle, he sent him to acitadel in the midst of a marsh, wherehe kept him for six months in a sort ofdungeon, without a single servant; andhangmanwince'shim witthen graciously permitted him to have asoldier for an attendant. Suspectingthat his daughter Wilhelmina wasconcerned in the prince's intendedelopement, he proceeded to kick herout of a large window, which reachedfrom the ceiling to the floor; and hermother, (the subject of our presentarticle,) who was present at this achievement,with great difficulty saved her, bycatching hold of her petticoats. Theprincess, continues Voltaire, received acontusion on her left breast, which markof her father's affection she preservedthrough life, and did me the honour ofpermitting me to see it.The queen survived her brutal husband; and in the affectionate and dutifulsolicitude of her son, whom his fatheronce thought of beheading, as Voltairestates, because he wrote verses, shefound many consolations for the eveningof her days. Her health had neverbeen robust, yet she lingered on throughmany years of great bodily and mentalsuffering, till the spring of 1757, whenshe expired in the seventy-third yearof her age.Formed to be the charm and graceof an amiable and polished circle, shewas consigned to the arms of a savage,who, totally insensible to her fascinations,and incapable of appreciating herfine qualities, treated her so unjustly,that it may with truth be said, therewas scarcely a greater slave in Prussiathan its queen.FREDERICK, PRINCE OF WALES, AND HIS CONSORTAUGUSTA.FREDERICK LEWIS, eldest sonof George the Second, was born atHanover, on the 20th of January, 1707.Great pains were apparently taken toteach him the English language, but hewas by no means well educated. Hismorals were so wretchedly neglected,that in childhood, he was remarkablefor treachery and deceit; and while yeta youth, drank, gambled, and evenkept mistresses. One day, says Walpole,when the prince was but a mereboy, his governor was complaining ofhim : the queen, whose way, as the kingsaid, was to excuse him, said, " Ah ! jeimagine que ces sont des tours depages." The governor replied, " Pluta Dieu que ces fussent des tours depages ! Ces sont des tours de laquais etde coquins." When this hopeful youthbecame a man, we find him, on oneoccasion, exultingly exclaiming, " I havejust nicked Doddington out of 5,000,and he has no chance of ever getting itagain." Nearly all the vices of hisyounger days seem to have grown upwith him: and his laxity of principle,even at mature years, was so evident,THE ROYAL FAMILY.that his friends have, upon occasion,been compelled to vindicate his heartat the expense of his head.In 1717, he was created Duke ofGloucester ; in the following year, hewas installed a knight of the garter; andin 1726, he became Duke of Edinburgh.In the twenty second year of his age, hefirst came to this country, and shortlyafter his arrival, was made Earl of Chester,Prince of Wales, and a member ofthe privy council. He soon becameexceedingly popular; but lost his creditat court, in proportion as he gained thegood will of the public. He evidentlyfelt no great veneration for his parents ;whom he thwarted, rather than obeyed :and instead of supporting the king'sgovernment, betrayed a strong biastowards the opposition, of which, heeventually became the head.Soon after he came to England, proposalswere made for his marriage withthe Princess Royal of Prussia, but herfather objected to the terms offered,and the negotiation ended in a personaldifference between the two monarchs.No great period elapsed before theprince was on the brink of a privateunion with a lady of rank, in thiscountry. The old Duchess of Marlborough,knowing that he was ingreat want of money, and felt no repugnanceto giving the king offence,offered him the hand of her favouritegrand-daughter, Lady Diana Spencer,with a fortune of 100,000. The princeconsented to the proposal; a day wasfixed for his being secretly united toLady Diana, at the duchess's lodge, inthe great park at Windsor ; and themarriage would, in all probability, havetaken place, had not Sir Robert Walpolediscovered the prince's intentions,in time to prevent him from carryingthem into effect.In February, 1736, a message wassent, by two privy-councillors, by theking to his son, with whom he was thenat variance, proposing a match betweenthe prince, ana Augusta, daughter ofFrederick the Second, Duke of SaxeGotha. This princess was born on the19th of November, 1709, and was saidto be possessed of very superior mentalendowments and considerable beautyof person. The prince having expressedhis satisfaction at the proposedalliance, the necessary preliminarieswere adjusted ; and on the 25th ofApril, the intended bride arrived at St.James's palace, where the prince paidher a visit. The next day, he dinedwith her at Greenwich ; and on thefollowing morning, her highness, it isstated, came in his majesty's coach,drawn by six horses, from Greenwichto Lambeth ; and was brought fromthence to St. James's, in the queen'schair. Her highness was received bytheir majesties with extreme tenderness.She dined with the prince andthe rest of the royal family. At eighto'clock the procession began to thechapel, where the marriage was solemnisedby the Bishop of London.Supper was served, at ten o'clock, inthe great state ball-room, which wascrowded with spectators. About twelveo'clock, it is added, the illustrious pairwere put to bed, when the king did thebride the usual honours, and companywere admitted to see them.Early in the session of 1737, Pul-tenet,afterwards Earl of Bath, thenthe most violent antagonist of hisformer friend, the minister, Sir RobertWalpole, moved an address, in thehouse of commons, for increasing theheir-apparent's income to 100,000 perannum, out of the civil list. The motionwas opposed with great determinationby ministers, as an infraction onthe king s prerogative, and it was negatived,on a division, by a majority oftwenty. This measure considerably increasedthe king's displeasure against hisson ; who, on the other hand, felt highlyexasperated, that out of a civil list of800,000, his father should only allowhim 50,000 per annum. Shortly afterwards,Bubb Doddington advised himto apply to parliament for an additionalgrant; but the prince declared, thatthe people had done enough for hisfamily already ; and, that he wouldrather beg his bread from door to door,than be a further charge to them.The unpardonable absurdity of theprince, on the birth of his first child,Augusta, led to a positive rupture betweenhis royal highness and the king.He brought the princess, in the middleof the night, and when she was inactual labour, from Hampton Court toSt. James's palace, where she was putinto an unprepared bed, for which theprince and Lady Archibald HamiltonFREDERICK, PRINCE OF WALES.were obliged to air sheets. Early thenext morning, the queen visited herdaughter-in-law, and asked LadyHamilton " How she dared to bringaway the princess in that manner ?"Upon which, her ladyship turned tothe prince, and said, " You see, sir ! Itold you it would be laid upon me."The prince made no apology, nor didhe even utter a word to his mother;but when he conducted her to hercoach, finding a crowd had assembledat the gate, he kneeled down in thedirt, and humbly kissed her hand. Afew months afterwards, when on herdeath-bed, she declared that she wouldnot insult his father, to whom he hadacted most undutifully, by eitherpardoning or even receiving him intoher presence.-The king's anger on the occasionwas so great, that he sent the prince amessage, stigmatising his conduct ashaving been, for some time, void of allreal duty ; intimating also that heshould not reside in the palace, untilhe withdrew his confidence from thoseby whom he had for some time pastbeen advised ; and commanding him toquit St. James's as soon as the princesscould with safety be removed. Theprince, in consequence of this mandate,retired with his family to Kew, andafterwards resided for some time atCliefden and Norfolk-house.In 1742, Seeker, then Bishop of London,was directed to acquaint the prince,that if his royal highness would writesuch a letter as might be consistentwith his majesty's honour to receive,he and all who were in his confidenceshould be kindly received at court;50,000 per annum should be addedto his revenue ; 200,000 should begranted to pay his debts, and every arrangementmade to give him satisfaction.The prince immediately replied,That he had the utmost duty for theking, and whenever he thought fit toadmit him to his presence, he wouldthrow himself at his majesty's feet,without insisting on any terms ; butthat while Sir Robert Walpole managedaffairs, he would take no partin them ; for he considered Sir Robertas a bar between the king and himself.Indeed," added the prince, " I takethis message to come from him, andnot from my father."Sir Robert soon after resigned; theprince's friends immediately took office;and we find it recorded, under date ofthe 17th of February, 1742, that, " asthe first happy effect in the change ofministry, the Prince of Wales, on thisday, waited on the king at St. James's,and was received in the most graciousand affectionate manner ; on which occasionthere was a very splendid court ;and a guard was immediately orderedto attend his royal highness at Carlton-house."This reconciliation was, however,by no means cordial : the fatherand son met, indeed, on a few greatoccasions, but there was neither warmthnor sincerity in their intercourse, andthey soon relapsed into their formerstate of mutual disgust.The prince obtained almost as muchpopularity by patronising authors andwits, as he did by quarrelling with theking, and countenancing an oppositionto the ministry. When the Ramblerappeared, he sent some persons of hiscourt, to ascertain from Cave, the bookseller,the name of its author, towardswhom he expressed a desire of extendinghis protection. He gave Tindala gold medal worth forty guineas;honoured Pope with a complimentaryvisit ; and sent Glover, the author ofLeonidas, a bank-note for 500, toextricate him from some embarrassmentswhich prevented him from payinghis usual visits to the little court^ofhis royal highness, at Leicester-house.Nor was he merely a patron of menof letters, having made some attemptsat authorship himself. It is asserted bySeward that the prince actually wrotea piece, called " The History of PrinceTiti," which was printed in 1736. AFrench copy of the work appeared inthe same year, which has been said,we know not with what truth, to havebeen the original. The prince, it issaid, had placed his manuscript forcorrection in the hands of Ralph, thehistorian, among whose posthumouspapers it was found by that gentleman'sexecutors.There exists little doubt that he did,on some occasions, indulge in literarycomposition ; his attempts, however,if we may judge from the followingspecimen, (a poetical address tothe princess,) were not exceedinglysuccessful :THE ROYAL FAMILY.Tis not the liquid brightness of those eyes,That .mini with pleasure and delight ;Nor those heavenly arches which ariseO'er each of them, to shade their light :Tis not that hair which plays with every wind,And loves to wanton round thy face ;Now straying round the forehead, now behindRetiring with insidious grace :Tis not that lovely range of teeth so white,Af new-shorn sheep, equal and fair ;Nor e'en that gentle smile, the heart's delight,\Vitli which no sniile could e'er compare :Tis not that chin to round, that neck so fine,Those breasts that swell to meet my love,That easy sloping waist, that form divine,Nor aught below, nor aught above:Tis not the living colours over each,By nature's finest pencil wrought,To shame the full blown rose, and blooming peach,And muck the happy painter's thought:No, 'tis that gentleness of mind, that loveSo kindly answering my desire ;That grace with which you look, and speak, andAt the time the prince paid these complimentsto his wife, he was living inadultery, to her knowledge, with morethan one mistress. Among his favoriteswere Lady Archibald Hamilton,who is aid to have been neither youngnor handsome within his memory ; MissVane, who had no other charms thanbeing a maid of honour ; and LadyMiddlesex, who was very short, plain,and yellow. His chief" passion, saysWalpole, was women ; but, like therest of his race, beauty was not anecessary ingredient. He was, however,in the same author's opinion,notwithstanding his gross infidelity, avery good husband !A French gentleman, also, in a letterto a friend, which has been printed,unaccountably testifies to the connubialexcellence of the prince. The writeralso speaks highly of the tenderness displayed,by his royal highness, towardsthe young princes and princesses. " Ihave met him," he continues, " twentytimes in his chaise, with one childbefore him, whom he caressed as muchas if this had been an only one ; andwhen, after a short absence, he returnedto his family, his embraces were oftenmixed with tears. He relied on theaffection of the people for the safety ofhis person, walking the streets unguarded,and only followed by a coupleof servants. In this way, he visited variousmanufactories, where he liberallyrewarded the workmen. Sometimes, inrowing-matches on the river, he woulddistribute the prizes with his own hand ;he would often converse familiarlywith the fishermen, on matters belongingto their business, rewarding themhandsomely for their industry. Hewould enter, unceremoniously, into thehut of a labourer, neither disdainingto sit down with the family, nor topartake of their humble repast ; butinforming himself of their occupations,and relieving their wants as far as layin his power. The following instanceof his goodness, I witnessed myself:being in the park one morning, at themoment the prince entered his chair,a ragged soldier approached it : theprince did not see him till the chairmenhad taken him up ; but then, perceivingthe cripple, he ordered them tostop. ' Where did you lose your arm,my friend ?' said he. ' At Fontenoy."You look pale ; are you in badhealth ?' ' Yes, sir ; since the loss ofmy arm, I have remained so feeble,that the least labour throws me into afever.' ' And why have you not appliedto be put on the list of out-pensioners?'' I have been promised that ;but, wanting a friend, many less miserablehave been preferred before me.'I had kept my eyes on the prince, andcould perceive his countenance expressthe most lively sensibility. Havingordered his gentleman to give the poorfellow four guineas, he said, ' Myfriend, come and see me, and I willendeavour to get you into Chelsea'"The circumstances related in thisletter, if true, are highly creditable tothe prince. Several other instances arerecorded of his alleged kindness andgenerosity to the distressed ; but, onthe whole, his character was by nomeans amiable. He affected, for it canscarcely be supposed that he felt, a greatjealousy for the liberties of parliament.To a deputation which waited on him,for the purpose of soliciting him tosupport a clause of the Tithing bill,in favour of the Quakers, he is said tohave delivered the following answer :As I am a friend to liberty in general,and to toleration in particular, I wishyou may meet with all proper favour ;but, for myself, I never gave my votein parliament ; and to influence myfriends, or direct my servants, in theirs,FREDERICK, PRINCE OF WALES.5]does not become my station. To leavethem entirely to their own consciencesand understandings, is a rule I havehitherto prescribed to myself, and purposethrough life to observe." " Mayit please the Prince of Wales," rejoinedAndrew Pitt, who was at the head ofthe deputation, " I am greatly affectedwith thy excellent notions of liberty,and am more pleased with the answerthou hast given us, than if thou hadstgranted our request."As a striking contrast to this anecdote,it is stated, that the prince oneday said of Lord Doneraile, who hadnot conducted himself in parliamentto the satisfaction of his royal highness," Does he think I will supporthim. unless he does as I would havehim ? Does not he consider that whoevermay be my ministers, I must beking?"He was easily accessible to flattery,and passionately fond of gaming; anaffected admirer of learning; decidedlygenerous, but contemptibly insincere.Walpole satirically says of him, thathe resembled his pattern, the BlackPrince, in nothing but in dying beforehis father. It appears th-it he was desirousof acquiring a martial reputation,and solicited the command of theking's troops during the rebellion, butrather through jealousy of his brother,the Duke of Cumberland, than truecourage. During the siege of Carlisle,he caused a representation in paste ofits citadel to be served up at his tablewith the dessert, which his royal highness,at the head of the maids ofhonour, bombarded with sugar-plumbs.His death took place on the 20th ofMarch, 1751. On the 12th of thatmonth, although he had previouslybeen ill of a pleurisy, the prince went tothe house of lords ; but he caught a coldand relapsed during the same night.On the day of his death he had aviolent fit of coughing, and, at length,laid his hand upon his breast, and said,"Je sens la mart!" The princess, whowas in the room, ran towards him, andfound that he had already expired.The cause of his death was the breakingof an imposthume, which had beenoccasioned by the blow of a tennis-ball.Soon after his decease, the followingproposed epitaph for his monumentwas anonymously circulated:Here lies Fred,Who was alive, and is dead.Had it been his father,I had much rather ;Had it been his brother,Still better than another;Had it been his sister,No one would have missed her ;Had it been the whole generation.Still better for the nation ;But since 'tis only Fred,Who was alive, and is dead,There's no more to be said.The violent spirit of party, accordingto Bubb Doddington (Lord Welcome),was displayed even at the prince's funeral." The whole bedchamber wereordered to attend from ten in the morningtill the interment, but there was notthe attention to order the board of greencloth to provide them a bit of bread ;and these gentlemen, of the first rankand distinction, in discharge of theirlast sad duty to a loved and loving master,were forced to bespeak a great colddinner from a common tavern in theneighbourhood ; at three o'clock, indeed,they vouchsafed to think of adinner, and ordered one ; but the disgracewas complete the tavern dinnerwas paid for and given to the poor."The princess, of whom Walpole said,she had never said a foolish thing, nordone a disobliging one, since her arrival,though placed in a very difficult situation.young, uninstructed, and besiegedby jarring interests was, at thedeath of her husband, already the motherof eight children, and expected in a fewmonths to give birth to a ninth. Sheremained for four hours in the room,after her royal husband's decease, beforeshe could be convinced that he was,in reality, dead. Her attendants puther to bed at six in the morning, butshe rose again at eight, and burnt allthe prince's private papers.The people evinced great commiserationfor the widow and her orphans ;and George the Second treated themwith unexpected kindness. The princesswas made guardian of her eldestson, in case of the king's demise duringthe young prince's minority ; and inNovember, 1752, on her re-appearancein public, she received the same honoursas had been paid to the queenduring her majesty's life. Yet it maybereasonably doubted, whether theking felt entirely satisfied with her managementof the young heir-apparent,THE ROYAL FAMILY.who was kept in positive seclusion, atLeicester-house, and entirely under thedominion of the princess dowager andher confidential friend, the Earl ofBute ; whose extraordinary intimacywith her royal highness is thus spokenof by the gossipping Walpole: "It hadalready been whispered, that the assiduitiesof Lord Bute at Leicester-house,and his still more :frequent attendancein the gardens at Kew, and Carlton-house,were less addressed to the Princeof Wales than to his mother. The eagernessof the pages of the back stairs tolether know whenever Lord Bute arrived,and some other symptoms, contributedto dispel the ideas that hadbeen conceived of the rigour of herwidowhood. On the other hand, thefavoured pe personage, naturally ostentatiousof his person, and of haughtycarriage, seemed by no means desirousof concealing his conquest. His bowsgrew more theatric; his graces contractedsome meaning ; and the beautyof his leg was constantly displayed inthe eyes of the poor captivated princess.When the late Prince of Wales affectedto retire into gloomy allies with LadyMiddleton, he used to bid the princesswalk with Lord Bute. As soon as theprince was dead, they walked more andmore, in honour of his memory. Theyoung Prince of Wales lived shut up withhis mother and Lord Bute, and musthave thrown them into some difficulties; their connection was not easilyreconcilable to the devotion which theyhad infused into the mind of the prince ;the princess could not wish him alwayspresent, and yet dreaded his being outof her sight. His brother Edward, whoreceived a thousand mortifications, wasseldom suffered to be with him ; andLady Augusta, now a woman, was, tofacilitate some privacy for the princess,dismissed from supping with hermother,and sent back to cheesecakes, with herlittle sister, Elizabeth, on pretence, thatmeat at night would fatten her toomuch."The latter years of her life wereembittered by the afflictions of her favouritedaughter, the premature deathof her youngest son, and the abuse thatwas heaped upon her, by the publicand the press, after her son's accession.Popular clamour ran so exceedinglyhigh against her, on account of theinfluence which she was supposed topossess over the young king's mind,,hat her residence was threatened withdestruction, by a mob. On this occasion,even at a moment when the horridyells of the populace rendered her almostinaudible, she is reported to havesaid, " How I pity these poor deludedpeople ! I hope they will know betterby-and-by."For some time before her death,George the Third and his queen visitedher every evening at eight o'clock;but when her illness became alarming,they went to her at seven, pretendingthey had mistaken the hour. On thenight of the 8th of February, 1772,they remained with her until nine ; shetalked to them as usual, and after theirdeparture, said to one of her medicalattendants, " I think I shall have agood night's rest." She expired, however,at six o'clock on the followingmorning; and on the 16th of the samemonth, her remains were interred inWestminster Abbey.On account of the paucity of well-authenticatedfacts, relative to the conductof this princess, it is impossible todelineate her general character. Shehas been the subject of much adulationon the one hand, and bitter obloquyon the other. Serious accusations havebeen made against her, which haveneither been satisfactorily substantiatednor disproved. It has been feebly arguedthat her conduct with regard toher son's education, could not have beenreprehensible, because, after his accession,he treated her with extraordinarykindness. George the Third was, however,far from an efficient judge ofwhat constituted a good education ;and, had he been pre-eminently qualifiedto form a correct opinion on thatsubject, the filial love which he evincedtowards his mother could scarcely beaccepted as a proof that he approvedof the manner in which he had beeneducated. Of her benevolence, nodoubt exists : nor can it be denied thatshe was possessed of many good qualities.She gradually paid off, out of herown income, the heavy sums in whichher husband was indebted at the timeof his decease. Her temper was placid :and the consideration she evinced forthose about her, exceedingly laudable.Bishop Newton, her chaplain, states,ANNE, PRINCESS OF ORANGE.that " the calmness and composure ofher death, were farther proofs and attestationsof the goodness of her life ;and she died as she had lived, belovedand lamented most by those who knewher best."ANNE, PRINCESS OF ORANGE.THE princess Anne, eldest daughterof George the Second, was born on the22nd of October, 1709. From herchildhood, she manifested a very imperioustemper; and, as she grew up,became remarkably proud and ambitious.One day, while yet very young,on being reproved by the queen forwishing she had no brothers, that sheherself might succeed to the crown, sheexclaimed, with energy, " I would dietomorrow, to be queen to-day !"In the year 1725, it is said that proposalsfor a marriage were made betweenLouis the Fifteenth and this princess,by the Duke of Bourbon, Regent ofFrance ; who had then recently brokenoff the intended union of the young kingwith a Spanish princess. The offer was,however, very properly declined : forhad it been accepted, the princess musthave abjured the protestant faith, andthe alliance would, decidedly, have irritatedmany of the warmest friends tothe house of Brunswick in this country.It was subsequently proposed, thatthe heir of the house of Orange shouldbe her husband. On this occasion,George the Second, being perfectlyaware of that prince's great deformity,could not refrain from apprising her ofthe hideous ugliness of her intendedbridegroom, and offered her permissionto refuse his proposals. She repliedthat she would marry him if he werea baboon. " Well, then," said her father," there is baboon enough for you."The prince's offer having been accepted,about May, 1733, after muchdebate, 80,000 was voted by parliament,as a marriage portion for theprincess ; but in a mode which wasthought very disrespectful, that sumbeing granted as one of the items in ageneral bill of supply, a clause of which,gave 10,000 to the distressed personsemigrating to Georgia. The princearrived in the early part of November,at Somerset-house ; where, however, hewas attacked by indisposition, and themarriage was consequently deferred.Many preparations had been made forthe ceremony, and a boarded gallery,through which the procession was topass, darkening the windows of the old .Duchess of Marlborough, she observed,That she wished the princess wouldtake away her orange-chest"Early in March, 1734, the princehaving recovered, visited various publicplaces, and on the 14th of that month,was united to the princess royal. Onthis occasion, the prince is described,by the writers of the day, as havingbeen dressed in a cloth of gold suit ;and the bride, in virgin robes ofsilver tissue, having a train six yardslong, which was supported by tendukes' and earls' daughters, all ofwhom where attired in robes of silvertissue. At twelve o'clock, the royalfamily supped in public. About two,the bride and bridegroom retired, andwere afterwards seen by the nobility,sitting up in their bed-chamber, in richundresses.The prince died of a quince, onthe llth of October, 17X1, after an illnessof only three days. According toWalpole, although he was an absolutemonster, his consort had been immoderatelyjealous and fond of him. Athis decease, she became gouvernanteto her son: she received her father'sletters of condolence and advice on theoccasion, in the most haughty and insultingmanner ; nor did any part ofher subsequent conduct evince eithergood sense or political wisdom.On the death of Queen Caroline,hoping to succeed to her majesty's influence,the princess came from Holland,on pretence of ill health ; but the. king,being aware of her plan, sent her toBath as soon as she arrived, and peremptorilyordered her back to Holland,without suffering her to pass twonights in the metropolis.THE ROYAL FAMILY.Her death took place on the 12th ofJanuary, 1759. During her last moments,the aggrandisement of her familystill occupied her thoughts, and shedied the same ambitious and imperiouscreature that she had lived. Shortlybefore her final struggle, she caused tobe laid before her, and signed, a contractfor her daughter's marriage withthe Prince of Nassau Walter, and aletter to the states general, entreatingtheir consent to the match.PRINCESS AMELIA SOPHIA.AMELIA SOPHIA Leonora,the second daughter of George the Second,was born on the 30th of May, 1711.Although highly accomplished, shepassed her life in celibacy, but, apparently,not without attachments. TheDukes of Grafton and Newcastle, it wasbelieved, paid her great attention ; and,according to Walpole, the wooing ofthe former were so far from being disagreeable,that the princess and theduke hunted two or three times a weektogether; and on one occasion staid outunusually late, lost their attendants,and went together to a private house inWindsor Forest, to the great indignationof the queen, who, had she not beenprevented by Sir Robert Walpole,would have made the king acquaintedwith the circumstance.No event of her life excited more interestthan the dispute in which sheinvolved herself by shutting RichmondPark, of which she was ranger. Anaction was brought against her by theinhabitants of the neighbourhood onthis occasion, but the princess was partiallysuccessful on the trial of thecause. Proceedings having been renewed,the princess, by advice of theattorney-general, allowed ladders overthe walls. The people of Richmondwere not, however, satisfied with thisconcession, but persisted in their suit,and, at length, succeeded in establishingtheir right to gates for passengers. Onthis, the princess, whose conduct hadbeen very conciliating throughoutthe affair, indignantly abandoned theownership.She is described by Walpole as havingbeen meanly inquisitive into what didnot relate to her, and foolishly communicativeof what was below her to know ;impertinent even where she had noresentment, and insolent, although shehad lost her beauty and acquired nopower ; but an excellent mistress to herservants, steady to her favourites, andnobly generous and charitable.Her manners and dress were exceedinglymasculine. It was her customto pass much time in her stables,particularly when any of the horseswere ill. She wore a round hat, and ariding habit in the German fashion ;and if any credit may be attached to thefollowing anecdote, her appearance, atoneperiod of her life, must have been extraordinaryfor a person of her sex andrank : George the Fourth, when Princeof Wales, in order to illustrate an observationwhich he had made, that menfrequently obtain credit for good deedswhich they had never even thought ofperforming, stated, that one day he wasaccompanied, in a drive to Earshot, byLord Clement; who, as it was rathercold, wore a white great coat and a kindof flannel hood, to protect his ears andneck ; and that, thus arrayed, severalpersons on the road, mistaking hislordship for the Princess Amelia, exclaimed," What a good young man theprince is, thus to be the companion ofhis father's deaf old aunt, during hermorning drives!" It appears that shewas extremely short-sighted, as well asvery deaf j but her conception was soquick, that she appeared to see and heareven better than other people.She rose early, and either stood orwalked about the room while drinkingher coffee or chocolate. Of cards shewas passionately fond, and took an immensequantity of snuff". One evening,a general officer, in the public rooms atBath, perceiving her box lying open onthe table at which she sat, presumed tohelp himself out of it. The princess,PRINCESS ELIZABETH CAROLINE.who observed him, instantly signifiedher displeasure at his audacity, bycommanding her attendant to throwthe remaining contents of the box intothe fire.She died on the 31st of October, 1786.PRINCESS ELIZABETH CAROLINE.THIS princess, the third daughter ofGeorge the Second, is described as havingbeen one of the most excellent ofwomen : her parents, to whom she wasdevotedly attached, are said to haveplaced such confidence in her veracity,that, on any disagreement occurringamong their children, they were accustomedto say, " Send for Caroline, andthen we shall know the truth." Possessed,as she was, of high rank, eminentvirtue, beauty of person, and attractivemanners, this princess enjoyedbut a very small portion of worldlyhappiness.Lord Hervey, whom Pope severelyridiculed under the appellations ofSpores," and " Lord Fanny," succeededin making a deep impressionon her heart, apparently for the purposeof forwarding his political views,or gratifying his vanity. On the deathof that nobleman, to whose childrenthe princess behaved with great kindnessand generosity, she retired fromthe world, and prepared herself fordeath ; which she appears to have desired,rather than dreaded: for, whenurged to comply with some request towhich she was exceedingly averse, shesaid, " I would not do it to die ;" andwhen her last illness ended in a mortification,she exclaimed, " I was afraidI should not have died of this !" Formany years she occupied two chambersin St. James's palace, which were sosituate, that she could not see any| external objects; and very few persons,i except her own relatives, were permittedto visit her. She was exceedinglygenerous and charitable ; but, atthe same time, so unostentatious, thatmany of the objects of her bounty,among whom were the wretched inmatesof the metropolitan gaols, didnot know who was their benefactress,until the sudden cessation of their supplies,on the death of the princess, discoveredthe source from which theyhad flowed. She died, after a veryprotracted illness, on the 28th ofDecember, 1787.WILLIAM AUGUSTUS, DUKE OF CUMBERLAND.1 HIS prince, third son of George theSecond and Queen Caroline, was bornon the 15th of April, 1721. The littlewe know of his childhood, is sufficientto prove that he began, at an earlyage, to manifest considerable decisionof character. He was a favourite withhis grandfather, George the First, atwhose imperfect English, however, hefrequently laughed, and whose blundershe delighted to ridicule. Having displeasedhis mother one day, she senthim up to his chamber; and wb.cn heappeared again, she asked him whathe had been doing. " Reading," repliedthe boy. "Reading what?"The Scriptures." " What part of theScriptures?" " That part where it iswritten, ' Woman ! what hast thou todowith me'" He was educated inthe same manner as the heir-apparent ;over whom, however, he manifested agreat superiority, as well in mind asmanners. He had scarcely been emancipatedfrom the nursery, when his extraordinarypredilection for a militarylife became apparent : at a somewhatlater period, although still in his boyhood,he assumed a princely gravityof deportment ; and listened, with deliberateattention, to the discussions ofthe senate and the council-chamber.While yet very young, he was event dDuke of Cumberland ; and, in 1743, heTHE ROYAL FAMILY.made his first campaign, with Georgethe Second, in Germany. He receiveda severe wound at Dettingen, wherehe behaved with great gallantry.In 1745, though scarcely twenty-fouryears old, and utterly deficient in experience,he was imprudently placed atthe head of a great army. Early inthat year, Marshal Saxe, accompaniedby the King of France and the Dauphin,having invested Tourney with an immensebody of forces, the allies, commandedby the Duke of Cumberland,assisted by Konigseg and Walden,though far inferior in number to theenemy, determined to make an effortfor the relief of the place. On the llthof May they accordingly commenceda resolute attack on the besiegers, whowere encamped under cover of thevillage of Fontenoy. The enterprisewas deemed a singular instance of militaryrashness. Such, however, wasthe intrepidity of the English andHanoverian infantry, that the French,being driven beyond their lines, werein imminent danger of a defeat ; but theDutch forces, which formed a part ofthe allied army, failing in an attempton Fontenoy, and the duke not makinga judicious use of his first success, bydividing the column of attack after hehad broken the enemy's centre, Saxewas enabled to bring up his reserve ;and the allies were enclosed, so to speak,within a circle of fire, from some redoubtswhich they had passed, maskedbatteries on their wings, and artillerywhich played upon them with fearfulexecution in front. Thus situated, itbecame less an object with them tocontend for victory, than to effect aretreat; and after the most heroic exertions,they succeeded in extricatingthemselves from their terrific position,but at a sacrifice of more than tenthousand men. Although the loss ofthe French was supposed to have beenequally great, the defeat proved fatal tothe allies, on whom the campaign closedin a manner exceedingly disastrous.The memory of the duke's misfortunesabroad was speedily obliteratedby his success against the rebels athome. Late in the summer, the youngPretender had landed in Scotland,obtained possession of Edinburgh,and proclaimed his father king ofGreat Britain; at Preston-Pans, he haddefeated Sir John Cope ; and, flushedwith success, had penetrated far intothe south of England, when the Dukeof Cumberland assumed the commandof the forces destined to oppose him.By a well concerted manoeuvre, therebels, while the duke's advanced guardwas posted at Newcastle-undermine,caused him, says Chambers, to remainwhere he was, under an idea that theywere about to meet him, and, thus gotpast him, on the road to London, so faras Derby ; which, however, they speedilyevacuated ; and, followed by the duke, atthe head of his dragoons, and a thousandmounted foot, commenced their retreattowards Scotland. In the neighbourhoodof Penrith, the rear-guard wasovertaken by the royal troops, and askirmish ensued, in which the latterwere repulsed, with considerable loss.Carlisle, which had been garrisoned bythe young Chevalier, soon afterwardssurrendered ; and the duke, deeminghis presence in the north no longernecessary, resigned his command toWade and Hawley, and on the 5th ofJanuary, 1746, returned to London.In less than a fortnight after his departure,the royal forces were routed bythe insurgents, at Falkirk; and, on the30th of the same month, the duke set outfor Scotland, to resume the chief command.After various movements of minorimportance, a general and decisive engagementtook place, at Culloden, onthe 16th of April. During the precedingnight, the rebels had made an attemptto surprise the royal camp ; which, aftera most harassing march, they werecompelled to abandon, and returned,fatigued, disconsolate", and nearly half-famished,to their former position ; wherethe royal troops, who had set out inpursuit of them before day-break, arrivedabout one o'clock in the afternoon;and Charles Edward, who might haveretired, with safety, to a more securepost, and there refreshed his men, resolvedat once to hazard an engagement.The Highlanders, on this occasion,rushed to the charge with all thecourage and impetuosity which theyhad displayed at Preston Pans and Falkirk;but, the shock of their attack wassteadily received, and the musketryand artillery of their antagonists didsuch prodigious execution among them,that they were very soon thrown intoWILLIAM, DUKE OF CUMBERLAND.visible disorder ; the cavalry of theroyal army then advanced upon theirflank ; and, in less than thirty minutes,the battle was converted into a generalrout of the rebels, great numbers ofwhom, in consequence of orders havingbeen issued by the duke to give noquarter, were slain in the pursuit. Itis even affirmed, that unnecessary andwanton barbarities were committed onthe persons and families of the Pretender'sadherents, long after the cessationof resistance ; and that the Dukeof Cumberland sullied the glory of hisvictory, by displaying a savage ferocityagainst the vanquished. In extenuationof his conduct, it has been suggested,that he probably conceived extremeseverity to have been necessary for theimmediate termination of the rebellion ;and that those who, as it is said, hecaused to be recklessly sacrificed onthis occasion, were not the troops ofa foreign state, with which the countrywas at war, but subjects who were, orvery recently had been, in arms againsttheir sovereign. The means, whetherjust or unjust, which he adopted torender his victory decisive, were certainlysuccessful, and Scotland returnedto its allegiance ; or, at least, the royalforces met with no further serious opposition.The young Pretender withdifficulty escaped to the continent, andseveral of his best friends were condemnedto the scaffold.In proportion to the alarm occasionedby the young Pretender's appearancein the field, was the enthusiastic gratitudedisplayed by the people towardshis conqueror ; whose courage and conduct,when contrasted with the follyand cowardice of Hawley and Cope,his predecessors in command, raised himat once in public estimation to the pinnacleof military fame. Six thousandpounds were collected in the metropolis,and placed at the disposal of the duke,to be distributed in gratuities to the soldierswho had fought at Culloden ; andhis "elegant letter" to the lord mayor,acknowledging the gift, was extolled asatruly noble composition.A charitable meeting, at Guildhall,subscribed for twelve thousand pairs ofbreeches, twelve thousand woollen caps,ten thousand pairs of worsted stockings,one thousand blankets, twelve thousandpairs of woollen gloves, and ninethousand spatterdash, in order to increasethe comfort of the troops ; forwhose benefit the judges contributed,1200; and even the players, glowingwith patriotism, performed gratuitously." The whole amount," saysthe British Chronologist, " of threenights acting the Beggar's Opera, proposedby Mrs. Gibber, who acted Pollygratis, making 600, was paid by Mr,Rich into the Chamber of London, forthe encouragement of the soldiers.Every comedian played gratis, and thetallow-chandlers gave the candles."From the same source we learn that,on the 25th of July, when the duke arrivedat Kensington, from Scotland, "allthe bells in London and Westminsterrung, and in the evening were illuminationsand bonfires, with continualfiring of guns for several hours, and alldemonstrations of the greatest joy fromthe people of all ranks." The duke soonafterwards obtained a more substantialreward for his exploits than mere popularity: the parliamentary allowance of15,000 per annum, which had beengranted to him in 1739, being raised to40,000 per annum, by acclamation.The king appointed him ranger ofWindsor great park, and he waselected chancellor of the university ofSt. Andrews, the minutes of his electionbeing presented to him in a splendidgold box.He continued for a long period to bethepopular idol, and was designated,par excellence, as "the duke." In1747, when the royal yacht, in whichhe was returning from Germany, wasnearly lost in a storm, the sympathy ofall classes rose to such an extraordinarypitch, as if the national safety haddepended on him alone. In 1751 heincurred some odium for his project ofimproving the discipline of the army,by the introduction of German severityto the military code. Abundance ofroom for improvement, no doubt, existed; but the means he adopted to produceit were the reverse of judicious.He became a Draco in legislation ; and,in his amended mutiny bill, the penaltyof death, says Walpole, came over asoften as the curses in the comminationon Ash Wednesday. Such a systemwas likely neither to be popularnor efficient in this country ; and,accordingly, while it tended materiallyTHE ROYAL FAMILY.to tarnish the duke's reputation, and tocountenance the reports of his crueltyto the Scotch after the battle of Culloden,it produced no amelioration in thearmy.The duke's behaviour on the death ofhis brother, the Prince of Wales, wasfar from amiable. When intelligenceof the event was communicated to him,he said, sneeringly, " It is a great blowto this country, but I hope it will recoverit in time." He probably thoughtthat the chief obstacle to his future importancewas removed by his brother'sdecease ; and calculated, no doubt, onbecoming sole regent, in the event ofthe king's death during the minorityof Prince George. His want of feelingon the occasion materially decreased hispopularity, which had already for sometimebeen on the wane. Elegies on thedeceased prince were cried about thestreets, to which were added such exclamationsas the following: "Oh! thatit was but his brother !" " Oh! that itwas but the butcher!"So rooted an opinion of his severityhad been formed by the people, thatthe probability of his becoming regentexcited general consternation. Someeven imagined that advantage wouldbe taken of the youth of the prince'schildren to raise the duke to the throne.George the Second appears to haverather participated in the general feelingagainst his son on this occasion ; andan act was passed nominating theDowager Princess of Wales regent, inthe event of the king's demise beforePrince George should have attainedthe age of royal majority. When theking caused his plans on this subjectto be communicated to the duke, thelatter coolly returned his thanks andduty, and added, " For the part allottedto me, I shall submit to it, because hismajesty commands it." He, however,considered a most unmerited affront tohave been put upon him, by the appointmentof the princess dowager, insteadof himself, to the regency; anddeclared to his friends, that "he nowfelt his own insignificance, and wishedthe name of William could be blottedout of the English annals."A mortification of a slighter sort soonfollowed : In his apartment there werefew ornaments but arms; and, one day,Prince George having paid him a visit,to amuse the boy, he took down a swordand drew it. The young prince turnedpale and trembled, supposing that hisuncle intended to kill him. The dukewas dreadfully shocked, and complainedto the princess that scandalous prejudiceshad been instilled into the childagainst him.In November, 1751, he fell from hishorse, while hunting at Windsor. Refusingto be blooded, he grew dangerouslyill, and was given over bythe physicians, but happily recovered.When urged to take advantage of theuneasiness manifested by the king onthis occasion, and solicit his majesty toget the regency bill repealed, he said,I would rather bear the ignominythat has been laid upon me, than ventureto give the king the uneasiness ofreflecting, if it were but for two hoursin his own room, on the injury he hasdone me."The duke was keenly sensitive toany thing which he thought affectedthe national honour. In 175C, on beinginformed of the loss of Minorca, he exclaimed," We are undone ! Sea andland are cowards! I am ashamed ofmy profession !" His conduct afterwards,during the prosecution of AdmiralByng, is described at having beenextremely harsh and vindictive. Partyprejudice, however, then ran so high,that, without suspecting his own injustice,many an otherwise conscientiousperson became the tool of the blackestmalice, in abetting the designs of hispolitical friends.In 1757, the French having made anirruption into Germany and threatenedHanover, the king wished the duke totake the command of the continentalforces, and, at length, wrung from hima reluctant consent. Accordingly, inthe month of April, his royal highnessembarked for the field of action ;and, on his arrival in Germany, foundhimself at the head of an allied armyamounting to fifty thousand men. TheFrench, under Marshal D'Etr^es, advancingfrom the Rhine, the passage ofwhich the duke had in vain been urgedto dispute, the allies were compelled toretire beyond the Weser. D'Etr^espassed that river also without opposition,and on the 25th of July attackedthe duke in his camp at Hastened.While the battle vas yet doubtful, hisWILLIAM, DUKE OF CUMBERLAND.royal highness, from a defect, not ofcourage, but of judgment, appears tohave given orders for a retreat. Theconfederates accordingly retired, hardpressed by the marshal, first to Nieu-burg, then to Verdenn, and finally toStade. Degrees, on being urged toembrace a favourable moment of attack,replied there was no occasion forfighting. It soon became apparentthat the marshal was right ; for, findingthat his further advance was preventedby the German ocean, that hewas enclosed on the right and left by theElbe and Weser, and that the enemyhad taken possession of all the passesas his troops had receded, the duke wascompelled, in the month of September,to submit to terms of capitulation.A convention was accordingly signedat Closter-seven, by which it was declaredthat the electorate of Hanovershould be left in the hands of theFrench, and that the whose confederatearmy, amounting to forty thousandmen, should be disarmed and disbanded.Walpole, in his memoirs ofGeorge the Second, is at great painsto vindicate the duke's conduct in thiscampaign ; and asserts that, thoughunsuccessful, the battle of Hastenedwas peculiarly glorious to his royalhighness, as it afforded him opportunitiesof evincing the most consummatemilitary skill : but such was far frombeing the general opinion.The convention of Closter-seven,however, seems to have been concludedin obedience to the express commandof George the Second ; but when newsof the event arrived in England, whereit excited universal clamour, he thoughtproper to disavow the whole transaction.Two messengers were despatched torecal the duke, who, early in October,returned to Kensington. He said toMr. Fox, on his arrival, " You see mewell, both in body and mind : I havewritten orders in my pocket for everythingI did." His haughty naturecould ill brook the coldness with whichhe was received ; and, on his fathersaying in his hearing, " Here is myson, who has ruined me and disgracedhimself," he came to the resolution ofresigning all his employments ; andfrom that period, passed his life incomparative retirement.In 1759, a rumour was circulated ofan intended French invasion, and itwas generally supposed that the Dukeof Cumberland would have been calledto the head of the army. During aconversation which he had with theDuchess of Bedford on this subject, hestated that he did not believe the commandwould be offered to him, butwhen no wise man would accept it andno honest man would refuse it.At this period the duke had becomeenormously fat : in the summer of1760, he had a stroke of the palsy ;which, although he soon recovered hisspeech and the use of his limbs, was consideredby his friends, on account of thegrossness of his constitution, as an omenof his decease at no very distant period.Shortly afterwards occurred the suddendeath of George the Second, who hadoften hinted that he should leave thepurchased German principalities to theduke: but he had either never intended,or forgotten, to make such an arrangement.The duke had, however, nowbecome fully reconciled to retirement ;though still a young man he had outlivedhis ambition, and all his feelingsand passions were sobered down eitherto apathy or content.On the 31st of October, 1765, hevisited at court, apparently in goodhealth and spirits ; he afterwards dinedin Arlington Street, and took tea withthe Princess of Brunswick, without exhibitingany symptoms of indisposition ;but a few minutes after his return homehe was attacked with a shivering fit,and almost as soon as the king's physicianarrived, he fell breathless on asofa, and expired.Walpole states, that the duke wasone of the only five great men he couldpretend to have seen. He was undoubtedlybrave, although he displayedthe cruelty of a coward. He appearedto have a natural inclination for war,but, apparently, despised renown. Itwas an observation of his, " That duringthe height of his popularity, hissatisfaction was allayed by thinking ofVernon" that admiral being about thesame period, with very little reason,the idol of the public. He was notcontented with flattery, but expectedblind obedience from those beneathhim. He felt so extraordinary andunlimited a respect for the royal authority,that had his brother, whom heTHE ROYAL FAMILY.appears to have despised, become king,he would, in all probability, have treatedhim with the most unconditional deference.Politics he considered unworthyof his notice, and refused to attendcabinet councils, even on occasionswhen his advice would, perhaps, havebeen valuable. He despised money,but was much addicted to gambling.He was fond of women, but alwaysfelt averse to matrimony. Lord Granville,at one time, greatly annoyedhim by negotiating a match for himwith the King of Denmark's sister.The duke consulted Sir Robert Walpole,then retired from public affairs,now to avoid the marriage with whichhe was thus threatened. Sir Robertadvised him to seem willing to consentto it, provided the king would makehim a large settlement. He adoptedthis plan, and the alliance was nolonger urged.He appears to have affected a loftyelevation of character, which posteritywill scarcely allow him to have possessed.He evinced the littleness ofhis mind by his attention to militarytrifles. To him, the establishment ofa proper pattern for spatterdash, appearedto be an object of considerableimportance; and the slightest transgressionof martial etiquette was visitedwith his severe displeasure. He affected,on some occasions, a dignifiedhumility, and a philosophical indifference,which, however, but ill concealedthe proud swellings of his heart, andhis strong inclination for power.Notwithstanding the encomiumswhich he received from some of hiscontemporaries, who, in estimating histalents as a commander, judged ratherfrom the national importance of thebattle of Culloden, than the real militaryskill of the conqueror, it may besafely asserted, that no general everpurchased reputation at a cheaper rate.Even the merito his success, at the headof regular troops over the raw forces ofthe Pretender, must, in some measure,be attributed to the advice of Lord Stair;and when we contrast the comparativelyinsignificant victory of Culloden, andinsignificant it certainly was, viewed asamartial achievement, although, perhaps,it determined the fate of thenation, with the duke's previous defeatat Fontenoy, and his subsequentdisasters at Hastened, we cannot butsmile at finding him elevated by hisadmirers above all heroes, either ancientor modern. The success whichthe insurgents had obtained over theroyal forces, previously to the duke'sappointment to oppose them, may beattributed principally to the imprudenceor irresolution of the king'scommanders : at the battle of Cullodenthey were a match in no respect forthose to whom they were opposed.The success of the duke, on this occasion,can, therefore, scarcely be saidto balance even the least of his defeats.He was successful only against a forceof brave but undisciplined Highlanders,without efficient arms or skilful commanders; being invariably beaten whenopposed to troops who were on a parwith his own, in every particular, perhaps,except the very important one ofhaving a man of military talent and experienceat their head. After the battleof Hastened, a French officer, noticingthe fine martial appearance of anEnglish prisoner, observed, " If wehad had many such enemies as you,we should not have conquered." Tothis the man replied, " There werethousands of better soldiers than I am,but not one D'Etr^es to lead them."On another occasion, an English captivehaving told some French officersthat they 'had nearly made the dukeprisoner at Fontenoy, one of themsaid, " We took care not to do so : hedoes us more service at the head of yourarmy." Marshal Saxe once sneeringlysaid of him, " He is the greatestgeneral of his age, for he has maintainedseveral thousand men on a spotof ground where I should never havevillette so many rabbits." The duke,on hearing of this, is said to have observed,that his men were well enoughfed to fight the French on any ground:and it is true that they did occasionallyfight, but, while under his command,never could manage to beat them.There are a few facts recorded, illustratingthe more amiable parts of theduke's character, which it behoves usnot to omit. On one occasion havingmissed his pocket-book at Newmarket,just before the horses started, he declinedmaking any bets, observing thathe had already lost money enough forthat morning. At the conclusion of theMARY, PRINCESS OF HESSE.races, he was presented with his pocketbookby a half-pay officer, who hadfound it near the stand, shortly afterit had been dropped by the duke, butwho had had no opportunity of returningit. " I am very glad, sir," saidthe duke, " that it has fallen into suchhands ; keep it : had it not been forthis accident, its contents would probablyhave been, by this time, dispersedamong the blackness of Newmarket."During his march against the rebels,he was, one day, presented with a petitionfor assistance, from a destitutelad, whose father had been many yearsin the royal household. The dukeordered the boy into his presence, and,giving him some money, said, " In considerationof your father's fidelity, andhoping that you are worthy of beinghis son, when the present troubles areover, should my life be spared, I willendeavour to provide you with somepermanent situation." After the rebellionwas ended, the boy proceeded toLondon, and obtained an interview withthe duke, by whose recommendationhe soon obtained a comfortable place.While the duke was in Germany, aSerjeant of excellent character havingperformed a daring exploit, the dukethought proper to give him a commission.But this elevation in rank byno means increased the man's happiness; he could no longer associate withhis former companions, and his brotherofficers treated him with degradingneglect. At length, he told the dukehow unpleasantly he was situated, andentreated permission to resume his halberd.The duke desired him to let thematter rest for a day or two; and thenext morning, on parade, walked uptohim, when he was standing apartfrom the other officers of the regiment,familiarly took his arm, and, on beinginvited by Lord Ligonier to dine atthe mess, replied, " With much pleasure,but I must bring my friend herewithme." " Oh ! certainly," said hislordship ; and thenceforth the duke'sfriend " never had occasion to complainof being slighted by any individualin the service.MARY, PRINCESS OF HESSE.THIS princess, the fourth daughterof George the Second and QueenCaroline, is characterized as havingbeen the mildest and gentlest of herrace. She was born on the 22nd ofFebruary, 1723. On the 8th of May,1740, being then only in the eighteenthyear of her age, she was married, inthe chapel at St. James's, to Frederick,Prince of Hesse, with whom she embarkedfor the continent, on the 6thof the following month of June. Theprince, her husband, is said to havetreated her with great inhumanity.In 1754, he abjured the protestantreligion, and turned Roman Catholic.This change of creed in a prince ofthe empire was viewed with muchsurprise, and subjected him, in theevent of his succeeding his father, tovarious heavy restrictions; which, ifpossible, increased the acerbity of histemper, and the brutality of his behaviour.After passing many years ofher life in hopeless sorrow and unresistingsubmission, death, at length,relieved the princess of her tyrant ;and she spent the remnant of her daysin ease and tranquillity. Her deathtook place on the 14th of June, 1771.LOUISA, QUEEN OF DENMARK.LOUISA, youngest daughter of Georgethe Second, was born on the 7th ofDecember, 1724. She was almost idolizedby her mother, and much admiredby the public for her personal graces,her temper, and her talents. In 1743,her hand was solicited by Frederick,Prince Royal of Denmark. On the 27thTHE ROYAL FAMILY.of October in that year, she was unitedto him, by proxy, at Hanover, and hesoon after ascended the Danish throne.Like her father, he kept a mistress, toshew that he was not governed by hiswife; and her death, like that of hermother, was occasioned by a rupture.She had declared to the Duke of Cumberland,before her departure fromthis country, that, however unhappyshe might be in Denmark, she wouldnever trouble her relations with anycomplaints ; nor did she, until the lastday of her life, when she wrote theman exceedingly pathetic letter. Sheexpired, in the prime of her life, aftera terrible operation, which lasted anhour, on the 8th of December 1751.AUGUSTA, DUCHESS OF BRUNSWICK.THIS princess, the first child ofFrederick, Prince of Wales, was bornon the 31st of July, 1737. She wasthe favourite of her parents, on accountof her beauty and gentleness ofdisposition. She received a very carefuleducation, and became highly accomplished.In 1763, she was demanded inmarriage by the hereditary Prince ofBrunswick Wolfenbiittel, and no obstaclesbeing raised to the match, thenuptials were solemnized on the 16thof January, 1764, in the great councilchamber, at St. James's palace. On thisoccasion, her brother, George the Third,presented her with a diamond necklaceworth j30,000 ; Queen Charlotte gaveher a gold watch, set with jewels, ofexquisite workmanship; and her mother,the princess dowager, gave her adiamond stomacher of immense value.In a few days after their marriage theroyal pair proceeded to the continent,where they resided for many years, inastate of enviable domestic happiness.The fruits of their union were six children; one of whom became, in 1795, thewife of George, Prince of Wales, afterwardsGeorge the Fourth.Unluckily for the princess, her husband,who had succeeded to the ducalchair, on the demise of his father, acceptedthe command of the Prussiansagainst the troops of republican France.His territories were shortly afterwardsentered by the enemy ; the duchesswas compelled to seek refuge in England; and in the autumn of 1806, theduke fell in the field of battle, whileleading on the Prussians against theFrench. His son and successor afterwardsmet with a similar fate.On her arrival in this country, theduchess found the king, her brother,infirm, blind, and about to be visitedwith that most dreadful of calamities, theloss of reason ; and her daughter, afterwardsQueen Caroline, not only livingin virtual widowhood, but deprivedeven of the society of her own child.The declining years of the duchesswere, therefore, it cannot be doubted,unhappy, rather than otherwise.Early in 1813, a species of epidemiccough, accompanied with shortness ofbreathing, which was-then prevalentin the metropolis, attacked the duchess,and greatly aggravated an asthmaticcomplaint with which she had longbeen afflicted. On the 21st of Marchshe was confined to her bed, butwithout being considered in danger.On the 22nd the Princess of Walesquitted her, after a visit of some hoursduration, without any idea that theduchess was near her dissolution jshortly before nine, on the same evening,however, she was seized with violentspasmodic attacks, which terminatedher existence in about twelvehours. Her remains were interred inWestminster Abbey.GEORGE THE THIRD.GEORGE THE THIRD, AND HIS CONSORT SOPHIACHARLOTTE.GEORGE, the first son of Frederick,Prince of Wales, and the PrincessAugusta, was born on the 24th of May,1738. He was a seven months' child,and, in consequence of his weakness, wasprivately baptized on the day of his birth.Doubts were entertained as to the possibilityof rearing him ; and, contraryto court etiquette, a nurse was selectedfor him from a very humble class ofthe community. Under the managementof this woman, who appears tohave been the wife of a gardener, herapidly gained strength ; and the alarmof his parents, that he would be incapableof surviving even the minordiseases of infancy, was soon entirelydissipated. Although the delicate childhad been confided to the care of thislowly, but robust individual, contraryto precedent, yet, in obedience to thecustom of the court, it was absurdlyintimated to the woman, that the royalbaby could not be permitted to sleepwith her. " Not sleep with me!" sheexclaimed, bluntly and indignantly ;then you may nurse the boy yourselves."No arguments could induceher to waive her objection on this point ;and the parties concerned, at lengthcondescended to permit the nurslingto be her bedfellow. Many years after,either from misfortune, or her husband'sextravagance, she was frequentlyin great distress for money : on suchoccasions, she invariably applied to theprince ; who, if he had not the meansof relieving her, would actually weepat his inability.He was publicly baptized on the 22ndof June, by the name of George WilliamFrederick : the King of Prussiaand the Duke of Saxe Gotha were hisgod-fathers by proxy, and the Queenof Prussia was his godmother, alsoby proxy.On the first anniversary of his birthday,a Lilliputian military band, consistingof about sixty lads, all undertwelve years of age, sons of wealthycitizens, formed into close column beforeNorfolk house; and, with drumsbeating, and colours flying, marchedup to the drawing-room, where thewere received by their elected colonel,the baby prince, and had the honourof kissing his hand.On the 20th of January, 1741, hewas first publicly prayed for : a reconciliation(externally at least) havingtaken place between his father and theking, and the royal child appears tohave been admitted familiarly into thepresence of his grandfather. One dayhis majesty and the little' prince beingin the library together, the latter wasso noisy that the king threatened toput him out of the window into thegarden ; and finding his threat of noavail, carried it into execution. Thesovereign continued at his businesswithout thinking any more of hisgrandson ; until, being about to retire,Dalton, the librarian, reminded himthat the young prince was a prisonerin the garden. " God bless me !" exclaimedthe king, " I had forgottenthe child ;" and opening the window,he set the future monarch at liberty.In 1744, Prince George, being nearlysix years old, was taken from the nurseryand placed under the care of Dr.Francis Ayscough, who is thus spokenof by Walpole : " Mr. Pelham said, Iknow nothing of Dr. Ayscough. Oh !yes, I recollect I was told by a veryworthy man, two years ago, that hewas a great rogue." " The princess,"says the same author, " found thatPrince George, at eleven years of age,could not read English, though Ays-cough, to make amends, assured herhe could make Latin verses."In 1748, George the Second directedBaron Steinberg to ascertain what progressthe royal children had made intheir education. The baron havingaccordingly examined them, told PrinceGeorge that he should report his greatproficiency in Latin to the king;but," added he, " I wish you werea little more perfect in your Germangrammar." "German grammar!" exclaimedthe boy, squinting at the baron,THE ROYAL FAMILY.why, any dull child can learn that."Shortly after, it was determined thathe should receive the garter, and hewas taken to his grandfather for thatpurpose. On being led into the royalcloset, he began a set speech, whichhad been taught him, by some of theCarlton-house court; but the king interruptedhim, by crying " No, no !" Inafew moments, the boy attempted toproceed with his address ; but thosetremendous sounds, which had beforestopped him, being again uttered in alouder tone, the little orator's lips wereclosed with fear.Goupy, the artist, who was the youngprince's drawing master, one day foundhis pupil standing a prisoner behind hisfather's chair. " Sit down, Goupy,"said the Prince of Wales, " and finishyour design." But the artist representingthat it was impossible for him touse his pencil with any spirit whilehis little friend was in disgrace, theyoung prince was forthwith relieved.A number of years afterwards, his royalpupil, who had long before ascendedthe throne, met poor Goupy, theneighty-four years of age, and in deepdistress, tottering from Kensington towardsLondon, with bailiffs at his heels.The king, who was in his carriage,directed the servants to stop, and thushailed his old preceptor : " How now,Goupy ! How now ! What's the matter?The aged artist replied, that hispersonal freedom was in imminentjeopardy ; but, added he, " as I oncetook your majesty out of confinement,I trust you will not suffer me to beplaced in it." " Oho, Goupy !" saidthe king ; " Bailiffs, eh ? I can't stopthe law, you know : let it take itscourse. But, d'ye hear, Goupy ?Ramus shall settle this business, andI'll take care to secure you from suchdangers in future."In 1749, Lord North, father of thefuture premier, who is described byWalpole, as having been an amiable,worthy man, of no great genius, unlesscompared with his successor, was appointedgovernor to the young prince.About this period, the tragedy of Catowas performed, at Leicester-house, bythe royal children, assisted by some ofthe young nobility and gentry. PrinceGeorge, who spoke the prologue, playedPortus ; Prince Edward, Juba ; andthe Princesses Augusta and Elizabeth,Marcia and Lucia. The instruction ofthe young performers, on this occasion,was confided to the celebrated Quin ;who, many years after, on hearing ofthe graceful mode in which George theThird had delivered the first speechfrom the throne, exclaimed, exultingly,Ay, 'twas I that taught the boy tospeak !"On the 12th of July, 1750, PrinceGeorge, represented by the Earl ofInchequin, was installed a knight ofthe garter. The death of his fathertook place in the spring of the followingyear : and it is related by Walpole,that the young prince, on hearing ofthe event, " cried extremely ;" althoughit has been affirmed, that he was hatedby the Prince of Wales, who lavishedhis paternal regard on his second son,Edward. For the father to detest hisheir had been the fashion of the familyduring two or three generations past ;and Prince Frederick, apparently expectingthat the custom would still bekept up, sent for his eldest son, earlyin 1751, and, embracing him tenderly,said, " Come, George, let us be goodfriends while we are suffered to be so."Soon after the death of Prince Frederick,an act of parliament was passed,vesting the regency and guardianshipof the heir-apparent in the princessdowager, assisted by a council, in caseof the king's demise during the minorityof his grandson ; who, on the20th of April in this year (1751), wascreated Prince of Wales and Earl ofChester.Lord Harcourt now became governor,in the room of Lord North ; and Halter,Bishop of Norwich, and Andrew Stone,preceptors to the heir-apparent Thenew governor, according to Walpole,thought he discharged his trust conscientiously,if on no account he neglectedto make the prince turn out histoes; Stone was proud, very able, andvery mercenary ; and the bishop a sensible,well-bred, honest, and zealousman, the natural son of Blackburn,the jolly old Archbishop of York, whohad all the manners of a man of quality,though he had been a buccaneer, andwas a clergyman.Differences soon occurred betweenthe parties to whom the education ofthe young prince was intrusted. TheGEORGE THE THIRD.particulars of their quarrels are neitherinteresting nor clearly related. It willbe sufficient to state a few of the circumstances,and the result of the whole.The bishop appears to have blamedStone for permitting his pupil to readThe Revolutions of the House ofStuart," and other improper books ; and,in return, was accused of having ejectedScott, a sub-preceptor, one morning,from the prince's chamber, by an impositionof hands, that had at least asmuch of the flesh as the spirit in theforce of the action. In the course ofthe disputes, Murray, afterwards LordMansfield, said, in reply to some statementmade by the bishop relative toLord Harcourt, " Pio ! he's a cypher,and must be a cypher, and was put intobe a cypher." On the 6th of December,1752, the governor resigned;and, in a few days after, Bishop Halterfollowed his lordship's example.Lord Waldegrave, at the earnest requestof the king, and after repeatedassurances of the submission and tractabilityof Stone, accepted the vacantoffice of governor ; and Dr. Thomas,Bishop of Peterborough, a man of faircharacter, became the chief preceptor.Lord Bute, although he held no officeabout the prince, now began to take ashare in his education ; and about, orprobably before, this period, laid thefoundation of his future influence overthe heir-apparent's mind.When the prince was in his fourteenthyear, the princess dowager, inaconversation with Lord Welcome,stated that he was very honest, but shewished he was a little more forward,and less childish, for his age. She saidthat she really did not well know whathis preceptors taught him ; but to speakfreely, she was afraid not much : thatthey were in the country, and followedtheir diversions, and not much elsethat she could discover. She observed,that when Stone talked to the prince ofthe frame and nature of government,he seemed to give a proper attention ;but she did not think the bishop at allfitted to convey knowledge to children,for she did not well understand himherself, his thoughts seeming to be toomany for his words. The prince, sheadded, was not particularly partial toany one about him, but his brotherEdward; and she was glad of it, for theyoung people of quality were so viciousthat they frightened her. On anotheroccasion, when Lord Welcome toldher, " it was to be wished that he couldhave more company, she seemed averseto the young people, from the excessivebad education they had, and from thebad examples they gave."In 1754, the prince began to attendhis mother's evening assemblies. Atthis period, it has been asserted, thathe not only displayed a taste for generalliterature, but evinced so singular apredilection for controversial writings,that he purchased and gave away anhundred pounds' worth of Leland'spolemic writings against the Deists.In the following year, 1755, Georgethe Second contemplated a match betweenthe prince and one of the niecesof the King of Prussia. " The suddennessof the measure, and the little timeleft for preventing it," says Walpole, " atonce unhinged all the prudence of theprincess. From the death of the prince,her object had been the government ofher son. She had taught him greatdevotion, and she had taken care thathe should be taught nothing else. Shesaw no reason to apprehend, from hisown genius, that he would escape her ;but bigotted, and young, and chaste,what empire might not a youthful bride(and the princess was reckoned artful)assume over him ! The princess thoughtthat prudence, now, would be mostimprudent. She instilled into her sonthe greatest aversion to the match ; andhe protested against it!" In the followingyear, the princess proposed anunion between the heir-apparent, anda female of the house of Saxe Gotha;but it was instantly reprobated by theking, who, after expressing himself interms of asperity, said, " he knewenough of that family already."When the prince attained the age ofroyal majority (eighteen) in 1756, theministry persuaded the king to offerhim a handsome allowance out of thecivil list, with a suite of apartments atSt. James's, and another at Kensington-palace: his royal highness accepted theallowance, but, refused to quit his mother.Meetings of the opposition nowtook place, almost daily, at Leicester-house,to the great alarm of the Dukeof Newcastle and his colleagues in office,who endeavoured, but in vain, " to getTHE ROYAL FAMILY.possession of the prince." His establishmentwas at length arranged ; butinsuch a manner as to suit the viewsof his mother and Lord Bute. The latterbecame groom of the stole, andAndrew Stone was appointed secretary.The prince was graciously permitted, bythose who ruled him, to negative theappointment of his sub-preceptor Scott,to any employment about his royal person;because, as it appears, Scott hadonce said to him, in the presence ofLord Waldegrave, on the prince's havingpleading idleness as an excuse forhis inapplication, " Sir, yours is not idleness:your brother Edward is idle ; butyou must not call being asleep all daybeing idle."During the years 1757-8, the influenceof Lord Bute with the princeappears to have been unbounded. Walpoleeven insinuates, that, by variousmisrepresentations, he induced him toneglect his mother ; finding it easier togovern a raw youth than an experiencedwoman. His countryman, Home,the author of Douglas, having producedthe indifferent play of Agis, Lord Butecompelled his pupil to attend the performanceon three successive Saturdaynights. It was also attributed to hislordship's influence, that the prince, atthis period, patronized various politicalauthors whose writings were obnoxiousto government. Among these wereSmollett, who had been imprisoned forlibel ; and Shebbeare, who had stoodin the pillory for abusing George theFirst.About this time, the prince, accompaniedby Lord Bute, took a trip toScotland. While changing horses atEdinburgh, they were recognized by acavalry officer, who, anxious to knowwhat important business had broughtthe heir-apparent and Lord Bute toNorth Britain, immediately took horse,and actually dogged them from Edinburghto Glasgow, thence to the Westof Scotland and the Isle of Bute, andafterwards, by another route, back tothe inn at Edinburgh where he had firstdiscovered them.The prince did not take his seat inparliament, as Duke of Cornwall, until1759. On the 4th of February, in thefollowing year, he went down to thehouse as one of the royal commissioners,and gave the king's assent toseveral new bills. He appeared inpublic on some other occasions, but theprincipal part of his time was passed inretirement, and he was still remarkablytimid and retiring.On the 25th of October, in this year,(1760,) the decease of George the Secondtook place; and, on the followingmorning, his grandson, now Georgethe Third, accompanied by Lord Bute,who, it was expected, would soon reapthe harvest of his attentions to hisroyal pupil, proceeded from Kew toSt. James's palace. On his arrival,the young monarch was presented byMr. Pitt, secretary of state and head ofthe administration, with a paper, onwhich were written a few sentences,which, the minister hinted, might formthe basis of the king's speech to theprivy-council. The young sovereignthanked Mr. Pitt, and added, that hehimself had already adjusted the sub '*stance of his intended speech. Thecouncil met at Carlton-house, and theking, although much embarrassed andagitated at first by the novelty of hissituation, soon acquired confidence, andaddressed them with unexpected dignityand grace.Before the death of George the Second,the people had entertained butahumble opinion of their future monarch,whose education had been notoriouslydefective, and of whom hisgrandfather was known to have said,The boy is good for nothing but toread the Bible to his mother." On hisaccession, however, to the great delightand surprise of his subjects, he displayedso many popular qualities, thatnot to be exceedingly loyal was to beobnoxious singular. " Everything,"says Walpole, speaking of the commencementof the reign, " goes onwith great propriety and decency ; thecivilest letter to Princess Emily ; thegreatest kindness to the duke ; the utmostrespect to the dead body. Thereis great dignity and grace in theking's manner. I don't say this, likemy dear Madame Sevign6, because hewas civil to me, but the part is wellacted. He has all the appearances ofbeing amiable : there is great grace totemper much dignity, and good naturewhich breaks out on all occasions."It is difficult to reconcile the statementof our amusing author, that theGEORGE THE THIRD.greatest respect was shewn to " thedead body," with the fact, that, threedays after his royal grandfather's demise,the young king caused a noticeto be issued by the lord chamberlain,intimating that drawing rooms wouldthenceforth be held two days in eachweek, namely, on Wednesdays, andafter divine service on Sundays. TheSabbath drawing-rooms were, however,soon discontinued as being irreverent.During the two last reigns, the royalmistresses had formed a settled appendageto the household; the continenceof the new monarch, therefore,was greatly admired. He has, however,been suspected of having engaged,soon after his accession, in an amourwith a fair quakeress ; and it is certainthat he was deeply attached to thebeautiful Lady Sarah Lenox ; (marriedafterwards to a baronet, and divorced ;)but he did not attempt to seduce her,nor would he violate his ideas of royaldignity by raising her to the throne.This lady has been described in glowingterms by Walpole. " There was aplay," he says, " at Holland-house,acted by children ; not all children, forLady Sarah Lenox and Lady SusanStrangers played the women. It wasJane Shore : Charles Fox was Hastings.The two girls were delightful, and actedwith so much nature, that they appearedthe very things they represented.Lady Sarah was more beautifulthan you can conceive, and her veryawkwardness gave an air of truth tothe sham of the part, and the antiquityof the time, which was kept up by herdress, taken out of Montauban. LadySusan was dressed from Jane Seymour.I was more struck with the last scenebetween the two women, than ever Iwas when I have seen it on the stage.When Lady Sarah was in white, withher hair about her ears, and on theground, no Magdalen of Corregio washalf so lovely and expressive."In his speech, on the opening ofparliament, in November, the kingsaid, with considerable feeling, " Bornand educated in this country, I gloryin the name of Briton ; and the peculiarhappiness of my life will ever consistin promoting the welfare of apeople whose loyalty and warm affectionfor me I consider as the greatestand most permanent security of mythrone ; and I doubt not but theirsteadiness in those principles will equalthe firmness of my invariable resolutionto adhere to and strengthen this excellentconstitution in church and state,and to maintain toleration inviolable."Although, in common conversation,the king spoke with a rapidity whichoften made him unintelligible, in publiche declaimed with as much true modulationas almost any man in his dominions.Yet he had but a mean opinion of oratory,for he once said, " 1 am sure thatthe rage for public speaking, and theextravagant length to which some of ourmost popular orators carry their haranguesin parliament, is very detrimentalto the national business ; and Iwish it may not, in the end, prove injuriousto the public peace. At avery early period of his reign, helaudably endeavoured to divest pulpiteloquence of its usual laudatory personalitiesto royalty. Wilson, the prebendaryof Westminster, having beenguilty of some fulsome adulation to theyoung monarch, in his chapel, he receivedan admonitory message from hismajesty, who stated that he went tochurch to hear God praised, and nothimself. Some time afterwards heissued an order, prohibiting thoseclergymen who should preach beforehim from paying him any complimentin their discourses.The king added considerably to hispopularity by recommending parliamentto enact, and it was accordinglyenacted, that the commissions of thejudges, which, since a short time afterthe Revolution, had been determinableon the death of the sovereign by whomthey were signed, should remain in fullforce, notwithstanding the royal demise.On this important occasion the kingsaid, " That he looked upon the independenceand uprightness of the judgesas essential to the impartial administrationof justice ; as one of the best securitiesof the rights and liberties of hissubjects; and as most conducive to thehonour of the crown."Parliament was dissolved on the 19thof March, 1761, after having settledthe civil list at .800,000 per annum,which it was provided should be paidout of the aggregate fund. On the writsfor the new elections being issued, theking declared, that no money shouldTHE ROYAL FAMILY.be spent to procure the return of membersfavourable to the government ;"for," said he, "I am resolved to betried by my country !" The ministrywas now partially changed : Lord Butebecame secretary of state, in the roomof Lord Holdernesse, and ViscountHarrington succeeded Mr. Legge aschancellor of the exchequer.The next important circumstance ofthis year, (1761,) was the selection of aconsort for the king. According to oneaccount, he followed the dictates of hisown judgment and inclination in fixingupon a wife ; and, as it would appear,fell in love with his future queen, onperusing a copy of a letter which she hadwritten to Frederick, King of Prussia.No sooner had he read the epistle, than,as it is said, he exclaimed to Lord Hertford," This is the lady whom I shallselect for my consort: here are lastingbeauties, on which the man who hasany mind may feast and not be satiated.If the disposition of the princess butequals her intellect, I shall be the happiestman, as I hope, with my people'sconcurrence, to be the greatest monarch,in Europe."Among other different versions of theaffair, is the following: The king'sknown attachment to Lady SarahLenox, fomented as it was by Fox,afterwards the first Lord Holland, inducedthe princess dowager and LordBute to engage the young monarch inamatrimonial connexion, without theleast delay. The princess dowagerwished to select a consort for her sonfrom the family of Saxe Gotha ; but asthe members of it were supposed topossess an hereditary disease, her desirewas over-ruled. A Scotch colonel,named Gramme, was then sent, by LordBute, to the various courts in Germanyin quest of a princess perfect in her form,of pure blood, and healthy constitution ;possessed of elegant accomplishments,particularly music, to which the kingwas much attached; and of a mild,obliging disposition. Such were thecolonel's instructions ; and his choicefell on Sophia-Charlotte, the seconddaughter of Charles-Lewis-Frederick,Duke of Mecklenburgh Strelitz, by hisconsort Albertina-EHzabeth, daughterof the Duke of Saxe Hildburghausen.This princess was born at the palaceof Mirow, on the 16th of May, 1744.The preliminary part of her educationwas conducted by her mother, with theassistance of Mademoiselle Seltzer, ahighly accomplished lady of noblebirth; and in 1751, Madame de Grasa woman of great erudition, andpossessed of such poetical talent as tobe termed " The German Sappho," wasappointed her governess. Under thisable teacher, she not only became agood German scholar, but obtained athorough knowledge of French, Italian,history, geography, &c. To the zealousinstructions of M. Gentler shewas indebted for considerable informationin the science of mineralogy.She drew well, danced with much grace,and displayed considerable skill in vocalas well as instrumental music. In addition,her mind was imbued with themost reverential sentiments for religionand morality, which the example of herfamily taught her to estimate above allmere worldly advantages.During the continental war, whichdesolated the fairest provinces of Germany,from 1756 to 1763, the duchy ofMecklenburgh suffered severely j itstowns and villages were occupied bythe troops of Prussia, who levied heavycontributions on the inhabitants, andcompelled the young men to enlist.Many families, in order to preserve awreck of their property, made theirescape to Hamburgh and Lubec ; and atlength the country was almost depopulated.Under the impulse of strongly-excitedfeelings, which the miseries ofher native land more than justified, theprincess sent the following letter to theKing of Prussia ; a copy of which, afterwardsfalling into the hands of Georgethe Third, excited in the bosom of thatmonarch, as we have already stated, anattachment towards its feeling and eloquentwriter:May it please your majesty,I am at a loss whether I should congratulateor condole with you on yourlate victory over Marshal Dan, Nov.3rd, 1760, since the same success whichhas covered you with laurels, has overspreadthe country of Mecklenburghwith desolation. 1 know, sire, that itseems unbecoming my sex, in this ageof vicious refinement, to feel for one'scountry, to lament the horrors of war,or to wish for the return of peace. IGEORGE THE THIRD.know you may think it more properlymy province to study the arts of pleasing,or to inspect subjects of a moredomestic nature ; but, however unbecomingit may be in me, I cannot resistthe desire of interceding for this unhappypeople.It was but a very few years ago, thatthis territory wore the most pleasingappearance: the country was cultivated,the peasant looked cheerful, andthe towns abounded with riches andfestivity. What an alteration, at present,from such a charming scene ! Iam not expert at description, nor canmy fancy add any horrors to the picture; but, surely even conquerors themselveswould weep at the hideousprospects now before me. The wholecountry, my dear country, lies onefrightful waste; presenting only objectsto excite terror, pity, and despair. Theemployments of the husbandman andthe shepherd are quite suspended ; forthe husbandman and the shepherd arebecome soldiers themselves, and helpto ravage the soil which they formerlycultivated. The towns are inhabitedonly by old men, women, and children ;while, perhaps, here and there a warrior,by wounds or loss of limbs renderedunfit for service, is left at hisdoor, where his little children hanground him, ask the history of everywound, and grow themselves soldiersbefore they find strength for the field.But this were nothing, did we not feelthe alternate insolence of either army,as it happens to advance or retreat,in pursuing the operations of the campaign.It is impossible, indeed, to expressthe confusion which they, whocall themselves our friends, create ; foreven those from whom we might expectrelief only oppress us with new calamities.From your justice, therefore,it is, sire, that we hope redress ; to you,even children and women may complain,whose humanity stoops to themeanest petitions, and whose poweris capable of repressing the greatestwrong!"Soon after the receipt of this admirableepistle, (which, judging from theindisputable productions of her pen,was more likely to have been transcribedthan composed by the princess,)Frederick issued strict injunctions " torevive a sense of order in the army ;"and his soldiers were drilled into feelingsof humanity.On the 8th of July, at an extraordinarycouncil, which was very numerouslyattended, the king stated, thatever since his accession to the throne,he had turned his thoughts towards thechoice of a princess for his consort ; andthat, after mature deliberation, he hadcome to a resolution to demand inmarriage the Princess Charlotte ofMecklenburgh-Strelitz, a princess distinguishedby every eminent virtue andamiable endowment." This announcementvery much surprised the greaterpart of the council, the preliminarynegotiations for the marriage havingbeen conducted with extraordinarysecresy. On the 15th of August thetreaty was concluded ; and preparationswere immediately made to conductthe bride to this country. TheEarl of Harcourt, and the Duchesses ofLancaster and Hamilton, the two finestwomen at the British court, were selectedto accompany her ; and the royalyacht, in which she and her suite wereto embark, was ordered to be convoyedby a fleet under the command of LordAnson.The separation of the princess andher family was exceedingly affecting.At Mirow, the place of her nativity,she finally parted from her elder sister,who, but for the marriage of SophiaCharlotte with George the Third,would, it is asserted, have formed amatrimonial connexion with one of hissubjects. Her suitor, a Scotch duke,was resident at Strelitz, and treated asthe favoured lover of the elder princess,when overtures for the hand of hersister, Sophia Charlotte, were made onbehalf of the King of England : thecourtship was consequently broken off,to the deep regret of the duke and hisintended bride, both of whom died unmarried.The princess received great honoursduring her journey. On Monday, the24th of August, she left Stade, in theAdmiralty barge, accompanied by herbrother, Lord Anson, and Earl Harcourt,and in about an hour reachedthe yacht; the royal standard was immediatelyhoisted at the ,the admiralty flag at thefore-top, and the union at the mizen.All the ships then fired a salute ofTHE ROYAL FAMILY.twenty-one guns each ; and the princess,overcome by her feelings, exclaimed," Is it possible that I can beworthy of these honours!" On accountof the unfavourable state of theweather, the squadron did not proceedto sea until the 28th ; even then thewind was adverse, and ten days elapsedbefore the admiral could reach anEnglish port. Flamborough Head wastwice in view during the voyage, butthe ships were driven to sea again, andall of them sustained some damage.The two duchesses were extremely ill ;but the princess, who had never seenthe sea before, bore the voyage withlittle inconvenience. At length, onSunday, the 6th of September, the royalyacht entered Harwich roads; but nopreparations having been made for thereception of the princess, she did notland until the next morning.Walpole states, that nothing was everequal to the bustle and uncertainty ofthe town at this time. He adds, " I forgivehistory for knowing nothing, whenso public an event as the arrival of anew queen is a mystery, even at thisvery moment, in St. James's-street.The messenger that brought the letteryesterday morning, said she arrivedat half an hour alter four at Harwich.This was immediately translated intolanding, and notified in those wordsto the ministers. Six hours afterwardsit proved no such thing, and that shewas only in Harwich road ; and theyrecollected that half an hour after spurhappens twice in twenty-four hours,and the letter did not specify whichof the twice it was. Well ! the bride-maidswhipped on their virginity; theNew road and the parks were thronged ;the guns were choaking with impatienceto go off; and Sir James Other,who was to pledge his majesty, wasactually married to Lady Mary Stuart.Five, six, seven, eight o'clock came,and no queen ! She lay at Withal,at Lord Abercorn's, who was most tranquillyin town ; and it is not certain,even, whether she will be in town tonight.She has been sick but half anhour ; sung and played on the harpsichordall the voyage, and been cheerfulthe whole time."About noon, on the eighth, she wasmet at Rumford, by the king's servants; and soon after entered the royalcarriage, dressed entirely in the Englishfashion, having a fly cap, with richlaced lappets, a stomacher ornamentedwith diamonds, and a gold brocadesuite with a white ground. From MileEnd she was escorted, by the LifeGuards, to St. James's. On her arrivalat the palace, the Duke of Yorkhanded her out of the carriage; andthe king raised her up and saluted her,just as she was about to drop on herknee to pay him obeisance. It was,however, afterwards rumoured that theking, on first seeing his bride, shrunkback from a feeling of disappointment,her personal graces being far fromstriking. But Walpole says, " In halfan hour, one heard of nothing but proclamationsof her beauty ; every bodywas content, every body was pleased.At seven," he continues, " one went tocourt; the night was sultry. Aboutten, the procession began to movetowards the chapel ; and at eleven theyall came up into the drawing-room.She looks very sensible, cheerful, andis remarkably genteel. Her tiara ofdiamonds was very pretty, her stomachersumptuous; her violet-velvetmantle and ermine so heavy, that thespectators knew as much of her upperhalf as the king himself. You willhave no doubt of her sense by what Ishall tell you : on the road they wantedher to curl her toupet: she said shethought it looked as well as that of anyof the ladies sent to fetch her; if theking bid her, she would wear a periwig,otherwise she would remain as she was.When she caught the first glimpse ofthe palace she grew frightened, andturned pale. The Duchess of Hamiltonsmiled, the princess said, ' My dearduchess, you may laugh you havebeen married twice ; but it is no joke tome.'Her lips trembled as the coachstopped, but she jumped out with spirit,and has done nothing but with goodhumour and cheerfulness. She talks agreat deal, is easy, civil, and not disconcerted.At first, when the bride-maidsand the court were introduced toher, she said, " Mon Dieu, il y en atant, il y en a tant !" She was pleasedwhen she was to kiss the peeresses ; butLady Augusta was forced to take herhand and give it to those that were tokiss it, which was prettily humble andgood-natured. While they waited forGEORGE THE THIRD.supper, she sat down, sung, and played.Her French is tolerable ; she exchangedmuch both of that and German withthe king. They did not get to bed tilltwo."The Archbishop of Canterbury performedthe marriage ceremony : theprincess was given away by the Dukeof Cumberland ; and the beautiful LadySarah Lenox, with some other unmarrieddaughters of dukes and earls, borethe bride's train.On the Sunday after their marriage,the royal couple appeared in public atthe chapel-royal. The next eveningthey went in chairs, attended by thehorse-guards, to Drury-lane theatre,where the queen, for the first time inher life, saw a dramatic entertainment ;theatrical performances having beeninterdicted at Mecklenburgh, as tendingto produce idleness and dissipation.In her progress to the theatre she wasmuch alarmed by the pressure of thepeople towards her chair. The streets,on this occasion, were filled with countlessmultitudes, and two persons weretrampled to death by the crowd, at theplay-house doors.Extraordinary preparations were nowmade for the approaching coronation :to the fronts of the houses, on eachside of the platform, scaffoldings werefixed for seats, for which the proprietorsasked enormous prices ; those in theAbbey were let at ten guineas each. Sogreat was the rage to witness the pageant,that the husband of a lady, who was inan advanced state of pregnancy, paidone hundred and forty guineas for tworooms, commanding a view of the platform,where she could be attended byher nurse and accoucheur.The ceremony took place on the22nd of September : thousands hadsat up in the open air all night; andlong before it was day-light, all thescaffoldings were crowded. The followingis an abridgment of a letter,written by an eye-witness of the spectacle: " First, conceive to yourselvesthe fronts of all the houses that couldcommand the least point of view linedwith scaffolding, like so many galleriesor boxes, raised one above another tothe very roofs. These were coveredwith carpets, and cloths of differentcolours, which presented a pleasingvariety to the eye : and if you considerthe brilliant appearance of those seatedin them, many of whom were mostsplendidly dressed, you will imaginethat this was no indifferent part of theshow. A rank of foot soldiers wasplaced on each side within the platform,and on the outside were stationed,at proper intervals, parties ofhorse-guards. As soon as it was daybreak,we were diverted with seeingthe coaches and chairs of the nobilitypassing along with much difficulty ;and many persons richly dressed wereforced to leave their carriages, and beescorted by the soldiers to their places.Their majesties came in chairs fromSt. James's to Westminster-hall, aboutnine o'clock. In spite of the painstaken to have everything in order,some curious blunders were committed.They actually forgot the sword of state,the chairs for the king and queen, andeven the canopies ; so that, as a substitutefor the first, they were forcedto borrow the lord mayor's sword, andto keep their majesties waiting till matterswere arranged in the hall. It isnot in the power of words to describeeither the beauty of the spectacle, orthe joy of the multitude, when theroyal pair passed. It was observed,that as they turned the corner whichcommanded a view of Westminsterbridge, they stopped to look at thepeople, the appearance of whom, uncovered,and gradually rising in a densemass from the ground, resembled apavement of heads and faces."When the king approached the altar,in order to receive the sacrament, heasked if he should lay aside his crown.The Archbishop of Canterbury replied,that there was no order in the serviceon the subject. " Then there ought tobe," rejoined the king, He immediatelytook off his crown, and wishedthat of her majesty to be also removed ;but being told it was fastened to herhair, he said it might remain, but mustbe considered only as a part of herdress. The most valuable diamond inthe king's crown fell out, during hisreturn from the abbey to the hall, but itwas soon afterwards found and restored.Bishop Newton, speaking of hismajesty's deportment at the coronation,declares " that no actor in thecharacter of Pyrrhus, in the DistressedMother, not even Booth himself, whoTHE ROYAL FAMILY.was celebrated for it in the Spectator,ever ascended the throne with so muchgrace and dignity."The following anecdotes, relative tothe ceremony, are principally gleanedfrom the lively Walpole: "At thedinner, Earl Talbot, as lord steward,on the second course being served up,rode from the hall-gate to the platformsteps. The earl piqued himself onbacking his horse down the hall, andnot turning its rump towards the king;but he had taken such pains to dressit to that duty, that it entered backwards; and, at his retreat, the spectatorsclapped, a terrible indecorum,but suitable to such Bartholomew-fairdoings. He had twenty semele's, butcame out of none creditably. He hadtaken away the table of the Knightsof the Bath, and was forced to admittwo in their old place, and dine theothers in the court of requests. SirWilliam Stanhope said, ' We are ill-treated,for some of us are gentlemen.'Beckford told the earl it was hard torefuse a table to the city of London,whom it would cost ten thousandpounds to banquet the king, and thathis lordship would repent it, if theyhad not a table in the hall ; uponwhich they had one. To the baronsof the cinque ports, who made thesame complaint, he said, ' If you cometo me as lord steward, I tell you itis impossible ; if as Lord Talbot, I amamatch for any of you.' "The champion acted his part admirably.His horse was the identicalcharger which George the Second rodeat the battle of Dettingen. Many personsof quality, in the galleries, letdown handkerchiefs tied together, andstrings with baskets suspended to them,earnestly requesting some of the goodthings from the tables, to satisfy theircraving appetites. Some of the peeresseswere dressed on the precedingnight, slept in arm-chairs, and werewaked if they tumbled their heads.Lady Townshend said, she should bevery glad to see a coronation, as shehad never seen one. " Why," saidWalpole, " madam, you walked at thelast." " Yes, child," said she, " but Isaw nothing of it : I looked to see wholooked at me."The king having complained of thestrange paucity of precedents as to theceremonies, Lord Effingham ownedthat the Earl Marshal's office had beenstrangely neglected ; " but," added he,I have taken such care, that the nextcoronation may be regulated in themost exact manner imaginable." LadyCowper, for some time, " refused to setafoot with my Lady M.; and whenshe was at last obliged to associatewith her, set out on a round trot, asif she designed to prove the antiquityof her family, by marching as lustily asamaid of honour of Queen Gwinevir."Probably no great public festival everpassed oft' with more chat than thecoronation of George the Third : theking and queen were both young, andexceedingly popular; it happened at amoment of great national prosperity ;the political heads of the governmentwere remarkably acceptable to thepeople, and not a single accident occurredduring the day.But amid all the bustle of pageantry,politics were not neglected. The kingevinced an inclination for procuring ageneral peace : in this, he differed fromhis great minister, Pitt, and the principalpart of his subjects. Being toldthat if he were determined on pacificmeasures, the premier would, in allprobability, resign, the king replied,I am determined not to be the onlyslave in a country, where it is my wishto see all the people free."On the 5th of October, Pitt retiredfrom office, and Lord Bute became thehead of the administration. CardinalStopping, on being told, at Rome, ofthe change which had taken place inthe English cabinet, could not believehis informant: " For what heir," saidhe, " on coming to a considerable estate,and finding it excellently well managedby a steward, would dismiss thatsteward merely because he had servedhis predecessor?"At this period, principally throughthe lofty spirit and political sagacity ofPitt, the affairs of the nation were inamost prosperous state. The armyand navy were highly efficient, andflushed with recent conquests ; therevenue flourished, commerce was increasing,the people were loyal, and,perhaps, no prince had ascended thethrone of his ancestors with more flatteringprospects than George the Third.To those, therefore, who, like CardinalGEORGE THE THIRD.Stopping, perhaps, were unacquaintedwith the ascendancy of Lord Bute overthe king's mind, the change in theEnglish ministry must have appearedextraordinary. In a life of Pitt, it isinsinuated, that the king was anxiousto be rid of that statesman ; feeling,as he did, awed in the presence of, andill at ease in his intercourse with, a manwhose personal dignity was so overwhelming.This may reasonably bedoubted, especially as the king was, atleast at this period, eminently dignifiedhimself : and the expulsion of the Titanicstatesman from the cabinet, may,with more safety, be attributed to theinfluence of Bute.On the 6th of November, the kingopened the new parliament, with aspeech from the throne, in which hestated, that having made an ineffectualattempt to bring about a general peace,nothing remained but to prosecute thewar with vigour.The last splendid scene of this yearof pageants was the civic feast, on the9th of November, which all the royalfamily attended. The king and queen,on this occasion, went to the house ofDavid Barclay, silk mercer, a memberof the society of Friends, opposite toBow church, to witness the lord mayor'sprocession. Barclay was the son ofthe author of the Apology for theQuakers; he had reached his eighty-firstyear, and this was the third occasionon which a king of England hadbecome his guest. The following isan abridgment of a letter, written byone of his daughters, relative to thevisit in question, which was publishedin the Gentleman's Magazine of December,1808 : " About one o'clock,papa and mamma, with sister Westonto attend them, took their stands atthe street door, where my two brothershad long been to receive the nobility,more than a hundred of whom werethen waiting in the warehouse. Asthe royal family came, they were conductedinto one of the counting-houses,which was transformed into a verypretty parlour. At half-past two, theirmajesties came, which was two hourslater than they intended. On thesecond pair of stairs was placed ourown company, about forty in number,the chief of whom were of the Puritanorder, and all in their orthodox habits.Next to the drawing-room door wereplaced our ourselves, I mean my papa'schildren ; none else, to the great mortificationof our visitors, being allowedto enter : for as kissing the king's handwithout kneeling was an unexampledhonour, the king confined that privilegeto our own family, as a return forthe trouble we had been at. After theroyal pair had shewn themselves at thebalcony, we were all introduced, andyou may believe, at that juncture, wetell no small palpitations. The kingmet us at the door, (a condescensionwe did not expect) at which place, hesaluted us with great politeness. Advancingto the upper end of the room,we kissed the queen's hand, at thesight of whom we were all in raptures,not only from the brilliancy of her appearance,which was pleasing beyonddescription, but being throughout herwhole person possessed of that inexpressiblesomething that is beyond aset of features, and equally claims ourattention. To be sure, she has not afine face, but a most agreeable countenance,and is vastly genteel, with anair, notwithstanding her being a littlewoman, truly majestic : and, I reallythink, by her manner is expressed thatcomplacency of disposition which istruly amiable ; and though I couldnever perceive that she deviated fromthat dignity which belongs to a crownedhead, yet, on the most trifling occasions,she displayed all that easy behaviourthat negligence can bestow.Her hair, which is of a light colour,hung in what are called coronation ringlets,encircled with a band of diamonds,so beautiful in themselves, and so prettilydisposed, as will admit of no description.Her clothes, which were asrich as gold, silver, and silk could makethem, was a suit, from which fell atrain, supported by a little page inscarlet and silver. The lustre of herstomacher was inconceivable. Theking I think a very personable man.All the princes followed the king'sexample in complimenting each of uswith a kiss. The queen was up stairsthree times ; and my little darling, withPatty Barclay and Priscilla Ball, wereintroduced to her : I was present, andnot a little anxious on account of mygirl, who kissed the queen's hand withso much grace, that I thought theTHE ROYAL FAMILY.princess dowager would have smotheredher with kisses. Such a report wasmade of her to the king, that miss wassent for, and afforded him great amusementby saying, ' that she loved theking, though she must not love finethings, and that her grandpa wouldnot allow her to make a curtsey.' Hersweet face made such an impression onthe Duke of York, that I rejoiced thatshe was only five instead of fifteen.When he first met her, he tried topersuade miss to let him introduce herto the queen ; but she would by nomeans consent, till I informed her hewas a prince ; upon which, her littlefemale heart relented, and she gavehim her hand, a true copy of the sex.The king never sat down, nor did hetaste anything during the whole time.Her majesty drank tea, which wasbrought her on a silver waiter by brotherJohn, who delivered it to the ladyin waiting, and she presented it kneeling.The leave they took of us wassuch as we might expect from ourequals ; full of apologies for our trouble,and their entertainment; which theywere so anxious to have explained,that the queen came up to us, as westood on one side of the door, and hadevery word interpreted. My brothershad the honour of assisting the queeninto her coach. Some of us sat uptosee them return, and the king andqueen took especial notice of us as theypassed. The king ordered twenty-fourof his life guards to be placed oppositeour house all night, lest any of thecanopy should be pulled down by themob, in which there were one hundredyards of silk damask."The entertainment at Guildhall wasso magnificent, that when the royalfamily retired, the king, addressinghimself to the lord mayor, said, " Tobe elegantly entertained, I must comeinto the city !" This fate cost upwardsof 7,000 ; and one of the foreignministers described it as a banquet fitonly for one king to give to another.On the 2nd of December, the royalassent was given to a bill for settlingthe queen's dowry (in case her majestyshould survive the king,) at 100,000per annum. A patent also passed theprivy seal, by which a yearly sum of40,000 was granted to the (queen, forthe better support of her dignity. Theking continued to be very popular.Walpole, in a letter dated about thisperiod, states, that his majesty wasevidently desirous of giving generalsatisfaction. " I saw him yesterday,"he continues, " and was surprised to findthe levee-room had lost so entirely theair of a lion's den. This sovereigndoes not stand in one spot, with hiseyes royally fixed on the ground, anddropping bits of German news; hewalks about, and speaks to every body."In January 1762, a declaration ofwar was issued against Spain. InMay, Lord Bute succeeded the Dukeof Newcastle as first lord of the treasury,and preliminaries of peace weresigned between this country, andFrance and Spain, on the 3rd of thefollowing November. The people, however,were by no means pacifically inclined,or contented with the politicalascendancy of Lord Bute ; whose administrationwas attacked with unsparingseverity by several popular writers,particularly by the celebrated JohnWilkes, in his periodical paper calledthe North Briton. The arrest ofWilkes, and the seizure of his papersunder a general warrant, issued by thesecretary of state for the home department,increased the indignation andclamours of the people ; Lord Bute wasexecrated throughout the country, andthe king himself became exceedinglyunpopular. The removal of the favourite,and the appointment of GeorgeGrenville to the head of the treasury,having failed to allay the national irritation,Pitt, it is asserted, was, atlength, summoned to court, and requestedto make arrangements forforming a new ministry; but he presumed,it is added, to dictate such arrogantterms, that, rather than submitto them, the king said he would placethe crown on Pitt's head, and submithis own neck to the axe.In 1764, the king suggested toGrenville the taxation of America as agrand financial measure for relievingthe mother country from the heavywar expenses which had chiefly beenincurred for the security of the colonies.The minister was startled, and raisedobjections to the proposal, which, however,were overruled by the king, whoplainly told him that, if he were afraidto adopt such a measure, others mightGEORGE THE THIRD.easily be found who possessed morepolitical courage. At length, Grenvillereluctantly brought the subject beforeparliament ; and, in spite of a violentopposition, the stamp act, so importantin its consequences, was passed in thefollowing year. The most alarmingirritation prevailed among the colonists.In the lower house of representativesat Virginia, Patrick Henry, apopular orator, exclaimed, " Caesar hadhis Brutus, Charles the First his Cromwell,and George the Third " Criesof " Treason !" here interrupted thespeaker ; but, after a moment's pause,he continued, " And George the Thirdmay profit by their example. If thisbetreason, make the most of it."Early in this year the king was attackedby an indisposition of six weeks'duration, which is suspected to havebeen similar in its nature to, though lessin its degree than, the malady which obscuredthe latter part of his life. Soonafter his recovery, he went down tothe house of peers, and, in a speechfrom the throne, proposed a legislativeenactment, by which he might beenabled, under the sign manual, fromtime to time, to appoint the queen, orsome other member of the royal family,guardian to the heir-apparent and regentof the kingdom. The bill was soon.afterwards brought into parliament,and eventually passed; although itmet with so much opposition in itsprogress, even from some of the ministry,who wished the term " royalfamily" to include only the descendantsof the late king, to the exclusion ofthe princess dowager, that a changein the administration ensued.The Rockingham party, which nowcame into power, procured the repealof the odious and impolitic stamp act ;but, notwithstanding this and someother popular measures of the newcabinet, it was dissolved in the summerof 1766. The Duke of Grafton succeededLord Rockingham as first lordof the treasury, and Pitt (then Earl ofChatham) took office as lord privy seal.In the following year, Charles Townshend,chancellor of the exchequer, proposedthe taxation of certain articlesimported by the American colonists ;and, early in 1768, Lord Chatham retired,in deep disgust, from the administration,which, during the precedingautumn, had been weakened by thesuccession of Lord North to CharlesTownshend, as chancellor of the exchequer.Some other official changestook place ; one of the most importantof which, perhaps, was the appointmentof Lord Gainsborough to the new colonialsecretaryship.The aspect of affairs in Americagrew more serious every hour: thedeputies of Massachusetts declared taxationby the British parliament to beillegal ; a scheme for a general congressof the different states was proposed ;and an open rupture with the mothercountry was evidently approaching.Blind to the consequences of their fatalpolicy, the king and his ministers, however,persisted in those measures, withregard to the transatlantic colonies,which, eventually, produced a dismembermentof the empire.The unpopularity of George theThird, in 1769, had nearly reached itsgreatest height. The proceedingsagainst Wilkes were viewed with deepindignation ; his outlawry, and, afterits reversal, the punishment of fine andimprisonment inflicted on him for hispolitical writings, tended to increase,rather than to depress, his zeal againstgovernment, and his influence over thediscontented. After having been expelledthe house of commons for hiscomments on a letter written by one ofthe ministers, he was so repeatedly andpersevering! y returned by the Middlesexfreeholders, that, at length, thepersons in power, who were resolutein their determination to keep him outof parliament, audaciously procuredhis opposing candidate, Lustre!, to bedeclared duly elected, although thelatter had been in a minority of nearlyone thousand on the poll. Duringthese proceedings, the metropolis wasdisgraced by a succession of dreadfulriots: the premises of Barclay, theQuaker, in.Cheapside, were wantonlydamaged, apparently for no otherreason than because he had entertainedthe king during his majesty'svisit to the city ; and a hearse, with aman seated on the box, in the habitof an executioner, who ferociouslybrandished an axe, was driven into thecourt-yard of St. James's, amid themost frightful yells and execrationsof the mob. The king, who was then inTHE ROYAL FAMILY.the palace, exhibited no symptoms ofalarm, but calmly gave such orders aswere necessary for the restoration ofpublic tranquillity, and which his confidentialservants were too muchagitated to issue. He soon after displayedanother strong proof of hisfirmness : several of the rioters werecapitally convicted for wantonly destroyingproperty at Bethnal-green,where it was deemed expedient thatthey should be executed : the timidityof ministers, however, produced somediscussions as to the danger of carryingthe sentence into effect; but theking, having ascertained from the judgesthat the proceeding was perfectly legal,personally gave the necessary directionson the subject to the civil power.A deficiency in the civil list, to theamount of half a million, increased theexasperation of the people against government;over which a positive triumphwas achieved, about the sameperiod, by the persecuted champion ofthe disaffected, the notorious Wilkes;who obtained a verdict with 4,000damages against Lord Halifax, for thearrest of his person and the seizure ofhis papers, under a general warrant,the issue of which was declared to havebeen illegal.At the close of this unpropitious year,Junius published his famous letter tothe king, who is said to have weptwhile he perused it. This terribleepistle, which was read and applaudedthroughout the country, so completelyparalyzed some of the feeble and foolishmembers of administration, thatthey were incapable of making a singleeffort to preserve their places. TheDuke of Grafton resigned all his employmentsin January, 1770 ; but, unfortunately,he was succeeded in thepremiership by Lord North, who increasedrather than alleviated the nationalcalamities.Popular clamour kept pace with ministerialfolly : blood was alreadyspilled in America ; and the city ofLondon delivered a bold address andremonstrance to the king, for which,being censured in the reply from thethrone, they voted a second address,declaratory of their deep concern athaving fallen under his majesty's displeasure.The king, in his answer,stated that it was his duty to express,as he did, the disgust he felt at theirsentiments; and Beckford, the lordmayor, in rejoinder, is said to have deliveredextemporaneously the spiritedspeech which is engraved on the pedestalof his statue at Guildhall.Doubts, however, have been entertainedas to his having used the languageattributed to him on this occasion; but it is quite clear, that, toadopt his own phrase, he repeatedsomething as much to the purpose ashecould ; and, on the next appearanceof the lord mayor and corporation atthe palace, Beckford was desired neverto reply to an answer from his majestyagain.In 1771, certain printers were orderedinto custody of the serjeant-alarms forhaving published the parliamentary debates: one of them, on being carriedbefore Alderman Wilkes, was immediatelydischarged ; and the lord mayorand Alderman Oliver, both of whomwere members of the house of commons,having acted in the same manneron a similar occasion, were committedto the tower, where they remained incustody until the prorogation of parliament.These contemptible measures,and the unsuccessful prosecution ofWoodfall, the printer of the famousletter addressed by Junius to the king,materially increased the feelings ofbitterness entertained by the peopleagainst the sovereign and his ministers.The former could scarcely everappear in public without receiving themost unequivocal marks of aversion ;while, strange as it may appear, thelatter gradually increased in strength,until all opposition to their impolitic proceedingsbecame hopeless.In 1772, at the express recommendationof the king, who felt highly indignantat the recent union of hisbrother, the Duke of Cumberland, withMrs. Horton, an act was passed,whereby all members of the royalfamily, if under twenty-five years ofage, were thenceforth prevented frommarrying without the king's consent ;or, although above that age, if theirintended alliance should be disapprovedof by parliament.The discontented colonists at lengthbroke out into acts of open violence :three sloops, laden with tea, were entered,in the port of Boston, by armedGEORGE THE THIRD.persons in disguise, who threw thecargoes overboard. In consequence ofthis outrage, a royal message was deliveredto parliament, recommendingthe adoption of such measures as theoccasion seemed to require ; and LordNorth introduced some severe billsagainst the colonists, which, althoughwarmly opposed, passed through bothhouses of parliament, and received theroyal assent. These injudicious enactmentswere followed by the meetingof a general congress at Philadelphia ;and, shortly afterwards, the Americanstates declared themselves independent.The disasters which befel themother country in her subsequent unsuccessfulstruggle with the colonists,it scarcely falls within the province ofthe biographer to record : suffice it, atleast in this place, to say, that, after along war, during which, France, Spain,and Holland, hostilely interfered inbehalf of America, the independenceof the United States was formally acknowledged.In' 1777, the king applied for anaddition of 100,000 per annum to thecivil list ; but the grant met with considerableopposition, principally becauseit was suspected that the civillist revenues were employed by ministersto increase their influence inparliament. On the 25th of June, inthis year, while the king was proceedingto the little theatre in the Hay-market,an insane female rushed uptothe royal chair, dashed her armthrough the glass, and would probablyhave committed some serious assault onhis majesty, but for the interference ofthe police.During the year 1778, the kingvisited the fleet at Spithead, inspectedthe works at Chatham, the batteries,storehouses, &c. at Sheerness, and thedock yard at Portsmouth. He alsogratified his predilection for militaryreviews at Winchester, Warley, Cox-heath,and other places, and acquiredsome popularity by his urbane deportmentto all classes of the communityduring his progresses.In 1779, the political 'horizon wasexceedingly gloomy. In addition to thecontest with her colonies, Great Britainhad become involved in hostilities withSpain ; her military force was wastingaway in America, the navy had ceasedto be triumphant, commerce had falleninto decay, ministers appeared to feeltheir own incapacity, and the sovereignwas hated by a great portion of hispeople. He still, however, persistedin his former principles ; and, while asmall party applauded his firmness, thepublic in general loudly censured hisobstinacy.During the riots of 1780, which wereoccasioned by the repeal of certainpenal statutes against the Catholics,the king sat up for two nights in thequeen's riding-house, and receivedhourly reports of the movements of themob. While London was on fire inseveral places, he presided at a privycouncil, which was summoned to considerthe legality of firing on actualrioters before the reading of the act.The question was decided in theaffirmative, but none of the ministershad sufficient courage to sign the necessaryorder for the direction of thetroops. At length, the king commandedthe attorney-general, Wedder-burnt,to write down his opinion, (whichcoincided with that of the council ingeneral on the subject,) and then coollyplaced his signature at the foot of theorder. His firmness, however, wastotally free from cruelty, or even excessiveseverity ; for when the mobattempted to break into St. James'spalace, he ordered the soldiers not tofire, but, if possible, to keep off therioters with their bayonets.In 1782, Lord North resigned, andthe Rockingham party went intooffice : but the new administrationsoon afterwards broke up, on accountof the sudden death of the premier.Lord Shelburne was now placed atthe head of the treasury, and Pitt, sonof the great Earl of Chatham, becamechancellor of the exchequer.In 1783, a general peace was concluded,and the United States procureda formal acknowledgement of their independence.When Adams, the firstAmerican envoy, attended at the levee,the king, to whom he was personallydisagreeable, received him with dignifiedcomposure, and said, " I was thelast man in England to acknowledgethe independence of America, but,having done so, I shall also be the lastto violate it !" Adams's own accountof the interview is as follows : " TheTHE ROYAL FAMILY.king asked me, whether I came lastfrom France, and, on answering in theaffirmative, he put on an air of familiarity,and, smiling, or rather laughing,said", ' There is an opinion among somepeople, that you are not the most attachedof all your countrymen to themanners of France.' I was surprisedat this, because I thought it an indiscretion,and a descent from his dignity.I was a little embarrassed, but determinednot to deny the truth on the onehand, nor leave him to infer from itany attachment to England on theother. I threw off as much gravity as Icould, and assumed an air of gaiety,and a tone of decision, saying, ' Thatopinion, sir, is not mistaken ; I mustavow to your majesty I have no attachmentbut to my own country.' Theking replied, as quick as lightning,An honest man will never have anyother.' "Early in this year took place the memorablecoalition between the partiesrespectively headed by Fox and LordNorth, who soon succeeded in administration, and forcingthemselves into office. To the kingthey were particularly obnoxious, andtheir political ascendancy had a powerfuleffect on his spirits. He becamedejected and uncommunicative ; but nosooner did Fox introduce his famousIndia bill, than all the firmness ofhis character seemed to return. Heopenly declared his aversion to themeasure, and, as soon as it was rejectedby the lords, fie sent a messageto Fox and North, commanding themimmediately to return him their sealsof office by a messenger, as a personalinterview with them would be disagreeableto him. On the followingday, Pitt became prime minister.During the very remarkable parliamentarycontest which ensued, the intrepidityand firmness of the king wasabove all praise ; it obtained, as it deserved,the applause of the nation, andwas attended with the most triumphantsuccess over the coalition. Theking declared that, rather than throwhimself into the arms of an overbearingfaction, whose politics he detested, hewould resign the crown, and retire toHanover; and when Pitt, almost overwhelmedby the opposition majorities,said to him, " Sire, I am mortified tosee that my perseverance has beenof no avail, and that I must resign atlast ;" the king replied, " If so, I mustresign too."On the 2nd of August, 1786, a woman,named Margaret Nicholson, attemptedto assassinate his majesty, at the gardenentrance of St. James's palace. Whilehe was in the act of receiving a paperfrom her, she struck at him with aknife, which pierced his waistcoat ; but,fortunately, did him no injury. Shewas about to repeat the thrust, "when ayeoman of the guard caught her arm,and, at the same moment, a footmanwrenched the knife from her grasp.The king, with extraordinary coolness,said, " Don't hurt the woman poorcreature ! she is mad." She afterwardsunderwent a long examinationbefore the privy council, and no doubtappearing of her insanity, she was atonce consigned to Bethlem hospital.In the month of July, the king wasso indisposed, that he went to Cheltenhamfor the purpose of drinking thewaters, from which he appeared toderive much benefit; but his indispositionre-appeared in a very alarmingform soon after his return to Windsor.About the middle of October, 1788, hewas attacked by a bilious fever: this,however, did not prevent him fromattending a levee in town on the 24th ;but immediately afterwards he displayedsuch peculiar symptoms, that his physiciansthought proper to apply a blisterto his head. For some time before hehad complained of weight or pressureon the brain, and entertained a presentimentof approaching insanity. Oneevening, at a private concert, he wentup to Dr. Ayrton, and said, " I fear,sir, I shall not be able long to hearmusic ; it seems to affect my head, andit is with some difficulty I bear it. Alas !the best of us are but frail mortals!"Mental aberration soon ensued; andDr. Warren, the king's physician, declaredthat there was no" immediatechance of his recovery ; but Dr. Willis,who was subsequently consulted on thecase of the royal patient, expressed abelief that the malady would be of shortduration. This difference of opinionproduced great excitation in the mindsof the people, with whom the king wasnow decidedly popular. In parliament,Fox and the opposition were staunchGEORGE THE THIRD.believers in the prognostication of Warren,while Pitt and his coadjutors confidedin the opinion of Willis. All theroyal physicians were examined, withgreat severity, at the bar of the houseof commons : Warren now affirmed theking's case to be absolutely desperate ;while Willis, on the contrary, with equalconfidence, predicted his majesty's recoveryin a few months.As, however, no hopes existed of hisspeedily resuming the duties of hisstation, a regency became indispensable.The debates on this subject werefierce and protracted. Both parties inthe house agreed that the heir-apparentshould be regent ; but while Fox contendedthat, under existing circumstances,the prince had an inherentright to exercise the royal authority inits utmost plenitude, Pitt advocatedthe necessity and legality of imposingvarious restrictions on his authority.The bill had reached its last stage,when the king suddenly recovered.Various indications of his return ofreason had been noticed almost simultaneously; but no idea appears to havebeen entertained, even by those whowere about him, of his perfect restorationto sanity, until the 22nd of February,1789, when he wrote the followingnote to his prime minister :The king renews with great satisfactionhis communication with Mr. Pitt,after the long suspension of their intercourse,owing to his very tedious andpainful illness. He is fearful that duringthis interval, the public interests havesuffered great inconvenience and difficulty.It is most desirable that immediatemeasures should be taken forrestoring the functions of his government;and Mr. Pitt will consult withthe lord chancellor tomorrow morning,upon the most expedient means forthat purpose ; and the king will receiveMr. Pitt at Kew afterwards, about oneo'clock."The next morning, Pitt waited uponthe king, who was evidently quite rational;and among other equally pertinentobservations, said to the minister," I made several promises beforemy illness, and they must now be fulfilled."Shortly before he wrote toPitt, he had inquired of his attendant,why a pier glass in his apartment hadbeen covered with baize ; the attendantbeing unwilling to confess that it wasto prevent the king from perceivingwhat a dreadful alteration had takenplace in his appearance, replied, ' Theglass, sire, was supposed to have reflectedtoo much light." " How couldthat be," said the king, " when it isplaced where no light can fall on it?"A little while after, on awaking from asound and refreshing sleep, he said, " Ihave been in a strange delirium for somedays past!" When he was informed thathis illness had been of more than twomonths' duration, he remained in anattitude of devotion for several minutes,but made no further remark on thesubject.On the 12th of March, the king senta message to parliament, announcinghis complete recovery : bonfires, illuminations,and other demonstrations ofpublic joy, succeeded. On the 17th,her majesty caused Kew palace to bedecorated with several thousand lamps,and a transparency of the king, beneathwhich were the following lines,written, it is said, by the queen herself;who, on some other occasions, publishedher affectionate, but rather unpoetical,effusions in a similar manner :Our prayers are heard, and Providence restoresA patriot king to bless Britannia's shores.But not to Britain is the bliss conrin M :All Europe hails the friend of human kind.If such the general joy, what words can shewThe change to transport from the depths of woe,In those permitted to embrace again,The best of fathers, husbands, and of men !The king determined not to appearin public until he could attend, in St.Paul's cathedral, to return solemnthanks for his recovery ; but, on the25th of March, the queen held a drawingroom, and, on the 15th of April,visited Covent-garden theatre, withtwo of the princesses. At her entrance,the shouts of welcome, from an immenseaudience, were so loud and longcontinued, that she was overpoweredby her feelings, and burst into tears.After " God save the King" had beenfive times repeated, it was again calledfor ; and some short delay occurring inthe re-appearance of the performers,the anthem was enthusiastically sung,or rather, vociferated, by the audience.On the 23rd of April, the king, accompaniedby his family, proceeded toSt. Paul's, in the midst of an immenseTHE ROYAL FAMILY.concourse of spectators. On this occasion,the queen evinced great elationof spirits ; but the king, according toBishop Tomline, seemed completelyoccupied with the religious duty hewas about to perform : walking with agrave and devotional air to his pew, heinstantly fell on his knees, and seemedwholly absorbed in the services of theday. So extravagant was the loyaltyof the public at this period, that thecongregation were with difficulty restrainedfrom bursting out into plaudits.Shortly afterwards, in a conversationwith Hardingee, chief justice of Brecon,the king said that his illness had beena perfect bliss to him, because it provedhow confidently he might rely on thesupport of his people.On the 25th of June, the king, accompaniedby the queen and three ofthe princesses, proceeded to Weymouth:while there, he received several letters,threatening him with assassination, buthe so utterly disregarded them, that heoften rode out, accompanied only byan equerry and a groom, and sometimeswalked on the beach wholly unattended.On the 21st of January, 1790, alarge stone was thrown with greatviolence into the king's carriage, duringhis majesty's progress to the house oflords, by a half-pay lieutenant, namedJames Frick, whose insanity beingclearly established, he was committedto Bethlem hospital. On this circumstance.Peter Pindar wrote the followingepigram :Folks lay, it ai lucky the stone mined the head,When lately at Cnsar 'twas thrown ;I think, very dig 1 'rent from thousands indeed,Twa a lucky escape for the tlonr."At this period, a war with revolutionizedFrance became inevitable : andthe commencement of hostilities affordedgreat satisfaction to the king,with whose feelings on the subject thoseof the majority of his subjects appearto have been in unison.On the 3rd of February, 1794, ahorrible accident occurred at the Hay-markettheatre, which the royal familyvisited that evening. The entrance tothe pit was by a descent of twenty orthirty steps; and when the doors wereopened, the foremost of the crowd thathad collected, were borne down andtrodden under foot by those behind,who rushed into the theatre amid thedying screams of their unhappy victims.Fifteen persons were killed on this occasion; and twenty others so dreadfullyinjured, as to be rendered cripples forlife. The awful circumstance was communicatedto the royal family after thePerformances, when the king expressedis determination never to visit theHaymarket theatre again.At this period, the splendid achievementsof the French armies, under Napoleon,had cast a gloom over the prospectsof Great Britain ; which, however,was somewhat dissipated by the navalvictory of Lord Howe. The royal familyvisited the triumphant fleet, afterits return to port, and the king presenteda diamond-hilled sword to the admiral,as well as gold chains to several of theofficers under his command.Although loyalty appears by nomeans to be a common result of nationalprosperity, yet popular clamoursagainst the party in power, hatred ofthe sovereign, and, occasionally, hightreason, are, in this country, at least,but too often, the consequences of unavoidablediscomfiture abroad, or calamityat home. George the Third, solately the Dagon of his people, hadnow lost their " golden opinions," andbecome as unjustly odious as he hadbefore been unreservedly idolized.On the 29th of October, 1795, anattempt was made to assassinate himwhile he was proceeding to the houseof lords, to open parliament in person.The Earl of Onslow, one of his attendants,has given a circumstantial accountof the occurrence, of which the followingis an abridgment : " Soon aftertwo o'clock, his majesty, attended bythe Earl of Westmoreland and myself,set out from St. James's in his statecoach. The multitude of people in thepark was prodigious: a sullen silenceprevailed through the whole, very fewindividuals excepted. No hats, or, atleast, very few, pulled off; little or nobuzzing and frequently aery of ' Giveus bread !' ' No war ! and once ortwice No king!' with hissing andgroaning. Nothing, however, materialhappened, till we got down to the narrowestpart of the street called St.Margaret's ; when, the moment we hadpassed the office of ordnance, a smallGEORGE THE THIRD.ball, either of lead or marble, passedthrough the window-glass on the king'sright hand, and out of the other door,the glass of which was down. We allinstantly exclaimed, ' This is a shot!'His majesty shewed, and I am persuadedfelt, no alarm ; much less didhe fear. We proceeded to the house oflords, where the king read his speechwith peculiar correctness, and evenwith less hesitation than usual. Hejoined in the conversation on the subject,while undoing, with much lessagitation than anybody else : and afterwards,on getting into the coach, hesaid, ' Well, my lords, one person isproposing this, and another is supposingthat, forgetting that there is One aboveus all who, disposes of everything, andon whom alone we depend !' On ourreturn to St. James's, the mob threwstones into the coach, several of whichhit the king, who took one out of thecuff of his coat, where it had lodged,and gave it to me, saying, ' I makeyou a present of this, as a mark of thecivilities we have met with on ourjourney to-day.' " One of the horse-guardsdetected a ruffian close to thecarriage, in the act of throwing a largestone at the king, and would have cutthe man down, had not his majesty puthis head out of the window, and commandedhim on no account to shedblood. The mob were so violent anddetermined, that Storey's Gate havingbeen closed against them, they attemptedto break it open with sledge-hammers; and would, in all probability,have succeeded, had not themilitary interposed.The king alighted in safety at thepalace ; but the state carriage was nearlydemolished in its progress to the royalmews. Shortly afterwards, he rashlyset out, in his private coach, towardsthe queen's house ; but having now noguards to protect him, his life was inimminent danger. The mob attackedhis vehicle with savage fury, and onemiscreant had already attempted toforce the door, when an Irish gentleman,of great height and strength, tooka brace of pistols from his pocket, andkept the mob off the carriage until itreached the palace, where, by mainforce, he cleared the way for his majestyto alight. It is stated, but thefact is doubtful, that, in gratitude forthis signal service, the king desiredMr. Duncan to confer some profitableplace on his deliverer ; and that, onbeing told, some time afterwards, thatno vacancy had occurred, so that hispreserver was still without a reward, hesaid to the minister, " Then, sir, youmust make a situation for him." Anew office, it is added, with a salary ofJ6650 per annum, was consequentlycreated, to which the Irish gentlemanreceived an immediate appointment.On the 1st of February, 1796, whilethe king and queen were returningfrom Drury-lane theatre, a large stonewas thrown with great violence at theircarriage. It broke through one of theglass panels, and hit the queen on theface. A few days afterwards, a strangewoman was discovered in Buckingham-house,near her majesty's apartments :on being interrogated as to what businesshad brought her to the palace, shesaid, " Mrs. Guelph, the queen, whois my mother, holds some property belongingto me ; and if it is not immediatelygiven up, I shall be driven tocommit some horrid act." Her insanitybeing evident, she was sent to Bethlemhospital.In the course of the year, some attemptswere made to negociate a peacewith France, by the king's expressdesire ; but they wholly failed, and thedifficulties of the country were augmentedby a war with Spain.In 1797, during the alarm of a Frenchinvasion, the people of this countrywere seized with a volunteer mania,which was warmly encouraged by theking ; as, if it did not tend to deter theenemy from attempting to carry theirthreatened project on England into execution,it brought patriotism and loyaltyinto fashion, and subdued the spirit ofdisaffection. At a grand review of volunteers,in Hyde park, the citizen soldiershaving puzzled the king with greatenthusiasm, he rode up the line, andsaid, good-humouredly, " I thank youfor your loyalty ; but this is unmilitary,and we must not have rules violated."On the 19th of December, his majesty,with the whole of the royal family,went in procession to St. Paul's cathedral,to return thanks to God for therecent victories of Howe, St. Vincent,and Duncan.In 1798, public distress in this countryTHE ROYAL FAMILY.appeared to have reached its climax : asubscription was opened to meet theexigencies of the state, to which theking subscribed 20,000 out of theprivy purse. To add to the nationalgloom, the Irish rebellion broke out inthis year : the spirit of party was alsoviolently displayed in the parliamentarydebates ; and the king excited considerabledissatisfaction, by personally erasingthe name of Fox from the list ofhis privy-counsellors:Notwithstanding these circumstances, 'the great body of the people of England,in 1799, were so eminently loyal, patriotic,or, perhaps, absurd, that therewas scarcely an able-bodied burgheror farmer in the country, who did notoccasionally carry arms and wear a redcoat,as a member of some volunteercorps. The king attended a great numberof reviews during this and the followingyear. On the 15th of May,(1800,) a grand military spectacle, atwhich his majesty was present, tookplace in Hyde park : while the troopswere firing in companies, a person ofthe name of Ongley, who was standingnear the king, received a musket ballin his thigh. Suspicion having arisen,that it had been aimed at his majesty,the crouch-boxes of the troops wererigidly inspected, but nothing was foundby which the delinquent could be identified; and it was afterwards suggested,that a ball-cartridge might have beengiven out to one of the men by mistake.The king behaved with what mayfairly be termed his hereditary courageon this occasion. In the evening, a playhaving been previously commanded atDrury-lane, he accompanied the queento the theatre, in spite of the earnestremonstrances of his ministers, to whomhe declared that he feared nothing, andwould not disappoint the people. Amoment after he had entered his box,and while he was in the act of bowingto the audience, a man who sat in themiddle of the rit, near the orchestra,fired a horse-pistol at him ; but theassassin's arm having fortunately beena little elevated by a person near him,who had observed his intent, the chargelodged in the roof of the royal box.The culprit was immediately seized,and the pistol, which he had dropped,was found beneath the seat. Terrorand indignation were depicted on everycountenance except that of the king,who stepped back, with admirable composure,to the door of the box, andprevented the queen from entering.Keep back, keep back," said he ;they are firing squibs for diversion,and perhaps there may be more." Hethen, according to the account of agentleman who was present, returnedto the box, advanced to the front, and,with folded arms, and a look of greatdignity, in which one might have readthe sentiment, " Now, fire, if youplease ! " presented himself to theaudience ; which, after a moment ofsilent, but intense admiration, burstinto acclamations which absolutelyshook the theatre. At length, thequeen and princesses entered, and theywarmly urged the king to return home;but he replied, " No ; sit down and becalm; there is no danger : we will stayand see the entertainment out !" Theloyalty of the spectators was raised tothe highest pitch of enthusiasm by hismajesty's firmness. " God save theking," was thrice repeated, with theaddition of the following stanza, bySheridan :From every latent foe,From the assassin's blow,God save the king!O'er him thine arm extend,For Britain's sake defend,Our father, prince, and friend,God save the king '."The man, who had thus attemptedthe king's life, on being interrogated,said, " I have no objection to tell whoI am. It is not over yet. There is agreat deal more to be done. My nameis James Hatfield : I served my timeas a working silversmith ; but afterwardsenlisted in the 15th light dragoons,and have fought for my king andcountry." The Duke of York nowentered the room where the examinationtook place. " I know yourroyal highness," continued Hatfield ;God bless you ! you are a good fellow! I have served with your highness,and I got these," he added, pointingto a deep cut over his eye, andanother long scar on his cheek; "andmore than these, in fighting by yourside. At Lincelles I was left three hoursamong the dead, in a ditch, and wastaken prisoner by the French. I hadGEORGE THE THIRD.my arm broken by a shot, and receivedeight sabre wounds in my head ; but Irecovered, and here I am !" On beingasked what had induced him to attemptthe life of the king, he said, " I did notattempt to kill the king ; I fired thepistol over the royal box. I am asgood a shot as any man in England ; butI am weary of life, and wish for death,though not to die by my own hands.I was desirous of raising an alarm, andhoped the spectators would fall uponme ; but they did not. Still I trust mylife is forfeited!" It subsequently appeared,that, after haying behaved, foranumber of years, like a brave andgood soldier, he had been dischargedon account of insanity, (which was supposedto have been occasioned by awound in his head,) and admitted anout-pensioner of Chelsea hospital.When the king returned to thequeen's house, he said, " I hope andpray that the poor creature, who hascommitted the rash assault upon me,may enjoy as sound a repose as I trustthat I shall this night !" He adoptedno additional precautions for his personalsafety, observing to those whoadvised him to do so, " I know thatany man in my dominions, who choosesto sacrifice his own life, may easily takeaway mine ; but I hope, if any oneattempts such an act, he will do itpromptly, without any circumstancesof barbarity !" Sheridan soon afterwardscomplimented him for the extraordinaryresolution he had displayed.Had your majesty abruptly quittedthe theatre," said he, " the confusionwould have been awful." " I shouldhave despised myself for ever," repliedthe king, "had I but stirred a singleinch: a man, on such an occasion,should need no prompting, but immediatelyfeel what is his duty, and do it."Hatfield was subsequently indictedfor high treason, but the jury beingsatisfied that he was of unsound mind,he was committed to Bethlem Hospital.He was living at the time of the demiseof his intended victim's successor, and,for a long period, was an object of greatinterest to the visitors of the nobleestablishment to which he had beenconsigned, until, at length, Martin, theincendiary of the cathedral at York,became, to his great indignation, morepopular in I5ethlem than himself.On the 22nd of July, in the sameyear, (1800,) the Union Act was passed.During the discussions on this measure,Pitt, with a view to conciliatesome of its opponents, had held outhopes that it would be followed bysome concessions to the Catholics ; butthe king being of opinion that he couldnot consent to their admission to politicalpower, without violating the spiritof his coronation oath, Pitt and hiscoadjutors retired from office early in1801. They were succeeded by the Addingtonadministration ; and scarcelyhad the new arrangements been completed,when the king was attackedwith a very alarming illness, whichseemed to threaten a return of his mentaldisorder. The complaint was a distressing,feverish irritability, precludingall repose ; and, as it continued for severalweeks, insanity seemed its necessarytermination. Mr. Addington, havingobserved the efficacy of hops as asedative, advised the king to use a pillowstuffed with them, which enabledhim to rest, and led to his recovery,when all other remedies were foundfutile. To this circumstance the ministerwas indebted for his well-knownnickname of" The Doctor."Military triumphs were so rare at thisperiod, that the victory of Alexandriaoccasioned much rejoicing. The Egyptianexpedition had been planned byLord Melville ; Pitt had never cordiallysupported it, and the king's concurrenceto it was signified in the followingwords: " I consent, with the utmostreluctance, to a measure, whichseems to me to peril the flower of myarmy upon a distant and hazardousexpedition!" Lord Melville was inretirement at Wimbledon, when thenews arrived of the battle of Alexandria: the king, soon afterwards, whilebreakfasting with him, filled a glass ofwine, and bidding the queen, and all theguests, to follow his example, he drank,To the health of the minister, who,in opposition to the opinion of his colleagues,'and the avowed reluctance ofhis sovereign, dared to plan and forwardthe Egyptian expedition !"The new minister was anxious forpeace ; and, in September, the preliminariesof the treaty of Amiens weresigned. The king's consent to thenecessary negociations is said to haveTHE ROYAL FAMILY.been most reluctantly given, as he consideredthe peace impolitic, unsafe, andunwise. It has even been asserted,that Lord Hawksbury affixed his signatureto the articles, not only withoutthe king's approbation, but without hisknowledge. The fact seems scarcelycredible ; and perhaps, his known disliketo the treaty may have been exaggeratedinto this assumption of theregal power on the part of his ministers.The peace was destined to be of shortduration ; for, in May 1803, much tothe satisfaction of the public, war wasagain declared against France. Theking, on this occasion, absurdly attemptedto shield Hanover from danger,by declaring, that although he had proclaimedwar against France, as King ofGreat Britain, he deprecated hostilitiesbeing commenced by that poweragainst his electorate ; which, however,early in June, was over-run by theFrench troops under Mortier.On the 14th of February, 1804, theking became suddenly and alarminglyindisposed. It was said, that his complaintwas rheumatic, but an opinionprevailed, to a considerable extent, thathis mind, on this occasion, was moreaffected than his body. The symptoms,however, gradually abated, and a tripto Weymouth completely re-establishedhis majesty's health.It being quite evident, that the Addingtoncabinet was incapable of advantageouslyconducting the affairs ofthe nation, early in May, Pitt, withhis friends and adherents, again wentinto power.So great a misunderstanding hadexisted for a considerable time betweenthe Prince of Wales and his royal father,that they had not met ; and the hereditaryvariance between the sovereignand the heir-apparent was thus perpetuatedto the fourth generation. Onthe 12th of November, however, a reconciliationtook place, which appearedto be sincere and cordial on both sides.On the 26th of February, 1805, anentertainment of unequalled magnificence,the expense of which exceeded50,000, was given by the king, atWindsor castle. This was followed,on the 23rd of April, by a grand installationof the Knights of the Garter.The king's vivacity, on this occasion,was absolutely boyish. He ran to andfro between the queen and the Princessof Wales, and rapidly addressed thelatter in the following words : " Youmust stop the week out at Windsorall, all the week. I'll take no excuse.No ! no ! you must stay ! I have gotsomething for your amusement everydayevery day !" Hearing Mr. Wind-hamsay something in praise of thespectacle, he turned round suddenly,exclaiming, " Ah, Windham ! You arethere : I hope you like it, eh ?" Shortlyafterwards he said to Lord Winchelsea,Winchelsea! Winchelsea! do you seemy horse ? I mounted him fresh sinceI came into the park, as I always do ; Ihave had him twenty years, and he isgood now. Do you know the secret ?I'll tell you, Winchelsea I know hisworth, and I treat him accordingly.That's the right way, Winchelsea!''Early in 1806, died the king's favouriteminister, Pitt, and the Grenvilleparty, which Fox had joined, went intooffice.For some time past 'the king's sighthad been materially affected ; but at thebeginning of this year, his power ofvision was rather improved, and hecould clearly distinguish objects at thedistance of twenty yards. Of his modeof living, at this period, a late writer hasgiven a very minute account, of whichthe following !are the most interestingparticulars. The king was less abstemiousthan he had formerly been. Heslept on the north side of the castle, inalarge room, on the ground floor,which had been furnished in a modernstyle, but without a carpet, under thedirection of the Princess Elizabeth.He generally rose about half-pastseven, and immediately proceeded tothe queen's saloon, where one of theprincesses received him. He then attendeddivine service in the chapel ;breakfasted with the queen ; and usuallyrode out on horseback, if the weatherwere fine, and if otherwise, he played atchess. He dined alone, at two o'clock ;but visited, and took a glass of wineand water with the queen and princessesat five. After that hour he frequentlyattended to public business inhis study. The evening was passed atcards, in the queen's drawing-room,with a select party of the neighbouringnobility, &c. When the castle clockstruck ten, visitors departed ; supperGEORGE THE THIRD.was then set out, but as a matter ofform only, for none of the family partookof it, and their majesties retired torest at eleven.In 1807, Lord Grenville, and his colleagues,attempted to change the king'sopinions with regard to Catholic emancipation; but his majesty was inflexible,and declared, " That although he hadfirmness sufficient to quit his throne,and retire to a cottage, or place hisneck on a block, if his people requiredit, yet he had not resolution to breakthe oath which he had taken, in themost solemn manner, at his coronation!" Shortly afterwards, (on the 24thof March,) Lord Grenville received anote from the king, stating, that hismajesty would be ready to receive theresignations of his ministers at noonon the following day. The premierand his colleagues, accordingly, gave uptheir seals of office the extorting; andthe Perceval administration succeeded.In the summer of 1808, Louis theEighteenth, his queen, and the Duchessof Angouleme, came to England : theymet with a very kind reception fromhis majesty, but their royal characterwas not recognized. The Prince ofOrange, with his two children, and alsoabove twelve thousand French emigrants,had, long before, sought andfound refuge in this country.On the 25th of October, 1809, thevenerable monarch commenced thefiftieth year of his reign, and a jubileetook place on the occasion. London,and all the principal cities in the kingdom,were illuminated ; and large sumswere raised, by subscription, for thebenefit of the poor. The queen gave agrand entertainment at Frogmore, atwhich however, his majesty did notappear. The rapid decay of his sight,at this period, considerably affected hisspirits-He would often shed tearsduring the performance of Handel'sTotal Eclipse, a composition to whichhe was exceedingly partial; and, onemorning, the Prince of Wales, on enteringhis royal father's apartment,found him pathetically reciting the followingpassage from Milton:Oh dark, dark, dark, amid the blaze of noon !Irrevocably dark '. Total eclipse,Without all hope of day!Oh ! first created beam ! and thou great Word,U t there be light, and light was over all ;Why am 1 thus deprived thy prime decree ?"Of the king's appearance, during hiswalks on the castle terrace, in the summerof 1810, the following is an abridgedaccount, taken from " An Excursion toWindsor," by the Rev. John Evans;At seven o'clock in the evening, a littledoor in the castle was thrown open,and two attendants led the venerablemonarch, with great care, down a flightof steps, to the terrace. Two of theprincesses then took him by the arms,and paced backwards and forwardswith him for an hour. He lookedruddy and full; his voice was sonorous,and he conversed with cheerfulness,though when he attempted to speakquick, it was not without hesitation.His want of sight was apparent, for hishat was drawn over the upper part ofhis face, and he felt about with his cane.Up to this period the king had not discontinuedhis rides : he was still ableto mount on horseback with considerableagility ; but it had now becomenecessary for him to have the assistanceof one of his servants in guiding hishorse.The Princess Amelia, the king'syoungest and darling child, had longbeen in a declining state of health ; andtowards the close of this year,(1810,) hersituation became hopeless. " Nothing,"said one of the official attendants, " couldbe more striking than the sight of theking, aged and nearly blind, bendingover her couch, and speaking to herabout salvation through Christ, as amatter far more interesting to themboth than the highest privileges andmost magnificent pomps of royalty !"The prospect of her speedy dissolution,and his daily sorrowful interviews withthe princess, atone of which she silentlyplaced a ring on his finger, inscribedwith the words, " Remember me," hada powerful effect on the king's mind.On the 25th of October, Mr. Percevalwas informed that an alarming alterationhad taken place in his majesty'sdeportment; and, by the 1st of November,he had betrayed such positive indicationsof mental disease, that it becameexpedient to make parliament acquaintedwith the facts. Early in December,it was admitted that the maladyhad assumed so violent a character thatbut slight hopes could be entertainedof his rrtajesty's restoration; and aftermuch animated discussion, a regencyTHE ROYAL FAMILY.bill, similar to that proposed by Pitt, in1788, was passed.In 1811, the conduct of the king, onseveral occasions, induced the royalfamily and the public to entertain ahope that he might ultimately recover.In February, he had an interview oftwo hours' duration with the PrinceRegent, and appeared several times onthe terrace, at Windsor. On the 20thof May he was sufficiently well to takean airing on horseback. He afterwardswent to the queen's apartments, andcongratulated her on the return of herbirth-day. But a violent relapse soonfollowed ; and though he sometimesknew those about him, and appearedsusceptible of religious consolation, hisrecovery at length became hopeless.At intervals he still took a lively interestin politics. His perception wasgood, though mixed up with a number oferroneous ideas ; his memory was tenacious,but his judgment unsettled ; andthe loss of royal authority seemed constantlyto prey on his mind. His maladyseemed rather to increase thanabate, up to the year 1814; when atthe time of the arrival of the alliedsovereigns in England, he evinced indicationsof returning reason, and wasmade acquainted with the astonishingevents which had recently occurred.The restoration of Hanover to theHouse of Brunswick, it is said, affordedhim particular satisfaction. He evenexpressed a wish to see the royalvisitors, which, of course, it was notdeemed proper to indulge.The queen, one day, found the afflictedmonarch engaged in singing ahymn, and accompanying himself onthe harpsichord. After he had concludedthe hymn, he knelt down, prayedfor his family and the nation, and earnestlysupplicated for the complete restorationof his mental powers. He thenburst into tears, and his reason suddenlyleft him. But he afterwards had occasionallucid moments. One morninghearing a bell toll, he asked who wasdead. " Please your majesty," saidan attendant, " Mrs. S ." " Mrs.S ," rejoined the king, " she was alinen-draper, and lived at the corner ofstreet Ay, she was a good woman,and brought up her family in the fearof God : she is gone to heaven ; I hopeI shall soon follow her!"At length deafness was added to hisother calamities: and his manner andappearance are described as having beenpitiable in the extreme. He becamefirmly impressed with the idea that hewas dead ; and said to his attendants,I must have a suit of black, in memoryof George the Third, for whom I knowthere is a general mourning."In 1817, he appears to have had afaint glimmering of reason again ; hissense of hearing also was not only restored,but became so remarkably acutethat he could readily distinguish, bytheir footsteps, those who approachedor passed him. He also recollectedthat he had made a memorandum, manyyears before, which was found in theprecise place he described, to destroy afavourite horse, on a day,when he wouldattain a certain age, and he requestedthat the animal might be shot accordingly.In November, 1817, the queen, whosehealth had for some time past been declining,visited Bath, for the purpose ofdrinking the waters ; and while there,she received intelligence of the death ofthe Princess Charlotte, which, it is said,produced a most serious effect on herdebilitated frame. On the 23rd of May,1818, she held her last drawing-room;and in the following week attended anexamination, at the Mansion-house, ofthe children educated in the nationalschools. She never appeared in publicagain. Her disease was a hopelessanasarcous (dropsical) affection of thewhole system; but it does not appearthat she was made acquainted with herdangerous state until the day before shedied. Up to that time, she had expressedgreat anxiety to go to Windsor, for thepurpose of seeing the king ; and on beingtold that she must resign all hopesof again quitting Kew, which had beenher place of residence for some monthspast, she appeared to be dreadfullyshocked ; but shortly afterwards dictatedand signed her will with greatcalmness. In a few hours she becamelethargic, and expired without a struggle,on the 17th of November, 1818.Her remains were deposited in the royalmausoleum, at Windsor, on the 2nd ofthe following month.In her youth, although certainly notbeautiful, the queen's person is said tohave been very agreeable. She was ofGEORGE THE THIRD.a middling stature, but her form wasfine, and her deportment graceful. Herhands and neck were particularly wellformed. She had a round face, a lightcomplexion, auburn hair, lively blueeyes, a flat nose turned up at the point,rosy lips, but rather a large mouth. Ananonymous writer has thus describedher appearance in 1777 : " She has anelegant person, good eyes, good teeth,a Cleopatra nose, and fine hair. The expressionof her countenance is pleasingand interesting ; it is full of sense andgood temper." The writer adds, " Sheloves domestic pleasures ; is fonder ofdiamonds than the Queen of France,as fond of snuff as the King of Prussia,is extremely affable, and very pious."During the latter part of her life thequeen was very thin, and remarkablypale.The piety and the purity of her moralshave never been questioned : as awife, her conduct was most exemplary ;and few women have performed theduties of a mother so admirably. Alady of high rank having, one day, saidto her, " My children must be doingwell, for they have plenty of servantsto attend to them," the queen exclaimed,What! do you leave them entirely toattendants ? I dare not do so ; for it isimpossible that servants, however good,can have the feelings of a parent!" Thelady attempted an excuse, but thequeen interrupted her by saying,There can be no apology for theneglect of our first duties : it is enoughthat you are a mother and conversewith one; and I should be sorry tosuppose you indifferent where yoursensibilities ought to be most acute."Under her auspices the British court,which, during the two preceding reigns,had been disgustingly licentious, becamecompletely reformed. She sufferedno lady to be presented to herwhose character was not above suspicion.It is stated, that a woman of highrank, but whose reputation was questionable,having prevailed on a peeress,who was a favourite at court, to solicitpermission to visit the queen's drawing-room; and her majesty having givenan unqualified refusal to the request ofthe fair petitioner; the latter exclaimed,Alas ! what shall I say to her ladyship?"" Tell her," replied the queen,that you did not dare to ask me."Although she was inflexible, with regardto the exclusion of improper personsfrom her court, the queen was,generally speaking, condescending,affable, and kind. One night, a lady,who attended her to the theatre, beingfar advanced in pregnancy, strove invain to conceal the dreadful exhaustion,produced by standing, pursuant to etiquette,behind her majesty's chair. Thequeen perceiving her distress, beggedher to be seated ; the lady thanked hermajesty, but hesitated to take a chair ;until her royal mistress said, " Pray beseated, madam, or I too must stand."The conduct of her majesty during oneof the royal visits to Weymouth hasbeen thus described : " She was easyof access, and would not suffer themeanest persons to be excluded fromher presence. She was never angry atthe most uncourtly approach, nor offendedby the most importunate petitioner."In Smith's account of Nollekensit is stated, that the queen was oneday unexpectedly announced to Mrs.Garrick, at Hampton, while that ladywas engaged in preparing onions forpickling; but she not only preventedMrs. Garrick from putting them aside,but condescendingly took a seat, andassisted her to peel them.The queen was generally supposed tohave been of a parsimonious disposition ;and it must be admitted, that in strivingto be laudably economical, she was occasionallyguilty of meanness. It is said,but the story is scarcely credible, thatat one period, when the popular feelingwas unusually strong against negro slavery,she refused sugar to her servants,because she could not conscientiouslypermit the use of an article which hadbeen cultivated by means so hostile toreligion and humanity. "A Miss Jenner,of Gloucestershire," says Dr. Wolcott,with her mother, viewing the palace ofSt. James's, and entering the royaldressing-room, where a cushion full ofpins lay on the toilette, the younglady expressed a strong desire for havingone of the queen's pins to carryinto the country, and was reaching outher hand to take one; when the attendantcaught her hand, saying it wasimpossible, as her majesty would certainlyfind it out. ' D'ye think Imight change a pin ?' said the lady.Miss,' replied the attendant, ' it isTHE ROYAL FAMILY.probable her majesty may not find thatout, so I'll run the risk !' "However paltry the queen's conductmay have been with regard to trifles,no doubt exists of her great liberality tothe distressed. She disbursed at least5000 a year, and frequently more,in charitable donations. Numerous in-dances of her benevolence have beenrecorded, which are as creditable to herjudgment as to her feelings. She particularlydirected her attention towardsthe relief of those of heron sex; amongthe most favoured objects of her charity,were respectable widows, whom misfortuneshad reduced to a state of poverty,and the destitute daughters ofnaval and military officers, who had diedin the service of their country. Her benevolencewas altogether devoid of ostentation: had it been more notorious,the queen would, in all probability, havebeen more highly esteemed; for duringa considerable period, she was unpopular,solely, or at least principally, onaccount of her domestic parsimony.At one time she suffered much in theestimation of a large portion of the public,through her alleged unjust harshnesstowards the Princess of Wales ; and atanother, she was severely censured fornot having been present at the fatalaccouchement of her grand-daughter.But the queen's advocates justify herconduct in the one case, by pleadingthe suspicions attached to the characterof her daughter-in-law, and her constantpractice of not countenancing anywoman, however exalted or nearly alliedto her, whose reputation was sulliedeven by the breath of slander ; and onthe other, by positively affirming, thatthe queen had expressed a strong desireto attend her grand-daughter'saccouchement, but that the PrincessCharlotte personally besought her in themost urgent manner, to follow the recommendationof the royal physicians,who had advised her to have recourseto the Bath waters without the leastdelay.To conclude, Queen Charlotte appearsto have been rather severelycorrect than amiable in her conduct.Rigidly virtuous herself, she could notoverlook the slightest blemish in thereputation of others. She might perhapshave been more lenient, had herrank been less exalted : but feelingthe importance of her situation, andthe effect her example might have uponsociety, she refused to allow not onlythe dissolute, but the suspected, toenjoy the honours accorded to thosewho were either pure or fortunateenough to be free from reproach. Toher high honour, it may be said, thatshe was one of the best wives andmothers in the king's dominions ; andby the force of her example, domesticduties became fashionable. She laudablyforbore to meddle with politics;never attempting to exercise any improperinfluence over the king's mindwith regard to public affairs. She indulgedin no unwarrantable luxuries,and set no bad example, except that oftaking snuff, for which she was mostliberally censured and nicknamed. Shewas accomplished, industrious, a lover ofscience, and to some extent, an admirerof the arts. She was mean, rather thanavaricious ; but her amusing parsimonywas more than extenuated by her unobtrusivebenevolence.George the Third never became acquaintedwith the queen's death, orthe subsequent appointment of theDuke of York to the office of custos ofhis person. He now occupied a longsuite of rooms, in which were placedseveral pianofortes and harpsichords :at these he would frequently stopduring his walks, play a few notesfrom Handel, and then stroll on. Heate with a good appetite, and his bodilyhealth was unimpaired. He generallywore a blue robe de chambre, tied witha belt, in the morning ; and a silk plaiddress in the afternoon. He seemedcheerful, and would sometimes talkaloud, as if addressing some nobleman ;but his discourse bore reference onlyto past events ; for he had no knowledgeof recent circumstances, eitherpolitical or domestic.In 1819, the following account ofhim appeared in a French paper:The august old man has been longdeprived of sight, and wears a longfloating beard. He wanders constantlythrough his apartments amidst thephantoms of his fancy, which representto him all the beings that were dear tohim. He speaks and replies to them.Sometimes he sits for hours with hishead resting on both hands : then herecovers, and thinks himself amongGEORGE THE THIRD.celestial spirits, rushes forward, andsinks exhausted with his feelings.Formerly, he would make his servantssit down before him ; and imagininghimself in parliament, wouldaddress them vehemently, until he fellinto a kind of delirium. When at hismeals, he supposed himself surroundedby his family ; and, preserving his loveof music, he would go to the pianoforte,or catch up a violin, and execute piecesfrom memory with astonishing precision."This is, perhaps, a fancy sketch,yet it agrees, in most particulars, withascertained facts.At the latter end of the year, hisappetite began to fail, and he appearedto derive but little nourishment fromhis food. In January, 1820, it wasfound impossible to keep him warm;his remaining teeth dropped out, andhe was almost reduced to a skeleton.His weakness rapidly increased ; onThursday, the 27th, he was wholly confinedto his bed ; and, at thirty-fiveminutes past eight, on the evening ofSaturday, the 29th of January, 1820, hebreathed his last, without the slightestconvulsion or apparent pain. At thetime of his death he was in the eighty-secondyear of his age. His remainswere interred in the royal vault atWindsor.In stature, George the Third wassomewhat above the middle size. Inconsequenceof a slight bend in theknee-joints, he looked best on horseback.In his youth he had been accountedhandsome : his eyes were blue,his hair was particularly light, hiscountenance florid, and his demeanourprepossessing.In a memoir of this monarch, writtenshortly after his demise, it is stated, thatLord Camden, soon after his accession,said, " I see already that this will be aweak and inglorious reign ;" and thatwhen the famous Charles T townshendwas asked for a character of the newmonarch, he replied, " He is veryobstinate." These opinions were, to acertain extent at least, prophetic. Hismother, the princess dowager, disgustedat the controul which English ministersexercised over the sovereign, hadcontinually impressed on her son thislesson: " George, be king!" He endeavoured,apparently, to act up to heradvice : it was his continual wish toexercise his authority personally, andto be his own minister. No limitedmonarch ever had a more decided influenceon public affairs : he repeatedlybrought into operation the most dangerousprerogatives of the crown ;changed ministers and dissolved parliamentswith unwavering boldness ; and,rather than give up an idea, or changean opinion, whether right or wrong, wasprepared to descend from his throne,or lay his head on the block. The resultof his councils was the loss ofAmerica, and the creation of an enormousnational debt. But the disastersof his reign were, perhaps, more thanbalanced by its glories : if the nationlost her colonies in the west, shegained an immense empire in the eastThe triumphs of Rodney, Duncan,Howe, St. Vincent, Nelson, Aber-crosbie,and others, which took placewhile he exercised the kingly functions,would have increased the splendour ofthe brightest era in history ; and if hebemade to incur much of the odiumattendant on the misfortunes, he certainlyought, on the other hand, toderive some credit for the splendidsuccesses, of his reign.Of the excellence of his intentions,both to the public and to his family,there can be no doubt. He was, unquestionably,a good husband ; and, accordingto his judgment, he acted, as amonarch and a father, in the mannerthat was most conducive to the welfareof his subjects, and the honour and happinessof his children. He had manyfine redeeming qualities : his dispositionwas benevolent, his probity unimpeachable,and his manners approachingalmost to patriarchal simplicity. If hisobstinacy were censurable on some occasions,his unflinching firmness, even inthe face of danger, was truly admirableon others. Few monarchs have exhibitedmore lofty, and, at the same time,unostentatious heroism, than Georgethe Third did, during the factious andmalignant opposition of Fox and LordNorth to the administration of Pitt. Heappears to have invariably acted up tothe dictates of his conscience ; and was,on more than one occasion, willing torisk his crown rather than swerve fromthat course which appeared to him tobe lawful and just. Many of his faults,a few of his virtues, and the greatTHE ROYAL FAMILY.mass of prejudice existing against himduring the early part of his reign, areto be ascribed to the peculiarity of hiseducation. His mother and Lord Buteso unwarrantably protracted his puerilethraldom, that he may almost be saidto have stepped from his leading stringsto a throne. The manner in whichhe conducted himself on his accession,tends materially to prove that, withbetter preceptors, he would have becomea better king. He possessed alarge share of the personal couragewhich has been ascribed, with sometruth, to his family in general ; and themorality and decorum of his conductafforded a happy contrast to the extraordinarylewdness and gross profligacyof his predecessors. He was eminentlypious ; and once gave utterance to thenoble wish, " that the day might comein which every poor child in his dominionswould be able to read theBible !" Hh reverence for religious ceremonieswas strongly evinced duringthe preparations for an installation : anobleman having carelessly inquiredif the new knights would be obligedto take the sacrament, the king, witha very severe countenance, replied,No ; that religious institution is notto be mixed with our profane ceremonies.Even at the time of mycoronation, I was very unwilling totake the sacrament; but when I wasassured that it was indispensable, andthat I must receive it, I took off thebauble from my head, before I evenapproached the communion table. Thesacrament, my lord, is not to be profanedby our Gothic institutions."In the book of common prayerwhich he ordinarily used, at the passage," Guide and defend our mostgracious sovereign lord, King George,"he had effaced the words, " KingGeorge," and written, " thy servant."He would not tolerate the slightestinattention in a place of worship. Itwas his custom to roll up the printedform of prayer, and beat time with itto the music of the choir; and, occasionally,he would point with it toportions of the service, when any olhis attendants seemed negligent. OneSunday, during the performance oldivine service at the chapel royal,Sir Sydney Smith, who was present,appeared very restless, changed hisposition repeatedly, and, at length,placed himself immediately before theroyal desk, when the king gave him atap on the head with his paper scroll,to remind him of his inattention.An eminent divine having sufferedsome fashionable assemblies to takeplace under his roof, the king is saidto have rebuked him, by letter, in thefollowing terms :My good Lord Primate,I could not delay giving you thenotification of the grief and concernwith which my breast was affected, atreceiving an authentic information thatrouts have made their way into yourpalace. At the same time, I mustsignify to you my sentiments on thissubject, which hold these levities andvain dissipations as utterly inexpedient,if not unlawful, to pass in a residencefor many centuries devoted to divinestudies, religious retirement, and theextensive exercise of charity and benevolence; I add, in a place where somany of your predecessors have ledtheir lives in such sanctity as hasthrown lustre on the pure religion theyprofessed and adorned. From the dissatisfactionwith which you must perceiveI behold these improprieties, notto speak in harsher terms, and stillmore pious principles, I trust you willsuppress them immediately ; so that Imay not have occasion to shew anyfurther marks of my displeasure, or tointerpose in a different manner. MayGod take your grace into his Almightyprotection ! I remain, &c."The king is said to have been verywell acquainted with the works of manyof the old divines. He once asked ayoung clergyman, if he were familiarwith the writings of Bishop Andrewsand Jeremy Taylor. The clergymanreplied, that his attention had beenchiefly directed to the productions ofmore recent divines. " Sir," exclaimedthe king, with great warmth, " therewere giants in those days !"Although decidedly averse to the admissionof Catholics to political power,he was a warm advocate for toleration.Many of his own servants were dissenters." The Methodists," said hearea very quiet kind of people, andwill disturb nobody ; and if I learnthat any person in my employ disturbsthem, he shall instantly be dismissed."GEORGE THE THIRD.Malone, a priest, having been convictedof celebrating mass in the countyof Surrey, and the judge who tried himhaving humanely recommended himas a proper object for royal mercy, theking said, " God forbid that differencein religious opinion should sanction persecution,or admit of one man withinmy realms suffering unjustly. Issue apardon for Mr. Malone, and see thathe be set at liberty."In 1802, a dignified churchman, whilepreaching before the king, quoted apassage, which so struck his majesty,that he subsequently inquired the nameof its author ; who, it appeared, was theminister of a Baptist congregation insome part of Yorkshire. The kingimmediately procured the sermon fromwhich the extract in question had beentaken, and perused the whole compositionwith such extraordinary pleasure,that he expressed a strong wish to confersome benefit on its author. Shortlyafterwards, a merchant's clerk was foundguilty of forgery at the York assizes,and sentenced to death ; but, at theearnest intercession of the Baptist minister,and although the two Perseus,Dodd, and others, had previously sufferedfor the same offence, the criminal'slife was spared.George the Third's temperance hasbeen attributed to the advice of hisuncle, the Duke of Cumberland, whois reported to have said to him, " Youwill certainly become as obese and unwieldyas myself, long before you attainmy age, unless you not only take muchexercise, but be rigidly abstinent."From that day, it is added, the kingimposed a very severe restraint on hisappetite: he generally dined alone, andpartook only of the plainest food, ofwhich he restricted himself to a comparativelysmall quantity. A leg ofmutton and caper-sauce was his favouritedish : of cheesecakes he wasparticularly fond ; and a cherry-piewas served at his table every day inthe year. He drank but little ; and,"or a considerable period of his life,the small quantity of wine which hetook was invariably diluted. The onlyappearance of state at his private dinnerswas the regular attendance of themaster-cook, who tasted every dish beforeit was carried away by the pages inwaiting. The royal children were rarelyindulged with delicacies : their foodbeing generally of a remarkably plaindescription. The Duke of Montaguehaving stated, in reply to an inquirymade by the king as to the health ofhis grace's grand-children, that theywere all doing remarkably well, andthat he had just left them heartily enjoyingtheir oatmeal pottage, his majestydirected that the young princesand princesses should breakfast on thatsimple dish for the future. The maidsof honour were, for a long period, sentto bed supperless, until at length theymade a complaint on the subject to thelord steward ; which, coming to theking's knowledge, his majesty said, thatthe regimen adopted by himself andthe queen could not be altered ; " but,"added he, " I shall order such an additionto be made to their salaries, aswill enable them to provide themselveswith moderate suppers for the future."No doubt exists of the domestic frugalityof the queen ; and, it is said,that the monarch was so thoroughlyconverted to her majesty's economicalopinions, as to have become a meanman by his own fireside. Reynoldsstates, that having written an interlude,by royal command, for private performanceat the palace, after a considerabledelay, he was presented withfive pounds as the price of his labours ;although he could have obtained atleast thrice that amount for the productionfrom the managers of one ofthe public theatres. He returned themoney ; and, on being afterwards requestedto write another piece for asimilar purpose, respectfully declinedthe order.Nicolai, the singer, appears, fromthe following anecdote, to have hadeven greater reason to complain oftheir majesties than Reynolds: Aroyal page called on Nicolai one dayto require his attendance at an eveningconcert, to be given at Buckingham-house." What!" exclaimed Nicolai,"on the old terms, I suppose! Nothing!My compliments to the kingand queen, and tell them I am betterengaged."In his agricultural pursuits, the kinghas been accused of exhibiting a paltrydesire for gain that was altogether beneaththe dignity of a monarch. Heconverted large portions of his parksTHE ROYAL FAMILY.into farms; the produce of which heregularly sent to market, and sold. Hisland is said to have been so well managed,that it yielded him a very considerableprofit ; and he acquired thereputation of being a good practicalfarmer. He was even a contributorto Arthur Young's Annals of Agriculture; and his communications, whichwere signed Ralph Robinson, Windsor,are stated to have contained many judiciousremarks. He imported a numberof Merino sheep from Spain ; and demeanedhimself so far as annually todispose of a certain portion of his flockby public auction. As long as the speculationwas profitable, he persuadedhimself that it was better to sell his ramsthan to give them away ; l< because,"as he said, " any body might accept asheep and neglect it ; but nobody wouldbuy one who did not mean to take careof it."Although the king was the reverse ofmunificent in his agricultural pursuits,and, at least, countenanced an undignifiedparsimony in his palace, on numberlessoccasions he exhibited an exalteddegree of generosity anil benevolence.He was not only charitable to the distressed; liberal, in many instances, tothe talented ; but bounteous and kindto the enemies of his house. He issaid to have contributed largely to themaintenance of the Pretender ; and tohave allowed Cardinal York, the last ofthe Stuartss, a pension of J64000 perannum. He sent the following messageto a gentleman in Derbyshire, who, asheheard, had absolutely refused totake the oath of supremacy : " Carrymy compliments to him, but what?stop! no he may, perhaps, not receivemy compliments as King of England; give him the Elector of Hanover'scompliments, and tell him, thathe respects the steadiness of his principles."Among the literary men on whomhe conferred benefits, were Johnson,Sheridan, Beattie, Blair, and Rousseau,to each of whom he granted a pension.Of the opinions of the latter, however,he is said to have disapproved ; butJohnson's talents he appears to haveheld in considerable estimation. Johnsonoccasionally visited the library atthe queen's house ; and one day, whilehe was there, the king unexpectedlyentered ; having come for the purposeof seeing Johnson, with whom he immediatelyentered into conversation.The king inquired about the librariesat Oxford, where Johnson had latelybeen, and asked the doctor if he wasthen engaged in any literary work.Johnson replied in the negative, adding,I have already told the world what Iknow, and must now read to acquiremore knowledge." The king said,You do not borrow much from anybody."Johnson replied, that he thoughthe had done his part as a writer. " Ishould have thought so too," rejoinedthe king, "if you had not written sowell !" The king then observed, thatJohnson must have read a great deal.I think more than I read," said Johnson; li in the early part of my life Iread a great deal, but having grownailing, I have not read much, comparedwith others, Dr. Warburton, for instance."The king said, he had heardWarburton's knowledge was so vast,that he was equally qualified to speakon all subjects, his learning being likeGarrick's acting, universal. His majestythen spoke of the controversy betweenWarburton and Louth, and asked whatJohnson thought of it. " Warburton,"replied the doctor, " has most generalmost scholastic learning; Louth is themore correct scholar. I do not knowwhich of them calls names best." Theking said, " I am of the same opinion.You do not think, then," continued hismajesty, "there was much argumentin the case?" Johnson replied, hethought not. " Why, truly," said theking, " when once it comes to callingnames, argument is pretty well at anend." The king next asked, whatJohnson thought of Lyttleton's History,then newly published. Johnson said, heconsidered the style pretty good, but thatLyttleton had blamed Henry too much.Why," said the king, " they seldomdo those things by halves." " No, sir,"replied Johnson, " not to kings." But,fearing to be misunderstood, he added,That for those who spoke worse ofkings than they deserved, he could findno excuse ; but that he could moreeasily conceive how some might speakbetter of them than they deserved,without any ill intention ; for as kingshad much in their power to give, thosewho were favoured by them wouldGEORGE THE THIRD.frequently, from gratitude, exaggeratetheir praises ; and as this proceededfrom a good motive, it was certainlyexcusable, as far as error could be excusable."The king inquired what hethought of Dr. Hill. Johnson answered,that he was an ingenious man, but hadno veracity ; and mentioned an assertionof his, that he had seen objects magnifiedto a much greater degree, byusing three or four microscopes at atime, than by using one. " Now,"added Johnson, " every one acquaintedwith microscopes knows, that the moreof them he looks through, the le ss theobject will appear." " Why," said theking, " this is not only telling an untruth,but telling it clumsily ; for if thatbe the case, every one who can lookthrough a microscope will be able todetect him." That he might not leavean unfavourable impression against anabsent man, Johnson added, " Dr. Hillis, however, a very curious observer,and if he would have been contentedto tell the world no more than he knew,he might have been a very considerableman, and needed not to have recourseto such mean expedients to raise hisreputation." Some conversation followedon the literary journals of theday, in the course of which Johnsonobserved, that the Royal Society hadnow a better method of arranging theirmaterials than formerly. " Ay," saidthe king, " they are obliged to Dr.Johnson for that." He then expresseda wish to have the literary biographyof the country well executed, and proposedsuch a work to Johnson, withwhich desire the doctor readily complied,and to this circumstance we probablyowe his Lives of the Poets. Afterthe interview, Johnson said to thelibrarian, ' Sir, they may talk of theking as they will, but he is the finestgentleman 1 have ever seen !" He subsequentlydeclared, that the king's mannerswere those of as fine gentleman asone might suppose Louis the Fourteenthor Charles the Second to have been."Not long after this interview, the kingsaid, alluding to the sceptical writers ofthe day, " I wish Johnson would mounthis dray-horse, and ride over them."Dr. Beattie has left the following circumstantialaccount of the first interviewwhich he had with the king andqueen : " Tuesday, the 24th of August,1773; set out for Dr. Majestie's, atKew green. He informed me that theking would see me at twelve. At thathour we went to the king's house. Wehad been only a few minutes in thehall, when the king and queen camein from an airing; as they passed, theking called me by name, and askedhow long it was since I came fromtown. " I shall see you," says he, " inalittle while." We waited for sometime,the king being busy, and then wewere called into the library, where theking was walking about, and the queensitting in a chair. I had the honour ofa conversation with them for upwardsof an hour, on various topics, in whichboth their majesties joined, with adegree of cheerfulness, affability, andease, that was to me surprising, andsoon relieved my embarrassment.They both complimented me on myEssay, which, they said, they alwayskept by them ; and the king said, hehad one copy of it at Kew, and anotherin town. ' I never stole a book butone,' said his majesty, 'and that wasyours ; I stole it from the queen, togive it to Lord Hertford to read.' Hehad heard that the sale of Hume'sEssays had fallen since the publicationof my work. He asked me when thesecond part would be ready for thepress ; and I told him, if my healthwas good, I might finish it in two orthree years. He asked how long I hadbeen in composing my Essay ; praisedits cautious tone, and said he did notwonder it had taken five or six years.He asked about my poems, and I said,there was only one poem of mine whichI valued (meaning the Minstrel). Wetalked much on moral subjects, fromwhich their majesties let it appear, thatthey were warm friends to Christianity,and disinclined to believe that anythinking man could be an atheist, unlesshe imagined he had made himself;a thought which pleased theking exceedingly, and he repeated itseveral times to the queen. Theygreatly commended the moderation andmild behaviour of the Quakers. I wasasked many questions about the Scotsuniversities. The king inquired whatI thought of Lord Dartmouth. I said,his air and manner were not onlyagreeable, but enchanting, and thathe seemed to me one of the best ofTHE Loyal FAMILY.men. ' They say that Lord Dartmouthis an enthusiast,' said the king, ' but,surely he says nothing on the subjectof religion but what every Christian mayand ought to say !' He asked whether Idid not think the English language onthe decline. I answered ' yes' and theking agreed, naming the Spectator asone of the best standards of the language.When 1 told him, that the Scots' clergysometimes prayed a quarter, or evenhalf an hour at a time, he asked, whetherthat did not lead them into repetitions.I said it often did. ' That,' said he,'I don't like in prayers; and excellentas our liturgy is, I think it somewhatfaulty in that respect.' ' Your majestyknows,' said I, ' that three services arejoined in one.' ' True,' he replied, ' andthat circumstance also makes the servicetoo long.' From this he took occasionto commend the composition ofthe liturgy : ' Observe,' said he, ' howflat those occasional prayers are, thatare now composed, in comparison withthe old ones. When I mentioned thesmallness of the church livings in Scotland,he said, ' He wondered how menof liberal education would choose tobecome clergymen there ;' and asked,whether, in the remote parts of thecountry, the clergy, in general, werenot very ignorant ?' I answered, ' No,for that education was cheap in Scotland,and that the clergy, in general,were men of good sense and competentlearning.' We discoursed on many othertopics. The queen bore a large partin the conversation, and both theirmajesties shewed a great deal of goodsense, acuteness, and knowledge, aswell as of good nature and affability.At last, the king took out his watch,which Dr. Majestie and I understoodas a signal to withdraw; we accordinglybowed to their majesties, and Isaid, ' I hope, Sir, your majesty willpardon me, if I take this opportunity toreturn you my humble and most gratefulacknowledgements for the honouryou have been pleased to confer uponme.' He answered, ' I think I could donoless for a man who has done so muchservice to the cause of Christianity.'The queen sat all the while, and theking stood, sometimes walking about alittle. The queen speaks English withsurprising elegance, and little or nothingof a foreign manner, so that if she wereonly a private lady, one 'would noticeher as one of the most agreeable womenin the world. Her face is much morepleasing than any of her pictures ;and in the expression of her eyes,and in her smile, there is somethingpeculiarly engaging." Beattie subsequentlyhad another interview with hismajesty, at which, however, nothingworthy of repetition occurred.It is said that the king, at one time,contemplated the creation of a neworder of knighthood, for the reward ofliterary merit : and that ministers werewilling to support his views on thesubject, until he proposed that theknights should receive salaries withtheir ribbons ; to which objections wereraised, on the score of the large expencesin which a long and vigorouswar had involved the nation ; and theproject was ultimately abandoned.He displayed a strong inclination toencourage painting ; although he appearsto have been rather deficient inpictorial taste. In 1765, he granted acharter to the society of artists, andknighted its first president, Reynolds;to whom, however, he never gave anycommission, apparently preferring theworks of Coates and Ramsay, two inferiorcotemporary painters, to those ofthe highly-gifted Sir Joshua. He waseven averse to any proposition for theadvancement of the art which emanatedfrom the president, to whose idea ofgratuitously embellishing Saint Paul'sby the combined efforts of all the mosteminent living painters in the country,his majesty expressed so great a dislike,that it was necessarily abandoned.But Benjamin West, who succeeded tothe president's chair on the death ofSir Joshua Reynolds, was a great favouritewith the king ; for whom, in thecourse of thirty years, he executed sixty-fourpictures, and received during thatperiod 34,187.It is related by Angelo, that, onbeing shown a landscape, which Wilsonhad painted, by command, for the royalcollection, the king exclaimed, " Hey !what! Do you call this painting? Takeit away; I call it daubing! Hey,what! 'Tis a mere daub!" He theninquired what Wilson expected for hisperformance, and being told one hundredguineas, he declared that it wasthe dearest picture he ever saw: " TooGEORGE THE THIRD.much too much," added his majesty ;tell him I say so." Opie, the self-taughtartist, having painted a picture,which attracted the king's notice, hismajesty desired that it might be broughtto Buckingham-house, where Opie, accordingly,soon afterwards presentedhimself with his painting; for which,however, the king gave him only tenguineas, observing that he could notafford any more for it.George the Third was particularlyfond of music, and afforded considerableencouragement to its professors.To Handel's oratorios lie was scarcelyever weary of listening. Angelo relatesthat, during one of the royal concerts,a violent thunder-storm came on,whereupon the king exclaimed, " Howsublime ! What an accompaniment !How this would have delightedHandel !" Soon after hostilities had firstcommenced between this country andAmerica, at an oratorio which he attended,the following lines in Alexander'sFeast are said to have had anextraordinary effect upon him :The princes applaud with furious joy,A ml the king seized a flambeau with zeal to destroy.He rolled up his book of the performanceinto the form of a truncheon,which he flourished over his head, and,starting on his feet, exclaimed, " Bravo !bravo! Encore! encore!" His enthusiasticcall for the repetition of thewords was generally, but, perhaps, veryerroneously, attributed to the warmthof his feelings against the refractorycolonists.The king, in many instances, displayeda laudable desire for the advancementof science. He patronizedCook, Byron, and Wallis, the navigators; Herschel, the astronomer ; andRamsden, the celebrated mathematicalinstrument maker; and placed largesums at the disposal of the RoyalSociety. During the dispute in 1779,as to the best form for conductors tosecure buildings from lightning, whichBanks and others, in opposition toFranklin, declared would be of greaterefficacy if made with blunt instead ofsharp ends, " The king," says Wolcott," being rather partial to blunt conductors,thought to end the matter atonce, by avowing his belief in thesuperiority of nobs. To confirm hisopinion, nobs were actually fixed oniron rods at the end of Buckingham-house.Nor was this all : he wishedthe Royal Society to declare that Franklinwas wrong ; but the president replied,he could not reverse the order ofnature."Ramsden, who was a very dilatoryman, on one occasion positively promisedto make the king an instrument,which his majesty had ordered, by aparticular day. Months, however,elapsed before it was completed ; andthen Ramsden refused to take it to thepalace, unless the king would promisenot to reprove him for his want ofpunctuality. " Well, well," said theking, " let him coin ; since he is consciousof his fault, it would be hard toreprimand him for it." Soon after,Ramsden went with his instrument tothe king, who observed, with a good-naturedsmile, " Well done, Ramsden ;you have kept your promise, on thisoccasion, to the very day of the month,and made a trifling mistake only as tothe year."Henry Angelo attributes to the kinga considerable knowledge of architecture,and states that his majesty designedthe small temple in Kewgardens, engraved in the works ofChambers, and the old gate entrancefor St. James's park to Carlton-housegardens. He was fond of the mechanicalarts, and is said to have beena good practical turner : at one time,he had a large room in Buckingham-housefitted up with lathes, and employedthe ingenious Pinchbeck, eitherto assist or instruct him in workingthem.The king rose early, often at sixo'clock ; and the two following hourshe termed exclusively his own. Hewas so exceedingly fond of riding,that, whenever the weather permitted,during a considerable portion of hislife, he passed much of the intervalbetween the hours of breakfast anddinner on horseback. He frequentlywent from Kew, on his hack, to attenda levee or council at St. James's, in themidst of a heavy shower ; and repeatedlyrode for several hours at reviews,(in which he took great delight,)with no covering but his ordinary dress,and often without a hat, during themost boisterous weather. For a numberTHE ROYAL FAMILY.of years, he hunted regularly duringthe season, and followed the houndswith as much ardour as any of hisyeomen prickers. One day, the staghaving taken water at Hampton, anumber of sportsmen in the royal huntrode up to the toll-gate on the bridge,shouting, " The king! the king !" Theywere permitted to pass without paying,but Pelham, the gate-keeper, stoppeda second party, who attempted to obtaina free passage by uttering the samecry. " I tell you what," said he, " Igive 400 a year for the bridge, andbefore I open the gate I'll have yourmoney. I've let King George through,God bless him ! and I know of noother king in England. If you havebrought the King of France with you,he shan't pass toll free." His majesty,on being made acquainted with thecircumstance, ordered the toll to bepaid for all his attendants ; and, manyyears afterwards, having occasion tocross the bridge, he said to the' gatekeeper,whose name and person heperfectly remembered, " No fear ofthe King of France coming to-day,Pelham."The tenacity of his memory wasastonishing : he knew the names, numbers,and uniform, of every regimentin the service ; and could at once particulariseevery sea worthy vessel inhis navy. West, the painter, declaredthat, during the progress of his paintingsat Windsor, he never made analteration, however minute, in any ofthem, that was not detected by theking. Garrick asserted that the kingwas not only perfectly well acquaintedwith most of the early English dramas,but that he recollected the names oftheir authors, and the dates of theirproduction respectively. When he wasat Weymouth, pending the alterationsat Windsor castle, he corresponded regularlywith the architect; and, fromhis vivid remembrance of every part ofthe building, suggested hints for variousimprovements, which had escaped thenotice of those who were employed onthe spotIt has been asserted that he recognizedthe persons and rememberedthe names of individuals many yearsafter they had been introduced to him,although he had never seen or heard ofthem in the interim. In a conversationwith Lord Amherst relative to a list ofcommissions, which had been presentedfor signature, the king found that anofficer had been nominated to a companyover the head of an old lieutenant,who, as Lord Amherst stated, couldnot purchase. The king was struckwith the old lieutenant's name, and onreference to a large folio, entirely inhis own hand writing, found some circumstancesrecorded which were greatlyto the honour of the poor subaltern ;who, at the express command of theking, was immediately appointed to thevacant company.When his majesty visited the exhibitionat Somerset House, he delightedin discovering, without the aid of thelist, for whom the principal portraitswere meant to be likenesses. "It washighly interesting," Conway often remarked," to observe the king's quickperception of the person intended bya portrait, if he had ever seen the individual."He is said to have been greatlyamused with caricatures, even withthose in which his own person or pursuitswere held up to ridicule ; and tohave heartily enjoyed the satirical effusionsof Peter Pindar, which were regularlyforwarded to his majesty, onthe day of publication. The followinginstance of his own humour has beenrecorded: two privates of the lifeguardshaving gone through the swordexercise before him, Lord Athwartinquired if his majesty would permittwo of the youngest officers to displaytheir skill in the use of their weapons.The king consented, and when theyoung gentlemen had concluded theirexhibition, he requested that the twooldest officers on the ground, (LordAthwart and Major Barton) would alsogive him a specimen of their dexterityin the exercise, which they accordinglydid, to his majesty's infinite amusement.A few anecdotes of his excursions toWorcester, Tewkesbury, and Cheltenham,have been related, which are not,perhaps, unworthy of repetition. Onthe morning of his arrival at Worcester,he was recognised while walking aloneon the bridge, and a crowd soon collectedabout him. " This, I suppose," saidhe, " is Worcester new bridge." "Yes,please your majesty," replied a dozenvoices. " Then, my boys," exclaimedGEORGE THE THIRD.the king, " let's have a huzza!" Atremendous shout ensued, in which thesovereign most heartily joined. Thenext morning he was in the streets byhalf-past five o'clock : at the residenceof Colonel Digby and Colonel Glynn,he found a female servant cleaning thedoor-way, whom he requested to shewhim where the " fellows" slept, andpersonally roused them from theirslumbers. When he visited the Guildhall,the mayor offered him a jelly,which, however, the king unexpectedlydeclined, saying, " Although I neveryet did take wine in the forenoon ; yet,on this pleasant occasion, I will ventureon a glass." Some rich old mountainwas immediately handed to him, andhe drank, " Prosperity to the city ofWorcester !"At Cheltenham, he said to the queen,We must walk about for two or threedays to please these good people whowish to see us, and then we may walkabout to please ourselves." As he rodeinto Tewkesbury , observing several personson the walls of the bridge, he saidto them, " My good people, I am afraidthat some of you may fall ; don't runsuch hazards for the sake of seeingyour king ; I will ride as slowly as youplease, that you may all see him."While strolling early one morning, hemet a countryman walking at a verybrisk rate, and thus accosted him :You seem to be very warm, my goodfellow eh?" "Yes, sir," was thereply, " I have come a long way : Iwant to see the king." " Friend," saidhis majesty, " you see him before you :here is half-a-guinea ; refresh yourselfafter your fatigue." On another occasion,perceiving a woman workingalone in a field, during harvest, heasked her what had become of hercompanions. " They are gone," saidshe, " to see the king." " Why doyou not go?" inquired his majesty. " Iwould not give a pin to see him," repliedthe woman ; " besides, the foolswill lose a day's work, which is morethan I can afford, for I have fivechildren to keep." " Well, then,"said his majesty, giving her somemoney, " you may tell your companions,who are gone to see the king,that the king came to see you."During his frequent rambles aboutWindsor, when he resided at the castle,George the Third frequently enteredinto familiar conversation with the personswhom he happened to meet. Thefollowing dialogue occurred one day, betweenhis majesty and a young clown :Who are you, boy ? who are youeh, eh ?" " I be a pig-boy." " Wheredid you come from ? who do you workfor here ? eh ?" " I be from the lowcountry, out of work at present." " Don'tthey want lads here? not want lads,eh ?" " I don't know ; all about herebelongs to Georgy." " Georgy !who's Georgy?" " He lives at thecastle yonder, but he does no good forI." The king immediately gave the lademployment on his farm, and told him,if he were a steady lad, " Georgy "might be a friend to him.He thus addressed a stable boy whomhe met near the castle : " Well, boy!what do you do? what do they payyou ?" " I help in the stable, but theyonly give me victuals and clothes," saidthe lad. " Be content; / have nomore," was the king's answer.Visiting his stable, one morning, hefound the grooms disputing so loudlythat his arrival was unnoticed. " Idon't care what you say, Robert," quothone, " but everybody else agrees, thatthe man at the Three Tuns makes thebest purl in Windsor." "Purl! purl!"exclaimed the king : " Robert, what'spurl?" The manner of making thebeverage having been explained tohim, the king said, " Very good drink,no doubt; but, grooms, too strong forbreakfast." Five years afterwards, onentering the stables one morning, heasked a boy, to whom he was unknown,where all the men were. " Idon't know, sir," replied the lad ;but they will soon be here, for theyexpect the king." " Ah, ah !" said hismajesty, " then run, boy, to the ThreeTuns, and say the king expects them ;to the Three Tuns, boy, d'ye hear?They are sure to be there, for the landlordmakes the best purl in Windsor 1"In August, 1785, while on his returnwith the queen from Egham races, aremarkably fine child attracted hisnotice. " Whose son are you, boy,eh 1" inquired his majesty. " Myfather is the king's beef-eater," repliedthe little fellow. " Indeed !" exclaimedthe monarch ; " then down onyour knees, sir, and you shall kissTHE ROYAL FAMILY.the queen's hand." The boy boldlyanswered, " No, but I won't though ;because it would dirt my new breeches."During one of his walks in the severewinter of 1785, two boys, who did notknow the king, fell on their knees andbesought him to afford them relief; theirmother, they said, had been dead threedays ; and their father was stretched byher on some straw, sick, helpless, anddestitute of money, food, and fuel. Theking went with them to their miserablehovel, and found that the boys had notexaggerated the distress of their unhappysurviving parent, to whom hismajesty immediately gave some money ;and, on his return to the castle, sentan ample supply of food and raiment tothe hovel. The man ultimately recovered,and the boys were provided for athis majesty's expense.The king and the Prince of Wales,one day, when rambling near Windsor,found a man vainly endeavouring to getthe wheel of his cart out of a hole in theroad, into which it had sunk : they immediatelyvolunteered their assistance,and with some difficulty, the king, theprince, and the carter, by their jointefforts, liberated the wheel. In gratitudefor their services, the carter proposedto treat his unknown friends withsome ale at the next public-house : they,however, not only declined his offer,but to his great astonishment, presentedhim with a couple of guineas.On another occasion, a pair of horseshaving bolted up a by-lane with thecarriage, the king, who happened towitness the circumstance, as soon as thecoachman had succeeded in stoppingthe animals, offered to hand out a ladywho was riding in the vehicle : shehowever, thought proper to keep herseat, and requested the king, whomshe did not know, to oblige her by assistingher man to back the horses outof the lane. His majesty complied withher request, and in a few minutes, thecarriage was again on the main road.Being overtaken by a sudden andheavy fall of rain, while riding nearStoke, he took shelter in a cottage,where he found a girl roasting a goose.Requesting her to put his horse in anadjacent shed, she agreed to do so, oncondition that he would not let thegoose burn in her absence. While shewas out, her father entered, and foundhis sovereign very busily basting thebird at the fire. He had good senseenough not to seem to recognise themonarch, who entered familiarly intoconversation with him on the disadvantagesof roasting with a string; andbefore his departure, took an opportunityof placing five guineas on thedresser, in a paper on which he hadwritten with a pencil, " To buy a jack."The king, on some occasions, evincedmuch impatience, if accidentally or purposelyintruded on : strangers, whilevisiting Windsor castle, were directedon no account to notice his presence,if they met him in any of the publicapartments; and he often gave thosewhom he honoured with private interviewsa hint to depart, by significantlylooking at his watch. Never, perhaps,was his patience more severely triedthan at a private audience which hegranted to Lord George Gordon, a manwho was neither remarkable for hisloyalty nor wisdom. On being admittedto the king's presence, his lordshipvery unceremoniously locked the door,which the lord in waiting had purposelyleft open. He then said that he hadan excellent pamphlet in his pocket,which he would do himself the honourand his majesty the pleasure of reading.He accordingly began the pamphlet,and the king listened very patiently,until it began to grow dark, when hismajesty observed, " I am sorry, my lord,that light fails you ; but some otherday " " Please your majesty," repliedLord George, " there is no timelike the present; and as for light, alittle of that will suffice for me." Hethen familiarly poked the fire, the blazeof which enabled him to continue thepamphlet, which he read to the lastword. The king now expected to bereleased : but to his amazement, LordGeorge said, " Please your majesty, Iwill next read you ten or eleven excellentletters that I have received fromyour protestant subjects in Ireland,which never were nor ever will besurpassed." He then commenced theletters ; and this vexatious interviewlasted for two hours longer; at thetermination of which, the fire havinggone out, or ceased to blaze, LordGeorge departed.Among the more remarkable dictaof George the Third, which have notGEORGE THE THIRD.been incorporated into the precedingportion of this article, are the following:At a levee, soon after the experimenton gunpowder had been made," saysBishop Watson, " the Duke of Richmondinformed the king, that they wereindebted to me for a great improvementin its fabrication. On my saying thatI ought to be ashamed of myself, inasmuchas it was a scandal in a Christianbishop to instruct men in the modeof destroying mankind, the king answered,' Let not that afflict your conscience,for the quicker the conflict theless the slaughter.' "Passing a handsome new house, heasked who was the owner, and on beinginformed that it had been recently purchasedby his card-maker, he said,Then I presume his cards have allturned up trumps."Having bought a horse, the sellerhanded him the animal's pedigree,which the king immediately returned,saying, " Take it back: it will do justas well for the next horse you sell."Lord Bateman, waiting on him oneday, as master of the stag hounds, toknow when they should be turned out,the king gravely replied, " I cannotexactly tell, but I can inform you thatyour lordship was turned out about anhour ago!"One day," says Smith, in his accountof Nollekens, " when Cobb, theupholsterer, (who was remarkable forthe absurd pomposity of his behaviour,)was in the library at Buckingham-house,giving orders to a workman,whose ladder was placed before a bookwhich the king wanted, he desiredCobb to hand him the work, which insteadof obeying, he called to his man,Fellow, give me that book !' Uponwhich the king arose, and asked Cobbwhat his man's name was. ' Jenkins,'answered the upholsterer. ' Then,' saidthe king, ' Jenkins, you shall hand methe book !' "On seeing Reynolds's portrait ofFox, the king said, " Very like finespecimen of art ; but Gillray is thebetter limner : nobody hits off Fox likehim. Gillray is the man for the manof the people eh ! like as my profileon a tower halfpenny eh !"During the progress of some alterationsin the grounds near Windsor castle,he told Colonel Price that he meant tohave a certain tree cut down, and thenrapidly asked the colonel's opinion, in amanner indicating that he expected anabsolute approval of his intention. Thecolonel, however, respectfully intimatedthat he differed in opinion with his majestyon the subject. " Ay," said theking, " that's your way ; you continuallycontradict me !" " If your majesty,"replied the Colonel, " will not condescendto listen to the honest sentimentsof your faithful servants, you cannever hear the truth." After a shortpause, the king said, in a very kindmanner, " You are right, Price ; andthe tree shall stand."Gainsborough having said to him,that painters ought to design the fashionsfor female dress, the king replied, " Iam of the same opinion, Gainsborough.Why do not you, and Sir Joshua, setabout it? But they are bewitchingenough as it is, eh? Gainsborough !eh?"Gresse, the artist, one of the teachersto the royal family, was a man of extraordinarybulk. The king often visitedhis residence at Cobham; and oneday, while going up a very narrow,crooked staircase, which led to Gresse'sbed-room, his majesty whispered to thelord in waiting, " It is a wonder howGresse climbs up to his dormitory ; butit will be a much greater wonder howhe will be brought down, if he shoulddie here, for there's no flexibility in acoffin, eh! my lord, eh !"To conclude, George the Third appearsto have possessed many amiableand some noble qualities. He was entitled,perhaps, to more respect as aman, than admiration as a monarch. Inprivate life his virtues would not havebeen so inadequately appreciated, norhis defects so glaringly obnoxious, asthey were in the exalted station whichit was his fortune to fill. The greatblemish of his character was an undignifiedpertinacity in cleaving to opinionsafter the most disastrous consequenceshad evinced their absurdity. His greatvirtue consisted in the admirable subserviencyof his conduct to the dictatesof his conscience. Few men haveequalled, scarcely any have excelledhim, in purity of motive. If his measureswere often attended with unhappyresults, his intention in originatingthem was, nevertheless, above impeach-theROYAL FAMILY.merit. If, while endeavouring to benefitGreat Britain, he frequently plungedthe nation into calamity, a want of wisdomis to be attributed to him, ratherthan a want of patriotism. But it isimpossible to excuse, or account for hissingular obstinacy in not retracing, or atleast, arresting his steps, when the pathhe had erroneously chosen was evidentlybeset with dangers; unless itmay be presumed, he still thoughtthat, although difficult and perilous, itwould eventually lead to the accomplishmentof an object, which, in hishonest opinion, it was desirable, or perhapsindispensable, to achieve. Hisdaring perseverance under the most unpromisingcircumstances, was, it mustbe admitted, occasionally rewarded withtriumphant advantages ; and the recollectionof his success in these cases,it is probable, strengthened him in hispredominant error. During his longreign, opinions frequently fluctuatedwith regard to his character : whenhis unflinching adherence to his ownopinions proved fortunate at last, hewas lauded for his firmness; when acontrary result occurred, he was abusedfor having been unpardonably pertinacious.He was a slave, upon conviction,to consistency ; than which, no bugbearbut gross superstition has so materiallychecked the improvement of individualsand-society at large. On the whole,however, it is probable that few of hispredecessors, if placed in similar extraordinarycircumstances, would havedone more good and less evil in theirday, than George the Third.EDWARD AUGUSTUS, DUKE OF YORK.EDWARD AUGUSTUS, son ofFrederick, Prince of Wales, was bornon the 14th of March, 1739. In hissecond or third year his medical attendantssuspected that he laboured undersome deeply-seated internal complaint ;and by the time he was twelve yearsold, it became evident that he had animposthume in his side. He was compelledto undergo an operation, which,although successfully performed, is saidto have not altogether re-establishedhis health.In 1752, he was created a knight ofthe garter; and in 1756, the king grand tedhim an allowance of 5,000 per annum.In 1758, he embarked as a volunteerwith the expedition against Cherbourg ;at the taking of which he was present,and manifested great intrepidity. Havingafterwards distinguished himself onseveral other occasions, he received thefreedom of the city of London in a goldbox ; and a handsome compliment fromthe Recorder for his early entranceinto the naval service of his country.He had previously been created Dukeof York, and appointed one of themembers of his brother's privy council;but he never took any part in publicaffairs.It is related of this prince, thatgoing one day to St. James's, evidentlyin a state of great dejection, the king,his brother, asked him-why he was low-spirited."How can I be otherwise,"said the duke, " eternally pestered as Iam, by my creditors, without having apenny to pay them ?" The king immediatelypresented him with a thousandpound note ; every word of which theduke gravely read aloud, and thenmarched out of the room, singing, loudlyand cheerfully, '' God save great Georgeour king," &c.When Bubb Doddington showed theduke a room, on the first floor of his(Doddington's) house, absurdly pavedwith marble, observing, at the sametime, that it ought, perhaps, to havebeen on the ground ; the duke replied,Be easy, sir, it soon will be there."He took great delight in travelling,and was beloved wherever he went, onaccount of his liberality and agreeablemanners. He died at Monaco, in Italy,of a malignant fever, after an illness offourteen days only, on the 17th ofSeptember, 1767. His remains havingbeen embalmed, were brought over toEngland, and interred in WestminsterAbbey.WILLIAM HENRY, DUKE OF GLOUCESTER.WILLIAM HENRY, DUKE OF GLOUCESTER.WILLIAM HENRY, son of Frederick,Prince of Wales, was born on the25th of November, 1743. In the courseof his education, he supplied the wantof brilliant talent by great diligence,and succeeded in becoming a man ofconsiderable acquirements. From hisboyhood he evinced a great predilectionfor the army ; and while yet veryyoung, served with much credit to himselfin several continental expeditions.He became colonel of the first regimentof foot-guards and gradually attainedthe rank of senior field marshal inthe British service. He was, however,never intrusted with any importantcommand.Shortly after attaining his majority,on which occasion he had been createdDuke of Gloucester, he became enamouredof Maria, the Countess Dowagerof Waldegrave, to whom he was privatelymarried on the 6th of September,1766. George the Third, his brother,was highly incensed at this match ; herefused to receive the bride at court;and, consequently, the duke and duchessproceeded to Italy, where they residedfor a considerable time. Theirunion was not generally known until1772, when, in consequence of a billhaving been brought into parliament,relative to royal marriages, the dukethought proper publicly to acknowledgethe duchess as his wife. In 1776, hereturned to England; his children bythe duchess were shortly afterwardsacknowledged as his legal heirs ; and areconciliation took place between hisroyal highness and the king.During the duke's residence in Italyhe was presented with several paintings,and exquisite specimens of ancientsculpture, by the pope ; from whomhe received various flattering marks ofcivility and respect. It is related, thatwhile the duke was at Rome, his carriage,one exceedingly muddy day,happened to enter at one end of a streetprecisely as that of his holiness appearedat the other. The pope and the duke,when within a short distance of eachother, ordered their respective vehiclesto stop, and several messages passedbetween the parties as to who shouldmove forward first, the pope feeling reluctantto take precedence in this respectof the duke, and the duke of the pope.Meantime, a great number of the populacewere silently waiting in the mud toreceive the papal benediction. Strength,this extraordinary dispute of mutualhumility was terminated by the duke'scarriage being driven slowly past that ofthe pope, in consequence of his holinesshaving stated, by one of his messengers,that he should be obliged to returnhome if his royal highness would notcondescend to pass on.The duke bore the character of ahumane, well-meaning man ; and, especiallyduring the latter part of hislife, enjoyed considerable popularity.He died on the 26th of August, 1805,and his remains were interred in Westminsterabbey.HENRY FREDERICK, DUKE OF CUMBERLAND.HENRY FREDERICK, son ofFrederick, Prince of Wales, was bornon the 7th of November, 1744. Hisperverse intractability of temper, in boyhood,rendered him exceedingly troublesometo his tutors. For fine clothesand costly ornaments, he displayed, atan early period, a weak predilection;but evinced no anxiety to support thedignity of his birth by moral excellenceor mental acquirements.He was created Duke of Cumberland,October 18, 1766, and, at the sametime, received a liberal provision fromparliament. Still no favourable changetook place in his disposition : a mereTHE ROYAL FAMILY.lounger in society, he dissipated his timein the most frivolous amusements, orthe practice of low and contemptiblevices. By degrees, he rendered himselfridiculously notorious; and, at length,the absurdity of his conduct, whenenamoured of the Countess Grosvenor,made him the laughing-stock of thewhole country. This lady, whosemaiden name was Harriet Vernon, appearsto have been respectably connected,but had no fortune. One day,about the year 1764, being caught in ashower of rain, while she was walkingin Kensington gardens, Lord Grosvenor,struck with her beauty, offered her, anda young lady who was with her, seatsin his carriage. The proposal was accepted,and his lordship accompaniedthem home. An intimacy between theearl and Miss Vernon ensued j and, inashort time, he led her to the altar. In1770, as it is stated, the Duke of Cumberland" began to idolize her." Onone occasion, his royal highness followedher to Eaton-hall, near Chester ;and meetings between them took placein the adjacent fields so frequently asto attract the notice of the neighbourhood.The duke lodged at an obscurepublic-house in Han ford ; and thoughhis real rank was unsuspected, yet thefineness of his linen, the ornaments ofhis watch, and the splendour of hisrings, which, with consummate weakness,he delighted to display, inducedthe landlord, who probably feared thathe was employed in some illegal practices,to hint that his departure wouldbe agreeable. The duke immediatelyquitted the house, and passed many ofthe following nights in barns and hovels,near the usual place of his rendezvouswith her ladyship. Lord Grosvenorbrought an action of crim. con. againsthim, and obtained a verdict for 10,000damages. At the trial of the cause, theplaintiff's counsel put in several of theduke's letters to the countess; the perusalof which is said to have been attendedwith great laughter. One of them containedthe following passage : " I gotto supper about nine o'clock, but I couldnot eat, and so got to bed about ten."Scarcely had these degrading proceedingsceased to be the subject ofpublic conversation, when, much to theannoyance of the royal family, thenewspapers announced, that the Dukeof Cumberland had, on the 2nd ofOctober, 1771, married Lady AnnLuttrell, (a woman much older thanhimself,) eldest daughter of the Earlof Champion, and widow of Mr.Christopher Horton, of Derbyshire.This new act of folly and supposed insultto the sovereign, on the part of hisweak-minded brother, not only producedan order, forbidding the dukeand his consort from appearing at court,but a message to parliament recommendinga legislative provision for preventingany of the royal family frommarrying without the consent of theking. Accordingly, a bill was passedthough not without violent opposition,enacting that none of the royal familybeing under the age of twenty-fiveyears, should contract marriage withoutthe sovereign's sanction : but that,on attaining the above age, they mightbe at liberty, should such sanction bewithheld, to solemnize the proposedunion, if, after having announced tothe privy-council the name of the personthey wished to espouse, an entireyear should elapse without either houseof parliament addressing the kingagainst it.Deprived of the society of his relations,and generally excluded from thefashionable world by his imprudence,the duke lived very uncomfortably withhis wife, who died in his lifetime withoutissue. A person named Olivia Serres,subsequently to his death, stated herselfto be a daughter of the duke by asecond marriage : but her claim to therank of a princess was not recognized bygovernment.It would be a difficult task to ascertainin which the duke was most defective,in judgment or in morals. Hesinned as often against decency as sense.Perhaps the best excuse for his transgressionswill be found in his naturalweakness of intellect : he appears tohave had neither discrimination to avoiderror, nor strength of mind to abandonit when discovered. He died on the18th of September, 1790, in the forty-fifthyear of his age, of an inveteratescrofulous malady, with which he hadlong been afflicted.CAROLINE MATILDA, QUEEN OF DENMARK.PRINCESS LOUISA ANNE.THIS princess, the daughter ofFrederick, Prince of Wales, was soextremely small and delicate, at herbirth, which took place on the 8th ofMarch, 1749, that it was deemed advisableto have her immediately baptized: but she passed through theperils of infancy, and seemed, for sometime,gradually to gain strength. Herdisposition was remarkably gentle ; andher intense desire for the acquisition ofknowledge, delighted, while it alarmedher family, lest her health might beinjured by too much application. Asshe advanced towards womanhood, thatlatent malady, the existence of whichhad, for some years, been indicated bythe peculiarly bright vermillion hue ofher cheek, became more developed ;and after suffering much from a hecticcough, which at length put on the appearanceof a rapid consumption, andrendered all medical skill unavailing,she expired on the 13th of May, 1768.CAROLINE MATILDA, QUEEN OF DENMARK.CAROLINE MATILDA, the posthumouschild of Frederick, Prince ofWales, was born on the llth of July,1751. The dawn of her life was sorrowful,its meridian stormy, and its closemelancholy. She is described as havingbeen a tall, fair, graceful girl, of elegantmanners, liberal acquirements, andamiable disposition. The terms of hermarriage with Prince Christian, of Denmark,were settled in January, 1765 ;but on account of the extreme youth'sthe parties, the ill-fated alliance did nottake effect until two years afterwards.During the interval, Princess Carolinelost much of that endearing vivacity, forwhich she had previously been remarkable; well-founded apprehensions asto her future happiness agitated hermind ; and she became pensive, reserved,and evidently unhappy.In the mean time, Prince Christianascended the throne of Denmark, andthe marriage was at length celebrated byproxy, on the 1st of October, 1766. Theyoung bride, then only in her sixteenthyear, embarked for the continent, withdeep regret, almost immediately after theceremony had been performed. Fromthe first moment of her arrival inDenmark she became an object ofcommiseration. Her husband was ahaughty, irritable, jealous, semi-barbarian; repulsive even in his few momentsof fondness; and, at other times, gloomy,remorseless, vindictive, and tyrannical,yet, in some respects, contemptiblyweak and pusillanimous.Soon after his marriage, actuated bya restless desire of change, he abandonedhis throne and young bride, tovisit foreign countries. In 1768, hearrived in England, where he wastreated with formal magnificence butreal coldness, on account of the illiberaltreatment which the young queen hadalready experienced at the Danishcourt, not only from the king himself,but, through his culpable neglect, fromher imperious stepmother. His conductat the British capital appears to havebeen by no means dignified. " I wish,"said his queen, in a letter to one of hersisters, " that the king's travels had thesame laudable objects as those of Cyrus :but I find that the chief visitors of hismajesty are musicians, fiddlers, andpersons designed for employments stillmore inglorious."Horace Walpole has thus describedthis prince : " He is as diminutive asif he came out of a kernel in the fairytales. He is not ill made, nor weaklymade, though so small ; and though hisface is pale and delicate, it is not at allu g'y> Y et nas a strong cast of the lateking, and enough of the late Prince ofWales, to put one upon one's guard notTHE Royal FAMILY.to be prejudiced in his favour. Still hehas more royalty than folly in his air ;and, considering he is not twenty, is aswell as one expects any king in a to be. He arrived on Thursday,supped, and lay at St. James's.Yesterday evening, he was at thequeen's and Carlton-house, and, atnight, at Lady Hertford's assembly.He only takes the title of Altesse, (anabsurd mezzo-termine,) but acts theking exceedingly ; struts in the circlelike a cock-sparrow, and does thehonours of himself very civilly."After quitting England, he passedinto France and Germany, and returnedto his dominions in the course of thefollowing year. On re-assuming thereins of government, he clearly demonstratedthat he had gained no valuableaccession of knowledge during hisabsence. A physician, and politicaladventurer, named John FrederickStruensee, the son of a clergyman at"Halle, in Saxony, by whom he had beenattended during his travels, acquired soabsolute an ascendancy over him, as toobtain the supreme direction of affairs.With the rash presumption incident tosudden and unmerited prosperity, thisman attempted various innovations inthe state, which rendered him exceedinglyodious. The very high favour inwhich he evidently stood with the queen,who, it is said, had made use of his influence,to bring about a reconciliationbetween herself and the king, gave riseto imputations against her majesty'scharacter. She was accused of havingfrequently been alone with him, and ofhaving, on many occasions, treated himwith indecorous familiarity.At length, an extraordinary courtrevolution, conducted by the queendowager, Prince Frederick, (her son,)and Count Rantzau, overthrew the favourite.On the night of the 16th ofJanuary, 1772, they roused the kingfrom his sleep, and, by their assurancesthat his life was in danger, procuredhis signature to a warrant for theimmediate arrest of Struensee and hermajesty. The former was soon afterconvicted of high treason, and sentencedto lose his right hand, to bebeheaded, and then quartered. In hislast moments, he was attended by Dr.Hunter, who wrote an elaborate accountof his conversion from scepticism. Thequeen was consigned, with much indignity,to the castle of Brandenburg, and,for some time, her life was in danger ; acapital process being meditated againsther, with a view to bastardize herissue, in order that Prince Frederick,the king's brother, might becomepresumptive successor to the throne.Through the strenuous remonstrancesof the court of St. James's, backed bythe appearance of a British fleet in theBaltic, she was, however, at length,allowed to retire from the Danish dominions,under the conduct of SirRobert Keith, who conveyed her tothe city of Hell, in the electorate ofHanover; where she died, on the 10th ofMarch, 1775, in neglect and obscurity.As it is impossible to ascertain thetruth of the allegations made againstQueen Caroline Matilda of Denmark,any attempt to give a correct estimateof her character must needs befruitless. There appears to be littledoubt of her having betrayed somesymptoms of levity ; these, however,are assorted, by some of her advocates,to have been the mere innocent salliesof a lively young woman, with her husband'sconfidential physician; whileothers boldly, but unsuccessfully, endeavourto justify them by the negligentand unfeeling conduct of theking. If she were only imprudent, theunhappy queen has a strong claim onour commiseration ; but if she reallydishonoured the king's bed, an offenceof which she was accused, but not satisfactorilyproved to have been guilty,she was, notwithstanding his improperbehaviour, exceedingly culpable; notonly for breaking her marital vow,from which his brutality had not absolvedher, but for deeply wrongingherself, and exposing her issue, and thecountry, to the horrors of a disputedsuccession.GEORGE THE FOURTH.GEORGE THE FOURTH, AND HIS CONSORT CAROLINE.THE birth of George AugustusFrederick, eldest son of George theThird and Queen Charlotte, took placeat St. James's palace, on the 12th ofAugust, 1762. As heir-apparent, hewas born Duke of Cornwall, Duke ofRothsay, Earl of Carrick, Baron ofRenfrew, as well as hereditary HighSteward of Scotland ; and, a few daysafter his birth, he received, by patent,the title of Prince of Wales. Havingacquired the rudiments of learningunder the superintendence of hismother, his further education was entrusted,in 1770, to the Earl of Holdernesse,as governor; Dr. Markham, aspreceptor ; and Cyril Jackson, as sub-preceptor.The young prince was now secludedfrom society, and coerced to severe application.Dr. Markham, on enteringupon his important duties as chiefinstructor to the heir-apparent and hisnext brother, had asked George theThird how he wished to have theyoung princes treated. " Like thesons of any private gentleman," wasthe reply ; " if they deserve it, letthem be flogged : d'o as you did atWestminster." Markham, it is said,did not fail, when it appeared necessary,to act up to these instructions; andhis pupils, by dint of constant study,rapidly acquired such a proficiency inthe classics, as was supposed to behighly creditable to themselves andhonourable to their teachers. Notwithstandingthe clamours that have beenraised against the restraint practisedat this period of his education, it doesnot appear, subsequently, to have metwith the disapprobation of the prince ;who, on the contrary, long after he hadreached maturity, expressed his gratitudefor the benefits he had derived,as well from the zeal and services ofMarkham, as those of the sub-preceptor,to whom, so late as 1809, he offered abishopric ; which, however, Jackson, onaccount of his advanced age, thoughtproper to refuse. Nor does the severityof his tutors seem to have had the effectof breaking his naturally high spirit.In 1772, his father, having given him,as he conceived, some unmerited offence,he revenged himself by shouting, atthe door of the king's room, " Wilkesand Number Forty-five for ever 1" anexpression, than which scarcely anything,at that time, as the prince knew,was more obnoxious to his majesty'sears.On reaching his twelfth year, a pieceof ground was set apart lor the heir-apparent,and his brother, the Duke ofYork, in Kew gardens. They croppedit with wheat, which they reaped,thrashed, winnowed, and ground ; theythen made the flour into dough, anddivided it into loaves ; these they baked,and afterwards distributed them amongthe royal family. In 1776, for somecause, as to the nature of which, conjecture,though busy, was apparentlyunsuccessful, Lord Holdernesse and thetwo preceptors resigned. The latterwere succeeded by Bishop Kurd andthe Rev. Mr. Arnald, and Lord Brucebecame the new governor ; but, in afew days after his appointment, heeither retired or received his dismissal,in consequence, it was reported, of hishaving committed a blunder in Greek,which his elder pupil had somewhatpertly corrected.The chief direction of the youngprinces' future education was now confidedto the Duke of Montague, towhom the junior members of the royalfamily had previously been indebtedfor the restriction of their morning repastto plain oatmeal-porridge. Thediscipline established by Markham andJackson, appears to have suffered norelaxation during the protectorship oftheir successors. Arnald, who haddoubtless heard of George the Third'savowed sentiments as to the correctionof his sons, personally inflicted thebirch on one of the royal pupils, (itdoes not appear which,) when thelatter was fifteen or sixteen years ofage. Indignant at his conduct, thetwo princes, when, on a subsequentoccasion, Arnald was about to repeatwhat they deemed his gross offence,THE ROYAL FAMILY.attacked him together, tore the rodfrom his grasp, and chastised him withit in such a manner that he neverthought proper to raise his handagainst either of them again.Up to his eighteenth year, the princehad been absurdly restricted to thesociety of his relatives and tutors ; and,although at that age he had attainedhis majority as heir-apparent, and washonoured with a small separate establishmentat Kew, the restraint and seclusionin which he had been broughtup, was even then but slightly relaxed.He contrived, however, at this period,so far to elude the vigilance of thoseunder whose care he was placed, as toindulge in an amour with the beautifuland accomplished Mrs. Robinson. Thislady, although not above a year olderthan the prince, had for some timebeen married : she was an actress, andhad first attracted his notice when performingPermit, in the Winter's Tale.A correspondence between them forthwithcommenced ; they frequently hadstolen interviews, by moonlight, on thebank of the Thames, near Kew ; andtheir attachment, for some time, appearedto be mutually fervent. Having,by his desire, resigned her theatricalengagements, his royal highness gaveher, as a compensation for the sacrifice,a bond for 20,000, payable onhis attaining the age of twenty-one ;and, as that period approached, arrangementswere in progress for attachingher to his establishment, whichwas then about to be formed. At themoment, however, when the prospectsof Mrs. Robinson were, in her ownopinion, brightest, the prince, having,as she suspected, formed a new connexion,sent her " a cold and unkindletter, .briefly informing her that theymust meet no more." Two years aftertheir separation, he was prevailed upon,with much difficulty, to relieve her, insome degree, from the pecuniary embarrassmentsinto which the connexionhad plunged her, and, at the same time,to redeem his bond for 20,000, bygranting her an allowance of 500 ayear.In June, 1783, a parliamentary provisionwas made for his establishment;100,000 being voted to him as anoutfit for his household, and half thatamount per annum by way of income.In the following November, he tookhis seat among the peers, and, for someshort time, supported government ;but, like the preceding heirs-apparentof his family, he soon joined the opposition,and obtained popularity at theexpense of his father's displeasure. Asit was anticipated, from the seclusionin which he had previously been kept,and his evident appetite for pleasure,he indulged freely, on coming of age,in all kinds of dissipation. The politicalopinions and private characters ofhis gay and talented associates, wereequally offensive to the king ; who sawhim, with deep regret, becoming dailymore and more entangled in the trammelsof a party opposed to the administration,and sharing in all the sensualexcesses and fashionable follies to whichsome of its leaders were notoriouslyaddicted. At length, during the greatcontest between the coalition and Pitt,some offence being taken at his sittingunder the gallery of the house of commonsduring the debates, where hispresence, it was said, might tend to influencethe votes, he suddenly avowedhis disgust for politics, and abandonedhimself wholly to pleasure.Soon after his breach with Mrs.Robinson, he had formed an attachmentwith the famous Mrs. Crouch, onwhom he lavished presents with recklessprofusion. Nearly at the sameperiod commenced his connexion withMrs. Fitzherbert, a Roman catholiclady of good family, nearly sevenyears older than himself, and who hadalready been twice married. Her personand manners had so fascinating aneffect on her royal lover, that, accordingto rumour, a marriage between themwas privately celebrated, for the purposeof satisfying her conscientiousscruples. In 1787, Rolle, the memberfor Devonshire, alluded to the presumedcircumstance in the house of commons.Fox, however, with (as he stated theexpress authority of the prince, deniedthe truth of the report in such positiveterms, that Mrs. Fitzherbert never wouldspeak to " the man of the people"again. Fox, it is said, subsequentlybecame convinced that she was somethingmore than the prince's mistress,and felt highly indignant at having beenbetrayed by his royal highness's instructionsinto the utterance of a falsehood.GEORGE THE FOURTH.This affair was brought before parliamentduring a debate (in 1787,) relativeto the pecuniary difficulties bywhich the prince had already becomeembarrassed. On the settlement of hisincome in 1783, his friends were desirousof procuring for him the sameyearly allowance as had been granted tohis father under similar circumstances.The king, however, would not consentto his receiving more than half the desiredamount. The prince's advocatesstrenuously protested against the inefficiencyof the sum, but the monarchwas firm ; and the prince's yearly incomewas settled at only 50,000.Although his royal highness was entitledto an additional revenue of13,000 a year, out of the duchy ofCornwall, it was, with confidence, foretoldthat he would inevitably get intodebt ; and the prediction was soon verified.His expences greatly exceeded hismeans, and he adopted a variety of expedientsto raise sufficient funds forthe satisfaction of his creditors ; all ofwhich having apparently proved fruitless,he, at length, solicited pecuniaryassistance from his father. The king,however, was so irritated by his extravagance,that he not only declinedto interfere in his affairs, but even refusedto grant him an interview, whenhis royal highness hurried from Brightonto Windsor, for the purpose of congratulatingthe monarch on his recentescape from Margaret Nicholson's attemptto assassinate him, of which, theprince had heard entirely by accident ;no formal communication having beenmade to him on the subject.He now broke up his splendid establishmentat Carlton house, dismissedhis servants, and intimated his resolutionof living in a state of retirement,so that he might be enabled to savesuch a portion of his income, as would,in a few years, liquidate his debts,which by this time amounted to upwardsof 160,000. His seclusion was,however, but brief: Carlton house soondisplayed its usual gaieties again, andthe prince was persuaded to suffer hisaffairs to be brought under the noticeof parliament.Alderman Needham, accordingly,during a debate on the budget, inquiredof the minister, if governmentintended to propose any measurefor the heir-apparent's relief from hisembarrassments. Pitt replied in thenegative ; but, after several violent debateson the subject, a royal messagewas brought down to the house, bywhich the king announced his intentionof adding 10,000 per annum, outof the civil list, to the prince's income,and solicited the assistance of parliamentto extricate him from his difficulties;having, as he stated, a well-groundedexpectation, that his royalhighness would avoid contracting anydebts for the future. Accordingly, onthe following day, the house voted161,000 to satisfy the prince's creditors,and 20,000 for the completionof Carlton house.George the Third having become insane,at the latter end of the year 1788,the minister, Pitt, on the 10th of December,proposed the appointment of aregency. Fox, on this occasion, imprudentlyinsisted on the prince's absoluteright to the full prerogatives ofthe throne, during the king's illness ;Pitt, on the contrary, contended that itwas at once constitutional and expedient,to repose in his royal highnessthe executive power, subject to certainrestrictions. He proposed that the careof the king's person, and the managementof the royal household, shouldbe entrusted solely to the queen ; thatthe prince, while regent, should conferno title of peerage except on such ofhis majesty's children as had attainedthe age of twenty-one ; and that heshould neither grant any pension, saveduring the king's pleasure, any officesin reversion, or any places whatsoever,except such as were by law conferredfor life, or during good behaviour. Theprince and his friends highly disapprovedof this scheme; and on the 1stof January, 1789, a very able andelaborate disquisition on the proposedmeasure, written by Burke, was deliveredin the name, and as containingthe sentiments, of his royal highness, tothe lord chancellor, Thurlow. " Theplea of public utility," it was stated inthis document, " must be strong andurgent, which calls for the suspensionof rights essential to the supreme power,or which can justify the prince in consenting,that in his person an experimentshould be made, to ascertain withhow small a portion of kingly powerTHE ROYAL FAMILY.the executive government may becarried on."Pitt, however, soon brought forwardhis propositions, which were, at length,adopted, although vigorously opposedby Fox and his party, in the house ofcommons, and notwithstanding thesolemn remonstrance of the Dukes ofYork and Cumberland, and fifty-fiveother peers, against the intended restrictions.On the 30th of January, adeputation from both houses waitedon the prince, and formally announcedhis appointment to the office of regent.He accepted the trust, and the bill hadalready been read in the commons (onthe 12th of February), when the kingsuddenly recovered.In the meantime, an provisionalregency had been voted to the prince,in the Irish parliament, whose resolutionson the subject the lord-lieutenanthaving refused to transmit, were broughtover by the Duke of Leinster, and otherdelegates, who presented them to hisroyal highness about a week after themonarch had resumed the exercise ofhis kingly functions. The prince nowsolicited the favour of an interview withhis father, probably for the purpose ofvindicating his conduct during therecent debates, which, however, wassternly refused ; and his royal highness(whose partisans, thwarted, by theking's restoration to health, in theirardent hopes of attaining political supremacy,were now somewhat crestfallen)again abandoned politics formore agreeable pursuits.About this time he is said to have beenenamoured of the beautiful Duchess ofDevonshire, who was then separatedfrom her husband ; but his advances donot appear to have met with a favourablereturn. He also formed an attachmentfor the Countess of Jersey : stillhis affection towards Mrs. Fitzherberthad suffered but little abatement. Asumptuous residence was prepared forher at Brighton, which he had previouslyraised from obscurity intofashionable eminence, by making ithis usual place of abode during thesummer months ; her furniture andequipages were magnificent; and, indiamonds, she is said to have beenalmost as rich as Queen Charlotte.For some time previously to 1790he had patronized horse-racing andpugilism ; but, in that year, having attendeda prize-fight in which one of theboxers was killed, he ceased to supportthe ring, declaring that he would neverbe present at such a scene of murderagain; and, in 1791, he disposed of hisstud, on account of some apparentlygroundless suspicion being attached tohis conduct, with regard to a race, inthe event of which he had little or noreal interest.In the midst of his dissipation, foppery,and extravagance, he was notaltogether destitute of laudable ambition.It is supposed that he attempted,but without success, to obtain the vicegerencyof Ireland; and also vainlysolicited the favour of being permittedto join the British forces under theDuke of York, in Holland. An apparentreconciliation at length tookplace between the prince and his father ;who, on the failure of issue by themarriage of his second son, appears tohave evinced considerable anxiety toremove the heir-apparent's scruplesagainst a royal union ; to avoid whichthe prince is stated, on more than oneoccasion, to have emphatically said,that he would willingly forfeit his rightto the crown.Hisincreasing embarrassments, whichhad been materially augmented bythe erection of a fantastic pavilion atBrighton, eventually, however, inducedhim to consent to a match with hiscousin, the Princess Caroline AmeliaElizabeth, (born on the 17th of May,1768,) daughter of George the Third'sfavourite sister and the Duke of Brunswick,on condition that his debts, whichamounted to nearly 70,000, shouldbe forthwith discharged.The bride elect was in her twenty-seventhyear, high-spirited, accomplished,of a prepossessing appearance,and, according to the journals of theday, " of great taste in dress, andmuch goodness of heart." She spokeEnglish with great fluency ; and onher arrival in this country, which tookplace on the 5th of April, 1795, sheappears to have used her best endeavoursto win the affection of her royalrelatives. By the prince, she was receivedwith flattering politeness andrespect; by the king, with great cordiality;but by his consort, with decidedcoolness. She had been attended,GEORGE THE FOURTH.during her journey from Greenwichto London, by Lady Jersey, who hadartfully extracted from her the secretof her having an attachment for ayoung German, which was, of course,immediately communicated to theprince ; whose deportment towards heronthe day after her arrival, was consequentlyrather reserved.On the 8th, their marriage was celebratedat the chapel royal, St. James's,and on the following day they proceededto Windsor, whither they wereaccompanied by Lady Jersey, for whoseestablishment in his household, theprince had peremptorily provided. Theprincess soon discovered his close intimacywith her ladyship, whose dismissal,on appealing to the king, sheeventually procured : her royal highness,also, no doubt, became acquaintedwith the fact, that Mrs. Fitzherberthad procured from him a superb mansionin Park lane, a magnificent outfit,a pension of 10,000 per annum, andan assurance, that, notwithstanding hismarriage, the attention which he hadpreviously shewn her should still becontinued. The mortification of theprincess was speedily increased, bylearning that the heir-apparent had reluctantlyconsented to an union withher, merely to obtain relief from anenormous load of debt ; previously tothe settlement of which, an investigationof his affairs took place, and manydisclosures ensued, with regard to hisconduct and character, that severelywounded her pride, and aggravated herresentment.Feeling highly indignant at the neglectwith which she was treated by theprince, she remonstrated with him onthe subject in such terms, that his disinclinationtowards her evidently increased.She returned the queen'scontinued coldness with disdain ; and,rather imprudently, made use of somevery sarcastic terms with regard to hermajesty, and other members of theroyal family, in a packet of letters forher friends at Brunswick ; which sheentrusted, for delivery, to a clergymannamed Randolph, who was about todepart for Germany ; but, finding occasionto defer his journey, he forwardedthem to the residence of herroyal highness, at Brighton, under anenvelope addressed to Lady Jersey,whose dismissal from the pavilion hadnot yet taken place. They neverreached the hands of the princess : andher royal highness expressed a mostfirm belief, that they had been malignantlydistributed among the membersof the royal family, for the purpose ofadding to the difficulties of her painfulsituation. The king continued herstedfast friend ; but, notwithstandingher pregnancy, she was treated withincreasing coolness by the prince ; who,shortly after the birth of the PrincessCharlotte, in January, 1796, sent herproposals for a separation, to whichshe promptly acceded ; at the same timeinsisting, that their intercourse, evenin the event of her daughter's decease,should never be renewed.In the meantime, a statement of hisdebts had been laid before the houseof commons; by which it appeared,that his extravagance had been boundless.His farrier's bill alone amountedto 40,000. Several animated debatestook place on the subject ; and theprince's conduct was animadverted onwith great severity. After a protracteddiscussion, parliament eventually determinedthat a jointure of 50,000 perannum should be settled on the princess;that 28,000 should be grantedto purchase jewels and plate for theroyal couple ; and a further sum of26,000 for finishing Carhonhouse :that the prince's future income, exclusiveof his ducal revenues, should beraised to 125,000 ; out of which, suchan annual deduction was to be made,as would pay off his debts in the courseof nine years. In answer to a proposal,that the accumulation of receiptsfrom the duchy of Cornwall, duringthe minority of the prince, and whichamounted to upwards of 230,000,should be appropriated to the satisfactionof some of his creditors, it wasinsisted, on behalf of the king, that ifthe prince were entitled to the ducalarrears, his majesty had a claim, equallyvalid, for the whole cost of his royalhighness's education and first establishment!Commissioners were now appointedto examine the prince's alleged debts ;many of which were rejected as groundless,and among others, an annuityof 1,400 to Mrs. Crouch was disallowed,because it had been grantednoTHE ROYAL FAMILY.without any valuable consideration."For the admitted claims, debentures,payable with interest, were given ; andthe prince retired into comparative seclusion,in order to save a sufficientsum out of the residue of his income,for the discharge of what Earl Moira,in the house of lords, termed certaindemands on his royal highness's honour ;which are supposed to have been loansobtained by him from the Landgraveof Hesse Cassel, the Duke of Orleans,and some other foreigners of distinction.By degrees his debts were liquidated,and he emerged from his temporaryretirement ; but, he seems to have feltno inclination to attract the notice ofthe public, until the threatened invasionof this country by the French,on the rupture of the peace of Amiens,in 1803. The prince had, for sometimebefore, been colonel of a dragoonregiment, which, it is said, he kept in astate of the most admirable discipline,and maneuvered with uncommon skill.He had ardently studied the principalauthorities on the science of war, and,in theory at least, was supposed to beanexcellent tactician. His predilectiontowards a military life appears tohave been so powerful as to have ledhis associates to believe that he wouldalmost have waived his right to thesuccession for the command of an army.With such feelings, it is by no meanssurprising that he solicited promotion,and active employment on the coast,with considerable earnestness. Government,however, refused to comply withhis request. He then addressed aspirited letter to Mr. Addington on thesubject, in which he stated, that, as noevent in his future life could compensatehim for the misfortune of notparticipating in the honours anddangers that awaited the brave mendestined to oppose an invading enemy,he could not forego the earnest renewalof his application. " All Isolicit," continued the prince, " is amore ostensible situation ; for, situatedas I am, a mere colonel of a regiment,the major-general commanding thebrigade, of which such regiment mustform a part, would justly expect andreceive the full credit of pre-arrangementand successful enterprise."No reply having been given to thisletter, he repeated the application ; buthis services were coolly declined. Henow made a direct and eloquent appealto the king himself, from whom heimplored permission " to display thebest energies of his character, to shedthe last drop of his blood in supportof his majesty's person, crown, anddignity. In this contest," continuedhe, " the humblest of your subjectshave been called upon ; it would, therefore,little become me, who am thefirst, and who stand at the very footstoolof the throne, to remain a tame,an idle, and a lifeless spectator ofthe mischiefs which threaten us, unconsciousof the danger which surroundus, and indifferent to the consequenceswhich may follow. Hanover is lostEngland is menaced with invasionIreland is in rebellion Europe is atthe foot of France;' at such a momentthe Prince of Wales, yielding to noneof your servants in zeal and devotion,to none of your children in tendernessand affection, presumes to approachyou, and again to repeat those offerswhich he has made to your majesty'sministers." " Ought I not," he alsoasked, " to share in the glory of thevictory, when I have every thing tolose by defeat ? The highest places inyour majesty's service are filled by mybrothers ; to me alone no place is assigned.I am not thought worthy tobe the junior major-general of yourarmy. If I could submit in silence tosuch indignities, I should, indeed, deservesuch treatment, and prove, tothe satisfaction of your enemies andmine, that I am entirely incapable ofthose exertions which my birth andthe circumstances of the times peculiarlycall for."The king, in answer, briefly stated,that if the enemy should land, hisroyal highness would have an opportunityof shewing his zeal at the headof his regiment. The prince thenentered into some correspondence onthe subject with the Duke of York, towhom he had unjustly attributed thefailure of his applications; and towardsthe close of the year, warmly remonstratedagainst the omission of his namein a list of promotions : the affection,however, of the royal brothers sufferedno abatement.At length, intelligence having beenGEORGE THE FOURTH.Illreceived by the minister, of a projectedinvasion on the south-eastern coast, herequested that his royal highness, whowas about to quit London for Brighton,would postpone his journey until furtherinformation as to the point threatenedby the enemy could be obtained. Theprince warmly replied, " If there beany reason to imagine that invasion willtake place directly, I am bound by theking's precise order, and by that honestzeal which is not allowed any fittersphere for its action, to hasten instantlyto my regiment. If I learn that myconstruction of the word ' intelligence'is right, I shall deem it necessary torepair instantly to Brighton." Shortlyafterwards, Fox having failed to obtainany explanation, in parliament, as tothe motives of government in refusingthe prince a command, his royal highnesspublished the whole of the correspondencethat had taken place onthe subject, which procured him somereturn of the popularity he had previouslyforfeited by his dissolute habitsand gross extravagance.In 1804, his royal highness claimedthe privilege of educating the youngprincess, with a view to separate hisdaughter from her mother. The kinginsisted that his niece had a naturalright to the guardianship of her child,at least, for the present ; but, to preventdisputes between the parents, he resolved,on the principle that his granddaughterbelonged to the state, to takeher under his own protection. Theprince remonstrated, but the king, asusual, was firm to his purpose. Allhis arrangements, wkh regard to theeducation of the royal child, were,however, made with the full knowledgeand concurrence of the Princessof Wales, and the object of his interference,on this occasion, avowedlywas, " to support the authority of hisbeloved niece as a mother."For some time after the separationof the Prince and Princess of Wales,her royal highness had remained atCarlton house, but, eventually, she tookup her residence at Charlton, a villagein the neighbourhood of Blockhead.The king still interested himself warmlyin her behalf, but by the queen andthe princesses she was rarely evenvisited. On parting from the prince,she had been offered an income of20,000, which, however, she refused jpreferring to submit her accounts, fromtime to time, to his royal highness, forexamination and settlement. At length,she contracted various debts to theamount of 30,000; but these werecheerfully paid out of the droits of theadmiralty. Although, at this period,her habits were retired, she was remarkablypopular ; the public regardingher as an innocent and unoffendingvictim to the prince's unpardonablerecklessness, and the successful intriguesof at least one of his mistresses.Hitherto, the character of the princessappears to have been irreproachable ;but towards the close of the year (1804)some extraordinary rumours, with regardto her conduct, were publicly circulated; and early in 1805, the Duke ofSussex informed the king, that Sir JohnDouglas, who resided near the residenceof the princess, had put him in possessionof circumstances, which mighteventually affect the succession. Acommission of inquiry was soon afterissued ; and depositions were taken, bywhich it appeared, that her royal highnesshad, at the least, been guilty ofgreat imprudence. Lady Douglas deposedthat the princess, in 1802, hadadmitted herself to be in a state of pregnancy; which, although her ladyshipascribed it to Sir Sidney Smith, theprincess intimated her intention ofattributing to her royal husband, as shehad, during the year, slept two nightsat Carlton house. Sir John Douglasswore that her royal highness, in 1802,appeared, in his opinion, to be pregnant; but her personal attendants,although one of them had witnessedsome familiarities between her royalhighness and Captain Many. proved,to the satisfaction of the commissioners,that the principal charge against herwas totally destitute of foundation. Anadopted child, which Sir John andLady Douglas had supposed to havebeen her own, was, in fact, accordingto the evidence, the son of a womannamed Austin, whose husband workedin the dockyard at Hertford ; and heralleged familiarities with Sir SidneySmith and Captain Many, were alonedisproved. With respect to the formergentleman, she observed, in a letteraddressed to the king, after the commissioners,by their report, had acquittedTHE ROYAL FAMILY.her of guilt, but accused her of indiscretion,that, " if his visiting frequentlyat Montague house, both withSir John and Lady Douglas, and withoutthem; at luncheon, dinner, andsupper ; and staying with the rest of thecompany till twelve or one o'clock, oreven later ; if these were some of thefacts which must give occasion to unfavourableinterpretations, they werefacts which she could never contradict,for they were perfectly true."She admitted, also, that Sir Sidneyhad often visited her at early hours inthe morning, and that she had beenalone with him on several occasions.But," she added, " if suffering a manto be so alone is evidence of guilt, fromwhence the commissioners can drawany unfavorable inference, I must leavethem to draw it ; for I cannot deny thatit has happened frequently, not onlywith Sir Sydney Smith, but with manyothers ; gentlemen who have visitedme; tradesmen who have come fororders; masters whom I have had toinstruct me in painting, music, andEnglish; that I have received themwithout any one being by. I never hadany idea that it was wrong thus to seemen of a morning. There can benothing immoral in the thing itself:and I have understood it was quiteusual for ladies of rank and characterto receive the visits of gentlemen inthe morning, though they might bethemselves alone at the time. But ifthis is thought improper in England,I hope every candid mind will makeallowance for the different notionswhich my foreign education and habitsmay have given me."To this letter, which had evidentlybeen drawn up as a vindication of theprincess, by her legal advisers, Percevaland Scott, no answer was returned ;but, on a subsequent application by herroyal highness to the king on the subject,his majesty replied that he feltassured of her innocence, and although,from her own admission, she had beenguilty of imprudence, he was advisedthat a necessity no longer existed forhim to decline receiving her into hisroyal presence.Her reception at court was, however,for some time delayed, on account ofthe prince having insisted on his rightto obtain the opinions of his own legaladvisers on the examinations ; and theirritated princess speedily resolved tovindicate her character by publishingthe whole particulars of the inquiry.The evidence was accordingly arranged,and sent to press under thesuperintendence of Perceval, who proposedto lay it before the public, underthe title of " The Book ;" but havingsoon afterwards taken office with hisfriends, he earnestly recommended theking to receive the princess " in amanner suitable to her rank andstation." Her royal highness consequentlyappeared at court, and theintended publication was suppressed.In 1805, the prince encouraged thecoalition of Grenville and Fox againstPitt; on whose decease, in the followingyear, his royal highness contributed,by his exertions and influence, to procurethe return of his friend, Fox, topolitical power. By the death of thatcelebrated statesman, soon after hisacceptance of office, in 1806, the chiefconnecting link between the Whigsand his royal highness, was decidedlybroken : he still, however, for sometime,continued to act with, and, insome degree, to be governed as to politicalaffairs, by their advice.In May, 1807, the Princess of Walesattended a drawing-room held by QueenCharlotte, at which she was receivedby the nobility present with the mostunequivocal testimony of respect andaffection. She visited the court on theking's birth-day in the following month:on this occasion, she met and enteredinto conversation with the prince ; butnothing beyond a polite and formal interchangeof compliments took placebetween them ; and, from the absenceof all cordiality in the deportment ofhis royal highness, it was confidentlypredicted, that a renewal of their moreintimate intercourse would never takeplace. This was, in fact, their lastmeeting, either in public or private.In October, 1810, George the Thirdbecame permanently deranged : and arestricted regency was again proposedto the prince, by Perceval, then at thehead of the cabinet. The friends ofhis royal highness re-asserted his claimsto the royal prerogative without limitation; but, after much discussion onthe subject, an act was passed, similarin its provisions to the bill which hadGEORGE THE FOURTH.been brought forward by Pitt, duringthe king's mental alienation, in 1788 ;the restrictions were, however, to ceaseat the expiration of twelve months.The state of public affairs, at thistime, was truly critical. With the exceptionof Spain and Portugal, thewhole continent of Europe was underthe absolute power, or immediate influence,of Buonaparte, who appearedto be determined on the annihilationof Great Britain's wealth and dominion.The war in the peninsula hadbeen prosecuted with varying successsince 1808 ; but the occasional victoriesof the British troops seemed only toincrease the number of their enemies,and to render the accomplishment ofa happy termination to the contest notmerely more difficult, but, apparently,hopeless. At home, the prospect wasnot less gloomy. The expenditure ofthe nation exceeded its income, andthe burthens imposed on the peopleproduced much discontent, and generaldistress.On assuming the reins of government,the prince acted with great firmnessand discretion. As soon as theregency bill had passed, he entrustedthe preparation of his answer to theparliamentary addresses on the occasionto Lords Grey, Grenville, and Moira.The proposed assistance of the latterwas, however, declined by the twoformer; who, in consequence of theirvarying in opinion, as to the tenour ofthe proposed address, not only witheach other, but also with the regent,adopted language which was at onceunsatisfactory to his royal highness andto themselves. The prince then solicitedSheridan to assist him in drawing up ananswer more consonant to his views:Lords Grey and Grenville, however,although they, at length, and after muchdiscussion, agreed to the draft preparedby Sheridan, warmly remonstrated onhis interference. The disunion that appearedto prevail among the leaders ofthat party with which he had long beenconnected, so disgusted the recent, thatcontrary to the expectations of the nation,and as much to the surprise ofthe minister as to the disappointmentof the Whigs, lie declared his intentionof continuing the premier, SpencerPerceval, in office.On the 19th of June, 1811, he gavea gorgeous fete at Carlton house, incelebration of the king's birth-day; andwith a view to benefit those branchesof trade which had suffered severelyby the late discontinuance of courtsplendour, he intimated his wish thatthe whole of his guests should appearin articles of British manufacture. Bythese and other equally judicious measures,he acquired so much popularity,that, on his attending a representationof Cato, at Covent garden theatre,when John Kemble, as the hero of thetragedy, delivered the two followinglines, the spectators indulged in an enthusiastictumult of applause, whichcontinued for several minutes :Thy virtues, iWill one day ionce, if I foresee aright,ake thee great.In the course of the same year, (1811,)the regent, in consideration of the excessiveweight of taxes, under whichthe people already laboured, refused theoffer of a large income from parliament.This unexpected self-denial procuredhim an increase of public esteem: thegeneral discontent which had latelyprevailed, began at the same time toabate ; and the prospect abroad becameconsiderably more cheering; the Frenchbeing now completely driven out ofPortugal by the British troops, who, inthe following year, added much to theirreputation for valour and tactics, byachieving a splendid victory over theenemy at Salamanca.The restrictions on the regency ceasedin 1812 ; and expectations were againentertained that the Whigs wouldspeedily take office. It was even insinuated,that the continuance of thePerceval administration had been entirelyowing to the opinions entertainedby the royal physicians, that the king'srecovery was by no means hopeless.All speculation on the subject was,however, soon set at rest. The regent,in a letter addressed to the Duke ofYork, expressed a wish, that " some ofthose persons with whom the earlyhabits of his public life were formed,would strengthen his hands, and constitutea part of his government." Theduke immediately made known thesentiments of his brother to Lord Grey ;but the Whig leaders peremptorily refusedto form a coalition with Perceval.THE ROYAL FAMILY.On the assassination of that minister,in May, 1812, the Marquess of Wellesleywas authorized to form an administration;but Lords Grey and Grenvillewere so uncompromising, that whenthe prince expressed a wish to retainhis household, they haughtily intimatedthat nothing could be done on theirpart, until all its members had resigned.They even talked of" riding rough-shodthrough Carl ton house." The negotiationconsequently failed ; and on the8th of June, 1812, the Earl of Liverpool(a thorough Tory) was chosenfirst lord of the treasury.A splendid succession of victories inthe peninsula, which led to its finalabandonment by the French, and thefailure of an invasion of Russia byNapoleon, induced the latter, in thesecond year of the regency, to makeproposals for a peace with this country,which were, however, rejected. Insubordination,produced by great distress,in the manufacturing districts,during the summer, led to severe legislativeenactments, and the introduction ofan armed force among the disturbed districts.In the course of the same year,some workmen, who were employed torepair a portion of St. George s chapel,at Windsor, discovered the coffin ofCharles the First, which was openedin the presence of the regent, who,much to his honour, would not permitthe most minute relic of the unfortunatemonarch to be abstracted.In January, 1813, after some years ofcomparative retirement, the Princess ofWales sent a letter, for the regent, toLord Liverpool, who returned it unopened,with an intimation that theprince was not disposed to renew acorrespondence which had long before,as he thought, entirely ceased. It was,subsequently, again forwarded to theearl, but with as little success ; and theprincess then thought proper to lay itbefore the public, for whose eye it hadbeen evidently designed, through themedium of the daily press. Her royalhighness, by the letter in question,insisted that the impediments whichhad long existed to her free and constantcommunion with the PrincessCharlotte should be at once removed.Much angry discussion ensued ; and itwas at length determined, by a commission,constituted by the regent, ofchurch dignitaries and law officers ofthe crown, that, under existing circumstances,it was decidedly proper torestrict the intercourse of her royalhighness with the young princess. Allthe proceedings of 1806 were thenmade public ; a re-examination of SirJohn and Lady Douglas before acompetent tribunal was solicited ; thecorporation of London, with infinitefolly, solemnly congratulated her royalhighness " on her happy escape from theconspiracy aimed against her house andher life ; and the princess apparentlyderived consolation for her disappointment,in the vulgar applause of a mob.The war on the continent was prosecutedwith the utmost vigour : Russia,Prussia, Austria, Sweden, and otherforeign powers, coalesced againstFrance ; its territories were invaded ;and his enemies evinced a resolutedetermination to crush the power ofNapoleon for ever. England was stillat war with America: but notwithstandingthe great distress of the peoplein general, the destruction of machineryby the Luddites, and theviolence displayed in the manufacturingdistricts, a spirit of loyalty and patriotismappeared to prevail. Publicrejoicing and illuminations for thesuccesses of the allied powers over theFrench, almost put a stop to the ordinaryroutine of business; parliamentgranted immense loans and subsidies,in order to carry on the war withvigour ; and a succession of splendidand expensive fetes, given by theregent, would, decidedly, have tendedto procure him unqualified popularity,but for the debateable point of hisconduct towards the princess; who,escorted by the Duke of Gloucester,thought proper, tacitly, to excite thesympathy of the people, by making herappearance, altogether unexpectedly,at a grand entertainment, in Vauxhallgardens, over which the Duke of Yorkhad condescended to preside.The year 1814 is rendered memorablefor the fall of Napoleon, his exileto Elba, and the restoration of theBourbons. On the 20th of April, Louisthe Eighteenth, emerging from hisseclusion at Farewell, publicly enteredLondon, amid the applause of thepeople, and escorted by the regent ;on whom, the French monarch, in theGEORGE THE FOURTH.enthusiasm of his gratitude for thefavours he had received in this country,conferred the order of St. Esprit, byinvesting the prince with his ownribbon and star. His royal highnessaccompanied the restored monarch toDover, whence the latter sailed for hishereditary dominions, on the 24th ofApril, 1814. Early in June, the Emperorof Russia, the King of Prussia,Blucher,Platoff, and other distinguishedforeigners, paid a visit to this country;and, in honour of their presence, QueenCharlotte announced her intention ofholding two drawing rooms, at which,it was intimated to the Princess ofWales, that her royal highness couldnot be received, the regent havingdetermined never to meet her in publicor private again. The illustriousvisitors were enthusiastically receivedby the people, and welcomed withprincely magnificence at court. A fewdays after their arrival, they were accompaniedby the regent to the opera-house,which they had scarcely enteredwhen the princess appeared in a boximmediately opposite them. The princewas evidently surprised ; but he retainedhis self-possession, and bowedtowards her thrice ; his illustrious companionsfollowed his example, amidthe acclamations of an immense audience.His royal highness subsequentlyattended them to Oxford, and dinedwith them at two sumptuous entertainmentsin the city of London, theone given by the merchants, and theother by the lord mayor and corporation.During his progress through thestreets, on these occasions, he wasincessantly hissed, and many of themob vociferated, at intervals, " Yourwife! where's your wife?" He wasso incensed at his reception, that hemade a resolution, which he neverbroke, under no circumstances whateverto dine in the city again. Notwithstandinghis resentment, he conferredthe dignity of a baronet on thelord mayor (Danville), because, ashesaid, it had always been customaryfor the sovereign, on visiting his faithfulcity of London, to confer a mark offavour on its chief magistrate.The royal visitors returned to thecontinent on the 27th of June. Peacehad previously been proclaimed, tothe great delight of the people, whotestified their joy at the welcome eventby illuminations, as well in variousparts of the country as in the metropolis.Early in July, the alleged insufficiencyof the income allowed to thePrincess of Wales was submitted to theconsideration of parliament by some ofher friends. Ministers, on this occasion,intimated that the prince had notthe slightest wish to interfere with herdomestic comforts, nor was he inclinedto permit any pecuniary question toexist between them. A few days afterwards,Lord Castlereagh, a leadingmember of the cabinet, proposed thather royal highness should be allowed50,000 per annum ; but, at the suggestionof Mr. Whitbread, on behalfof the princess, who, as he stated, felta full sense of the burthens of thenation, the proffered income was decreasedby 15,000 a year.On the 7th of the same month, theregent returned public thanks, in greatstate, at St. Paul's cathedral, for therestoration of the blessings of peace.A fortnight afterwards he gave a superbentertainment to the Duke of Wellington,to whose conduct and skill as acommander, the successful terminationof the war was chiefly attributed. Anumber of splendid fetes succeeded,which were concluded by a publicfestival of extraordinary magnificence,on the 1st of August, the centenaryof the house of Brunswick's accessionto the throne of Great Britain. Onthe 9th, the Princess of Wales, feelingherself but ill at ease in this country,departed, with the regent's consent,but rather against the opinions of herfriends, for Brunswick. She was accompaniedby a few persons of rank,six domestics, and the boy Austin.A pacification with America waseffected at the close of the year ; butthe universal peace which had beenthus attained, was soon disturbed bythe return of Napoleon to France. Hewas received with enthusiasm by hisformer subjects, and, to adopt thelanguage which he himself used on theoccasion, his eagle flew from spire tospire until it alighted on the steeple ofNotre Dame. Louis the Eighteenthfled, and war against France was immediatelydeclared by the allies. Thecelebrated battle of Waterloo followed :THE ROYAL FAMILY.the combined forces again enteredParis ; Louis was re-established ; andthe fallen emperor, who had placedhimself in the hands of the English,was sent to St. Helena, where he expiredon the 5th of May, 1821.The peace which ensued on the finaloverthrow of Napoleon was not accompaniedby its proverbial attendant,plenty. On the contrary, distress, toan alarming extent, prevailed throughoutthe country ; violent clamours aroseagainst the corn bill, tumults of a mostserious nature took place, and severalrioters were executed.In 1816, a fleet, under the commandof Lord Mouth, bombarded Algiers,which had recently attacked Bona;where a number of poor Italians, whotraded under the protection of theBritish flag, were savagely massacredby the pirates. After enduring a mostdestructive fire of six hours' duration,the dey thought proper to make a mosthumble apology for the insult his subjectshad offered to England, to deliverup all the Christian captives in his dominions,and to pledge himself that thepiracies of the Algerine should be entirelyabolished.The death of Sheridan, in the courseof this year, (1816,) occurred undercircumstances which reflect indelibledisgrace on many of his quondamassociates, who, though sufficientlyopulent to relieve his necessitieswithout injuring themselves, sufferedhim to linger through the last days ofhis life in such deep distress, that hewas in constant fear of having the bedon which he lay taken in execution.The regent made him a niggardlyoffer, which the expiring orator indignantlyrejected, first of 50, and finallyof 200, with a proviso that themoney should not be applied " tosatisfy troublesome people."In 1817, the prince, who continued tobe unpopular, was fired at on his returnfrom opening the session of parliamentin person. The bullets passedthrough the windows of his carriage,without doing any other mischief. Thisattempt on his life led to the extensionof the act, passed in 1795, for the securityof the king's life, to that of theregent; and the tumults that occurred,the inflammatory publications that appeared,and the general disaffectionattendant on distress which prevailed,induced ministers, who appear by theirdescriptions to have magnified the evilsactually existing, to procure a suspensionof the habeas corpus act, and topass some other highly unpopular lawsagainst meetings of the people and theliberty of the press. The death of thePrincess Charlotte, which occurred atthe latter end of this year, threw herfather into such a paroxysm of grief asto bring on a violent inflammatory attack.The loss of his mother, whodied in the following year, is also said tohave affected him severely. He appearsto have invariably felt a warm attachmentfor the queen, by whom, in return,he was, under every circumstance, andat all times, most tenderly beloved.In 1819, the distresses of the peoplewere not yet alleviated, nor their discontentappeased. On the 18th ofJanuary, a meeting, to which themagistrates had refused to give theirsanction, took place at Manchester, forthe purpose of petitioning parliamentagainst the obnoxious corn laws : variousother places followed the example ;and the spirit which had, by this time,obtained among a large mass of thepopulation, was truly fearful. At Stockport,the propriety of destroying thebank was seriously discussed. Femalereform societies were organized, bywhich mothers and sisters were urgedto engraft on the minds of thosechildren with whom they were connected," a deep-rooted hatred of theirtyrannical rulers." Pikes were manufactured,and military discipline wassecretly practised by the discontentedin various parts of the disturbed districts.In defiance of a proclamationwhich had been issued against politicalmeetings, nearly eighty thousand persons,chiefly of the lower orders, assembledon the 16th of August, 1819,near St. Peter's church, at Manchester,for the purpose of discussing some publicquestions. The business of the dayhad scarcely been commenced, when abody of yeomanry cavalry, brandishingtheir swords, dashed through the crowd,and claimed Mr. Henry Hunt, thechairman of the meeting, as theirprisoner. He quietly surrendered himself;but the assembled multitude continuingthe shouts of defiance andexecration with which they had receivedGeorge THE FOURTH.the yeomanry, a tumult ensued, andthe volunteer dragoons, with more zealthan discretion, galloped about thefield, trampling the defenceless peoplebeneath the feet of their horses, and indiscriminatelycutting at men, women,and children, with their swords. Thoseof them who were tried for their conducton this occasion, notwithstandingseveral of the people had been mortallywounded, received their acquittal, andthe corps to which they belonged obtainedthe thanks of the magistratesand the approbation of the regent.An increase, rather than a diminutionof turbulence, followed these proceedings:early in 1820, serious disturbancesoccurred in several manufacturing districts,and many of the chief offenderswere taken and executed. Ministers,at this period, had spies in their employ,who, it is said, on several occasions,actually instigated to seditionthose unhappy beings whom they afterwardsdenounced. In the metropolis,a few desperate men, subsequentlyknown as the Cato-street conspirators,formed a plot to assassinate the prince,as well as the leading members of theadministration : government was, however,made acquainted with the wholeof their proceedings; and shortly beforethe period arrived when they haddetermined on attempting to carry theirmurderous design into execution, severalof them were seized, and afterwardsexecuted for high treason.The demise of George the Thirdtook place on Saturday, the 29th ofJanuary in this year; and, on the followingMonday, the new monarch wasproclaimed. For some days after hisaccession, he laboured under an inflammationon the chest, which had nearlyproved fatal ; but, on the 10th of February,he was declared convalescent.A new parliament assembled in April,and the king opened its first session inperson. His levees and drawing-roomsat this period were much crowded ;and, generally speaking, he appearedto be popular. Preparations were sooncommenced for his coronation ; but, onthe 12th of July, that ceremony wasindefinitely postponed, in consequenceof the unexpected return to this countryof Queen Caroline, at whose conduct,since 1814, it now becomes necessaryt6 give a retrospective glance.On quitting England in that year,she had assumed the title of Countessof Wolfenbuttel, and visited variousparts of Italy and Germany. At Milan,she took into her service an Italian,named Bartolommeo Bergami, in thecapacity of courier ; but he was soonelevated from that menial station tothe office of chamberlain, and all themembers of his family, with the exceptionof his wife, obtained employmentin the princess's household. His sister,the Countess Old, was subsequentlyappointed one of her ladies of honour.At Naples, in January, 1815, she gavea grand masked ball, which she attended; and, in the garb of the geniusof history, placed a laurel crown onthe bust of King Joachim Murat. Bythis time, nearly all her English attendantshad quitted her; and Bergamiwas soon afterwards permitted to takea seat at her table. Having purchasedan elegant villa on the banks of thelake of Como, she resided there untilNovember, when she visited Palermo,and went to court, accompanied byBergami as her chamberlain.In January, 1816, she embarked forSyracuse, in the Chloride, commandedby Captain Pechel, who having seenBergami, shortly before, as a menial,refused to dine with him ; and theprincess, consequently, declined thatgentleman's company and table. InSicily, she obtained for Bergami thetitle of Knight of Malta, and afterwardsthat of Baron della Francis.Here, too, she presented him with herportrait. In the course of the succeedingsix months, she visited Tunis,Utica, Malta, and Athens. She afterwardsproceeded to Constantinople,Ephesus, and Jerusalem, where shetook upon herself to found a neworder of knighthood, entitled The Orderof St. Caroline, of which she constitutedBergami grand master. At Jaffa,she remarked on board her polacre,and, the weather being sultry, causeda tent to be fitted up for herself andBergami, on the deck, under which,for several weeks, they reposed at nightwithout the presence of any otherperson. Returning to her villa atComo, she purchased a splendid seatfor her favourite, which was subsequentlycalled the villa Bergami. Shethen revisited Germany ; whence sheTHE ROYAL FAMILY.proceeded to Rome ; and continued totravel, almost without intermission, uptothe period of George the Third'sdemise.During her various journies, shedisplayed considerable liberality. InSicily, she daily distributed moneyamong the indigent ; at Tunis, sheransomed several slaves ; at Athens, shepresented a large sum to the new academy,liberated all the debtors fromthe prisons, and left a purse with thegovernment for the relief of necessitousobjects. To the conventual fathers ofJerusalem, she exhibited extraordinarymunificence ; and at Rome, she gavea large sum to the poor. While absentfrom England, death had deprived herof her friends, George the Third andthe Duke of Kent ; of her daughter,the Princess Charlotte ; and of herbrother, the Duke of Brunswick, whowas slain at Waterloo.During the latter portion of her residenceon the continent, rumours of herindiscretion reached this country: shewas consequently treated with markeddisrespect, by the British ambassadorsat foreign courts, and commissionerswere secretly sent out to Milan, tomake inquiries as to her conduct. Theirreport was so decidedly unfavourableto the princess, that the regent, it issaid, would have taken immediate measuresto obtain a divorce, but for thedissuasions of his confidential advisers,who were of opinion, that the princesswould neither return to this country, noreven claim the title of queen-consort,in the event of her husband's ascendingthe throne, if her parliamentary allowancewere continued; one of her agentshaving made a proposal to that effect,in June, 1819. Accordingly, soon afterthe demise of George the Third, LordLiverpool addressed a letter on thesubject to Mr. Brougham, one of thequeen's advisers, in which his lordshipadverted to the proposition, as an overturethat had come directly from theprincess; who, however, so far fromadmitting that such was the fact, assumeda tone of defiance, which equallyastonished her enemies and friends, andintimated her intention of returningimmediately to England. She was meton her journey (at St. Omer) by Mr.Brougham and Lord Hutchinson, thelatter of whom was instructed, bygovernment, to offer her 50,000 perannum, on condition that she wouldcontinue to reside abroad, and renouncethe title and dignity of queen-consort ;and, in case of her refusal, he wascharged to threaten her with criminalproceedings, and severe penalties. Sherejected the proposal with indignation ;hurried to Calais, where she embarkedin a common packet-boat, (the admiraltyhaving refused her a royalyacht,) and reached Dover on the 5thof June, 1820.On her arrival in London, accompaniedby Lady Anne Hamilton andAlderman Wood, she proceeded to theresidence of the latter, amid the acclamationsand blessings of an immensemultitude. On the evening of the sameday, the king sent a message to parliament,recommending that an inquiry,as to her conduct abroad, should beimmediately instituted ; and a committeefor that purpose was accordinglyappointed. Before, however, any furthersteps, hostile to the queen, weretaken by government, an attempt atnegotiation was made, and the Commons,in an address, prayed that shewould forbear to press the adoption ofthose disputed points, on which anymaterial difference of opinion rested.But the queen gave a decided negativeto their application, and all hope of anadjustment was evidently at an end.On the 5th of July, Lord Liverpoolbrought in a bill of pains and penalties,founded on the report of the committeeof inquiry, against the queen, by whichshe was impeached of adultery withBergami. On the 21st of August, witnesses(chiefly her former servants) werecalled to substantiate the charges ; andthe case in support of the bill closed onSeptember the 7th. The queen's defence,conducted by Messrs. Broughamand Penman, occupied forty-nine days,and ended on November the 6th. Thesecond reading of the bill was carriedby a majority of twenty-eight; and thethird, through a manoeuvre of thequeen's friends, by a majority of nineonly. Ministers then thought proper toabandon the measure ; a course, againstwhich several peers entered their protest.It seems that some of the bishopshad opposed the bill on account of thedivorce clause which it contained ; thata few noble lords had voted against it,GEORGE THE FOURTH.because they did not approve of theprecise mode of proceeding which hadbeen adopted ; that several had doneso, because they deemed the proposedpenalties insufficient ; and that others,again, had refused to give the measuretheir support, because the king wasknown to have been guilty of theoffence with which he had charged hiswife.During the proceedings, which occupiedmore than five months, the queenfrequently attended the house of lords.Her popularity was almost unprecedented: scarcely a day elapsed in whichthe road to her residence was notthronged with processions of her partisans; she received numberless addresses,as well from different parts ofthe country as the metropolis ; whenshe appeared in public, her carriagewas constantly followed by an applaudingmob ; the abandonment ofthe bill of pains and penalties wascelebrated as though it had been anational triumph; and, finally, thequeen went to St. Paul's, attended bya vast concourse of people, to returnpublic thanks for her deliverance froma conspiracy against her honour andlife."The king, on the 23rd of January,1821, opened parliament in person, andrecommended, in his speech from thethrone, that a separate provision shouldbe made for the queen ; who, on herpart, distinctly stated that she shoulddecline any pecuniary grant until hername was restored to the liturgy, fromwhich, by the king's express command,it had been excluded. Ultimately,however, she thought proper to acceptan income of .50,000 per annum,which parliament had voted to her.A day was at length fixed for thecoronation ; and no sooner had ittranspired, than the queen insisted onher right to be crowned ; but her claimwas disallowed, and her attendance atthe ceremony expressly prohibited.She strongly protested against thiscommand ; and, during the splendidceremony, which took place on the19th of July, 1821, she made an unsuccessfulattempt to enter Westminsterabbey. She is said to have been exceedinglymortified at her exclusion,which, it is even asserted, had a seriousand visible effect on her spirits and health.The coronation was conducted withsuch unexampled splendour, that, accordingto Sir Walter Scott, it threwinto the shade all scenes of similarmagnificence, from the field of the clothof gold down to modern times. Themonarch had actually superintendedsome of the preparations for the ceremony,with an anxiety which was byno means consistent with the dignityof his station. He gloried in tailors ;and, on this occasion, full scope wasafforded for the indulgence of his predominantweakness. The dresses ofsuch official personages as had to appearin the procession, were arrangedunder his immediate direction. Hisdeliberations, as to all the parts ofhis own costume, were frequent andanxious ; and when his gorgeous attirewas at length completed, he causedone of his attendants, a tall, fine-lookingfellow, to put it on, and walkto and fro in his presence, so that hemight judge of its effect. He appearedto take great delight in the whole ofthe splendid pageant, during which heconducted himself with his accustomedpersonal dignity and grace. " Whenpresiding at the banquet," says SirWalter Scott, " amid the long line ofhis nobles, he looked every inch aking !"During the session of parliament, inthis year, a bill was brought in for theremoval of the civil disabilities of thecatholics, which, after having passed thecommons, was rejected by the lords :its limited success, and ultimate failure,however, met with but little attention,on account of the all-engrossing topicsof the queen's trial and her husband'scoronation.Her majesty's life was now rapidlydrawing to a close. On the 31st ofJuly, while attending Drury lanetheatre, she complained of illness : inflammationof the bowels followed,and she soon felt convinced that herchequered career was about to be terminated.On the morning of the 7thof August, some favourable symptomsoccurred, but, in the course of the day,it became evident that her dissolutionwas at hand. She spoke calmly andwith resignation of her approachingdeath ; thanked her friends for theirkindness towards her ; and humbly,but confidently, commended her soulTHE ROYAL FAMILY.to God. She then fell into a slumber,which continued for about three hours :on awaking, she grasped Lady AnneHamilton by the arm, exclaiming,God Almighty bless you!" and expiredwithout a struggle.With the exception of a few triflinglegacies, the whole of her property wasbequeathed to William Austin. Shehad expressed a wish, that her remainsshould not be buried in this country;accordingly, on the 15th of August,they were removed from her residence,Brandenburg-house, in order to beconveyed to Brunswick. In oppositionto the directions issued by government,as to the route of the funeral procession,it was forcibly conducted, after aviolent conflict between the life-guardsand the populace, through the city ofLondon. Her remains were embarkedat Harwich, in the Glasgow frigate,and, on the 24th of August, they weredeposited, at Brunswick, with but littleceremony, between those of her fatherand brother.Queen Caroline was of the middlestature, and, when young, she is saidto have been handsome in face, andelegant in person ; towards the latterperiod of her life, she became corpulent,and did not display even the remainsof those charms which she is describedas having possessed when in her prime.Her manners are reported to have beeneminently pleasing. The acute anddiscerning Canning said, on one occasion,in the house of commons, thatshe had been the grace, the life, andornament of that society in which shemoved. She evidently possessed astrong mind, a kind heart, and a masculinespirit. Of her youth but little isknown ; of the early part of her womanhood,enough has been ascertained toentitle her to a strong claim on ourpity. No woman was ever more decidedlya victim to expediency : theprince, when enthralled by other attachments,and with a decided aversionto matrimony, married her, merelyto obtain relief from pecuniary embarrassments.His conduct, in placinga woman about her person, on herarrival in this country, whose interestand inclination it was to render theunfortunate princess disgusting, istotally indefensible : by so doing heinjured her and seriously disgracedhimself. But his attachments to othersof her sex, however notorious andculpable, afforded her no just pretextfor being indiscreet ; and that she wasso, previously to quitting this country,in 1814, is evident even from her ownstatement. Up to that period, sheappears to have avoided positive guilt ;but an attempt to vindicate her conductwhile abroad, would, at thistime, be ridiculous. The popularity sheacquired, on her return to England,is no proof of her innocence : it is tobe attributed rather to the generaldisloyalty which then happened toexist; to the obnoxious men who werein power; to the violent spirit ofpartisanship ; to the absence of anyother public excitement, and the inclinationinvariably exhibited by thepeople, to have some popular idol " theCynthia of a minute;" to the comparativerefutation of those chargeswhich had previously been made againsther ; to the ignorance which, for sometime,prevailed as to her character onthe continent; to the treachery, andsystem of secret espionage, which hadbeen adopted in order to ascertainand prove her guilt; to the spirit-stirringcry of " injured innocence" setupin her behalf ; to her being a womanwho had decidedly been wronged,a queen who courted the people'sapplause ; and finally, and, perhaps,chiefly, to the strong commiserationand influence of her sex. Her boldnessin returning to England, for thepurpose of meeting the charges withwhich she was menaced, has been setupby some of her advocates as a proofof her conscious purity. It certainlywas the precise course which, under suchcircumstances, any virtuous woman,with a spirit as daring as that of QueenCaroline, would have pursued ; but theguilty and the innocent often act preciselyalike, when placed in the samesituation. Had the queen accepted theoffer of government to live abroad, onthe proposed income of 50,000 perannum, but divested of her title anddignity, she would have tacitly admitted",that the alternative chargeswith which she was threatened werefounded on facts. Besides, it is quiteclear, that she had no idea of theextensive information which governmentpossessed relative to her conduct;GEORGE THE FOURTH.nor was she at all aware, that the caseagainst her would be supported by thetestimony of those witnesses who wereafterwards examined, in the house oflords, on the part of the crown.Immediately after his coronation theking paid a visit to Ireland. He landedat Howth, on the 13th of August, andexpressed a wish to remain in privacyuntil after the burial of the queen, withwhose death he had been made acquaintedon the preceding day, atHolyhead. But his desire to be decent,on this occasion, it was, according tosome writers, impossible to gratify, onaccount of the resistless enthusiasm ofhis Irish subjects, vast crowds of whomaccompanied him to the vice-regallodge, in Phoenix park, where he addressedthem with extraordinary goodhumour, and shook hands, indiscriminately,with all those who were happyenough, in their own estimation, tocome within his reach. He made hispublic entry into Dublin on the 17th ;and after having received numerousproofs of loyalty and attachment, fromall classes of people in and about theIrish capital, he remarked for Englandon the 5th of September ; but, theweather being tempestuous and thewind contrary during his passage toMilford haven, he did not arrive atCarlton house until ten days afterwards.His conduct, while in Ireland,was eminently judicious and conciliating:catholics and protestants wereequally welcome at his levees; he conferredthe order of St. Patrick on theEarl of Fingal, a Roman catholic peer ;and not only evinced a most anxiousdesire, during his visit, to crush thatspirit of party by which the Irish hadlong been made wretched, but, on hisdeparture, most earnestly recommendedthem, in a farewell epistle, communicatedthrough Lord Sidmouth, nolonger to allow their religious distinctionsto be the cause of public animosity,or personal bitterness.Shortly after his return to E england, heset out for Hanover, where he arrivedon the 8th of October. In the courseof his progress thither, he attendeda grand review of troops, who, underthe direction of the Duke of Wellington,attempted a mimic representation ofthe battle of Waterloo, on the spotwhere the actual contest had takenplace. During his absence abroad,which continued until November thellth, the sovereign authority was executedby a regency of lords justices.Early in 1822, Mr. Peel succeededLord Sidmouth as secretary of state forthe home department. Ireland, at thisperiod, was much agitated by tumults,for the suppression of which it becamenecessary to have recourse to somesevere penal enactments. A rapid improvementin the condition of the restof the united kingdom was at the sametime evident, and the king's popularityconsiderably increased. In the autumnof this year, he would, it is said, but forthe dissuasion of his cabinet, have againproceeded to the continent, for the purposeof attending a congress of sovereignsand ministers, which had beenappointed to be held at Verona. Aboutthe middle of August, he paid a visit toScotland, where he received such flatteringattention, that he emphaticallycalled its inhabitants, " a nation ofgentlemen." On the 1st of September,he returned to Carlton house, and immediatelyafterwards, Canning was appointedto the post of secretary of statefor foreign affairs, recently held by theMarquess of Londonderry, who hadcommitted suicide during his majesty'sabsence. Lord Liverpool still continuedpremier, but the "new secretary infusedso much of his liberal spirit into theadministration, that, in the course of thefollowing year, England seceded fromthat unjust and unpopular league of theprincipal European powers, generallytermed The Holy Alliance, to whichshe had long been a party.The year 1824 was rendered memorableby the formation of a greatnumber of joint stock companies, which,for a considerable period, engrossed publicattention, and eventually producedthe most disastrous consequences. Awild spirit of adventure pervaded allranks of the community. The mostabsurd schemes were eagerly receivedand enthusiastically supported. Almostevery avocation, every necessary of life,and every article of commerce, formedthe subject of a proposed association, afew shares in which, it was believed,would raise the fortunate holder to comparativeinfluence. The most successfulcompanies, as bubbles, were those, whoseavowed objects were most ridiculousTHE ROYAL FAMILY.and impracticable. Generally speaking,the parties by whom they were started,had no intention of attempting to carrythem into effect; their views beinglimited to a traffic in the shares, which,by a variety of iniquitous tricks, wereraised, by those who jobbed in them, toan artificial price, which even deludedintelligent men of business, many ofwhom became victims, on this occasion,to their folly and cupidity. Some membersof parliament, and several commercialand professional persons, of previousrespectability, took a culpablepart in these transactions ; but the consequences,in some cases ruinous, andin others disgraceful to themselves, werebut of little moment compared withsuch as befel the country at large.The eyes of the speculators were soonopened to the frauds and the follies ofthose whom they had blindly followed,and a violent reaction took place.Despondency, fear, and distrust, succeededto pecuniary faith, rashness,and unlimited credit. A run uponthe bankers, equally ridiculous in itsorigin and fatal in its effects, was theconsequence, and the nation was involvedin lamentable distress. Thebubble, which had attracted the universaladmiration of " children of alarger growth," in 1824, burst in 1825 ;and its results were most severely felt,not only during the remainder of that,but nearly throughout the followingyear.In the course of 1825, the victoriesachieved by the British troops over theBurmese, had materially augmentedthe extent of our empire in India.During the same year, a bill for therelief of the catholics passed throughits various stages in the commons, butwas lost in the upper house, principally,perhaps, on account of the Duke ofYork having solemnly opposed it, in aspeech, which, it was suspected, embodiedthe opinions of his majesty onthe subject.Spain having committed some unwarrantableaggressions on Portugal,in 1826, the princess regent of thelatter country appealed to England onthe subject, and a body of Britishforces was despatched, with laudablepromptitude, to Lisbon, for the protectionand support of " our ancientally."To the king, Brighton had nowceased to be delectable ; buildings wereerected between his residence and thesea ; a blacksmith refused either to sellor remove his obnoxious forge fromthe immediate vicinity of the pavilion ;into which visitors had been too copiouslyadmitted ; and, to complete thesovereign's disgust with his once favoritemarine retreat, some discontentedor humorous person had written, witha diamond, on a pier glass, in theprincipal apartment, " Who pays forall this ?" To his former appetite forpersonal display and popular admirationhad now succeeded a singular loveof seclusion ; and, henceforth, heresduring the summer months, tothe royal cottage at Windsor, whichhas, with some propriety, been termedthe most splendid and luxurious hermitagein the world.In 1827, the king was much affectedby the loss of his favourite brother, theDuke of York ; soon after whose deceasethe Earl of Liverpool became totallyincapacitated for public life, by a severeparalytic affection, and Mr. Canningwas appointed premier. Several of theministers consequently resigned, and anew cabinet was formed, which, however,had existed only three or fourmonths, when its popular and talentedleader expired. Lord Goderich wasthen placed at the head of the administration; but he retained office onlyuntil the following year, when most ofthe leading Tories, with the Duke ofWellington at their head, returned topower. The Duke of Clarence, whohad been appointed lord high admiralduring the premiership of Canning,soon disagreed with the new ministry,and resigned.The test and corporation acts werenow repealed ; and, in the followingyear, (1829,) the catholic questionwas brought forward as a ministerialmeasure, which, after much clamourand a most determined opposition, wastriumphantly carried through bothhouses of parliament, and received theroyal assent This was the last importantoccurrence of the reign.The young queen of Portugal hadpreviously arrived in this country, inconsequenceof intelligence havingreached her, while on her passage fromBrazil to Portugal, that her uncle, DonGEORGE THE FOURTH.Miguel, the regent, to whom she wasbetrothed, had assumed the sovereignauthority. The usurper had, some timebefore, paid a visit to England, and theking had received him with more kindnessthan even at that time he justlydeserved. The young queen, duringher abode in this country, was treatedwith great cordiality. The king behavedwith much tenderness towardsher ; partly, it is said, on accountof the striking resemblance which shebore to his daughter, when about thesame age. She was not, however, recognizedas Queen of Portugal by theBritish government; and, eventually,she returned to Rio Janeiro, under thecare of her mother-in-law, the newEmpress of the Brazils.The latter part of the king's life wasembittered by frequent attacks of thegout; and, in some measure, on thisaccount, but principally, it is said,owing to his abhorrence of being exposedto the gaze of the vulgar, heseldom appeared in public. At length,he held his courts entirely at Windsor,and passed nearly the whole of histime, in comparative seclusion, at theroyal cottage ; where the Marchionessof Conyngham and her family formedthe chief portion of his domestic circle.With Mrs. Fitzherbert he had longceased to hold any particular intercourse.When the weather permitted,he drove about Windsor park, in hisponey phaeton, and occasionally amusedhimself by angling in Virginia Water.On Ascot course, he usually appearedin public during the races ; and hereonly could he be seen without greatdifficulty by his subjects ; the mostextraordinary vigilance being used, onother occasions, to save him the paineven of a passing glance from a casualobserver. He was partial to the lightliterature of the day ; and as his lifedrew towards a close, but before hewas attacked with his last illness, it isstated, that Miss Chester frequentlyattended at the royal cottage for thepurpose of gratifying his majesty's inclinationfor good dramatic readings.His predilection for building, which hadlong been notorious, continued in fullforce almost up to the day of his death.He personally superintended the improvementsat Windsor castle ; in whichhe took such extraordinary interest,that, when unable to walk, he frequentlycaused himself to be taken inawheel-chair through the rooms whichwere under alteration.In January, 1830, he was attackedby a catarrh, which, assuming an inflammatoryform, it was necessary tosubdue by repeated depletion. Theloss of blood produced considerable debility; and, towards the end of March,the existence of an organic disease ofthe heart became evident. His extremitieswere soon after dropsical, and aneffusion of water on the chest at lengthtook place. Early in April, his symptomshad somewhat abated ; and onthe 12th, he took a drive in Windsorpark. Immediately afterwards hegrew worse ; and, on the 15th, a bulletinwas issued, stating, that he labouredunder a bilious attack, accompaniedby an embarrassment in hisbreathing. The public, at this period,and for some time afterwards, on accountof the ambiguity of the bulletins,were not aware of the true nature orextent of the king's disease ; nor doesit appear that, until about a month beforehis death, he himself became acquaintedwith his dangerous situation.The improvements at Windsor castlewere still continued, and he evincedparticular anxiety that a new diningroomshould be completely ready forthe reception of visitors, before hisbirth-day, in August. Towards theend of May, his disorder was so faralleviated, that he transacted somepublic business ; but a relapse speedilyensued, and he became incapable ofwriting his name : an act of parliamentwas consequently passed, to legalizethe sign-manual to public documentsby means of a stamp. His medicaladvisers at length informed him thathis case was hopeless ; and he is saidto have received the awful announcementwith firmness and resignation.His breathing daily became more difficult,and the close of his earthlycareer was evidently fast approaching.On the 26th of June, about three o'clockin the morning, a blood-vessel burstin his stomach, while his attendantswere removing him from his bed to achair: aware that his dissolution wasat hand, he exclaimed, "Oh, God!this is death !" and almost immediatelyafterwards expired.THE ROYAL FAMILY.Endowed by nature with remarkablyhandsome features, and a form sofinely proportioned, that at one periodof his life, it was deemed almost thebest model of manly beauty in existence,George the Fourth, during theearly part of his manhood, eclipsed thewhole of his gay associates in fashionand gallantry, as much by personalattractions, as pre-eminence in birth.Byron described him as having possessed" fascination in his very bow ;"and it is said, that a young peeress, onhearing of the prince's attentions toone of her fair friends, exclaimed, " Isincerely hope that it may not be myturn next, for to repel him is impossible."Towards the middle period ofhis life, he became so enormously fat,that four life-guardsmen could not,without difficulty, lift him on horseback; but, as he advanced in years,although still corpulent, his inconvenientobesity gradually diminished.The expression of his features washaughty, and strikingly indicative ofvoluptuousness ; in deportment, he wasgraceful but not dignified ; in manners,artificially urbane and supremely genteel; in disposition, selfish ; and intemperament, indolently luxurious.From his premature manhood to thelast year of his life, he appears to havebeen a refined sensualist. Afflicted bya love of externals, he was a slave tothe pitiful ambition of being the mostfinished gentleman in Europe; and itmust be admitted, that his labours toachieve this object were decidedly successful.If he did not wear the crownwith supreme dignity, he certainlytook off his hat with more grace thanthe most renowned or accomplished ofhis predecessors. As a royal fop, hehas scarcely had an equal in any ageor country. His tailors were as frequentlywith him as his ministers ofstate : to him a well-cut coat appearedto be almost the master-piece of humanskill, and a crease in his pantaloonsnearly tantamount to petty treason.While regent, and during a great portionof his reign, he seemed to delightin shewing his subjects with how muchtrace he bore the honours of regality,satiated, at length, with public admiration,he became an eccentric beau;tenderly solicitous as to the unimpeachablefashion of his attire, andat the same time, fastidiously averseo personal publicity.Exclusiveness eventually became hislobby, and the curiosity of the peoplelis chief annoyance. The manufacturersof some splendid silk hangings,intended to have been used in the decorationof the new palace, erecting"or him on the site of Buckinghamlouse, were rigidly enjoined neither toexpose any part of their work duringts progress, nor to withhold an inch ofthe patterns. His cottage at Windsorwas so surrounded by trees, that itschimnies alone were visible from thetop of the long walk : admission tothe grotesque fishing villa at VirginiaWater was forbidden under pain of hissevere displeasure ; and he had avenueslaid out, to the extent of nearly thirtymiles, in the surrounding parks, whichwere sacred to the use of himself andhis immediate attendants. At certainpoints of these avenues outriders werestationed, while his majesty drove outin his poney phaeton, to preventstrangers from offending him by theirapproach. If he had occasion to crossthe Frogmore road, in order to enterthe opposite park, some of his suitewere despatched towards the gatethrough which he intended to drive ;and if they returned with intelligence,that any person was loitering in thepublic thoroughfare, his majesty's coursewas immediately altered. Even the unsatisfactorylanguage of the bulletins,issued during his last illness, it hasbeen confidently asserted, arose fromthe royal patient's morbid aversion toany particulars of his malady, or anydetails of its progress, being submittedto the public.Although culpably extravagant at hisoutset in life, he is said to have becomeparsimonious of the privy purse as headvanced in years. From his meannessto Mrs. Robinson, his subsequentprodigality to her successors in hisaffections could scarcely have been anticipated.He was, perhaps, quite asmuch to blame for the one as the other.To the first object of his attachment heappears to have been, for some timeafter their separation, not merely ungenerous,but unjust ; to the mistressesof his more mature years, at once profuseand slavishly devoted; to his wife,the mother of his legitimate child,GEORGE THE FOURTH.harsh, negligent, insulting, and evencruel. The royal abode, during hisreign, lost the purity it had acquiredunder the auspices of Queen Charlotte,and retrograded to the state in whichit had been left by his libidinous great-grandfather.He never aspired to emulatethe personal virtues of George theThird ; the example of his private life,on the contrary, being decidedly pernicious.At the commencement of hiscareer he was a libertine ; at its closehe was the same. Of his religiousopinions we know nothing : but it isessential to state, that he was by nomeans utterly destitute of amiable qualities; and that his positive errors wereentirely those of selfishness, indolence,and voluptuousness.He was tenderly attached to hismother: his love for the PrincessCharlotte was boundless : and his affectionfor his brother, Frederick Augustus,the companion of his boyhood andyouth, appeared to be most fervent, andunalterable either by time or circumstances.Soon after the duel betweenthe Duke of York and Colonel Lennox,the latter appeared at a court ball givenin honour of the king's birth day. " Theprince, who danced with the princessroyal," according to the newspapersof the day, " was so far down the set,that the colonel and his partner werethe next couple. The prince paused,looked at the colonel, and led her royalhighness to the bottom of the dance.Observing this, the queen approachedthe heir-apparent, and said, ' You areheated, sir, and tired ; I had better putan end to the dance.' ' I am heated,'replied his royal highness, 'and tired, notwith dancing, but with a portion of thecompany.' He then emphatically added,I certainly never will countenance aninsult offered to my family, however itmay be regarded by others.' "He has been accused of having desertedearly political connexions, on acquiringhis hereditary pre-eminence :the disappointment of the Whigs in notbeing called to office, on his elevation,was, however, to be attributed principallyto their disunion. His privateconduct towards his friend and associate,the unfortunate Sheridan, hasbeen severely, and with much justice,reprehended : but it is fair in his behalfto state, that although he made acontemptible and totally inadequateoffer to relieve the wants of the dyingorator, yet, on a previous occasion, (in1804,) he had, in some measure, evinced,to use his own language, that sincereregard which he had professed andfelt for Sheridan during a long seriesof years, by appointing him to the receivershipof the duchy of Cornwall.His friendship for Fox was constantto the last. When that distinguishedstatesman lay on his death bed, theprince called on him daily, and displayed,according to Trotter, the mostindubitable proofs of sincere grief atthe prospect of Fox's approaching dissolution.He scarcely ever forgot an injury, anaffront, or a marked opposition to hispersonal wishes. The cordiality whichhad previously subsisted between hismajesty and Prince Leopold, entirelyceased, when the latter volunteered avisit to Queen Caroline on her returnto this country, in 1820 : Broughamand Penman, for the zeal with whichthey had advocated the cause of theirroyal client, were, during a long period,deemed unworthy of those legal honoursto which their high talents andlong standing at the bar, justly entitledthem; and Sir Robert Wilson was arbitrarilydismissed from the service, forhis interference at her majesty's funeral.On account of his unpopular reception,by the mob, when he accompanied theallied sovereigns to Guildhall, in 1814,he never afterwards honoured the citywith his presence ; and when Rossinirudely declined the repetition of a pieceof music, in which the king had takena conspicuous part, at a court concert,his majesty turned his back on the composer,to whose works, from that moment,he displayed the most unequivocaldislike. But, on the other hand, somecases have been recorded, in which hisconduct was unquestionably tolerantand forgiving. He allowed Canning,an avowed supporter of the queen, toretain office, without taking any partin the ministerial proceedings againsther majesty ; and at the last stage of hisearthly career, sent the Duke of Sussex,with whom he had long been at variance,his own ribbon of the order ofSt. Patrick, with an assurance of hismost sincere affection. Erskine, whileattorney-general to the prince, had soTHE ROYAL FAMILY.offended his royal highness, by acceptinga retainer from Paine, on a prosecutionbeing instituted against thelatter for publishing the Rights of Man,that his immediate resignation was required.But, some time afterwards,Erskine was desired to attend atCarlton house, where the prince receivedhim with great cordiality, and,after avowing his conviction that, " inthe instance that had separated them,his learned and eloquent friend hadacted from the purest motives, hewished to give publicity to his presentopinion on the subject, by appointingMr. Erskine his chancellor." On oneoccasion, at the opening of a session ofparliament by George the Third inperson, his royal highness, who wasthen very much in debt, having gonedown to the house of lords in a superbmilitary uniform with diamondepaulettes, Major Doyle subsequentlyremarked to him, that his equipage hadbeen much noticed by the mob. " Onefellow," added the major, " prodigiouslyadmired, what he termed ' thefine things which the prince had uponhis shoulders.' ' Mighty fine, indeed,'replied another; ' but, mind me, they'llsoon be upon our shoulders, for allthat.' " " Ah, you rogue !" exclaimedthe prince, laughing, " that's a hit ofyour own, I am convinced : but, come,take some wine."Much of his laxity of conduct is,doubtless, to be attributed to the absurdityof his education, and to thepeculiar situation in which he wasplaced, when he commenced his publiccareer. On acquiring manumissionfrom paternal control, during the continuanceof which he had been coercedrather than reasoned into propriety ofdeportment, he was, according to hisadvocates, immediately surrounded bytemptations which young men of bettereducation and stronger minds wouldhave been unable to resist; and whateverfine qualities he might naturallyhave possessed, were either nipped intheir bud, or blighted in their blossom,by a combination of disastrous circumstances.Colonel M'Mahon is said, onhis death-bed, to have given him thecharacter of being one of the kindestmen alive. It is certain that, to hisservants, he was, in many cases, exceedinglyconsiderate and indulgent ;that several acts of benevolence towardsdistressed individuals, have, ongood authority, been attributed to him ;and that at the council-board, whenevera report from the recorder waspresented, he invariably evinced astrong inclination to temper justicemost liberally with mercy.It is related of him, that he restoreda fatherless boy, who had been dischargedfor purloining oats, to his employment,on the lad's expressingcontrition and promising to amend.Avoid evil company," said the prince,on this occasion ; " be diligent, behonest, recover your character, andyou shall never be taunted, by anyperson in my service, for the offencewhich I have forgiven."A few years after he had become ofage, the prince solicited the loan of800 from a gentleman, in a mannerso remarkably urgent, that the lenderresolved, if possible, on ascertaining towhat purpose the money was to beapplied. With some difficulty he discoveredthat, having accidentally heardof the distressed situation of an officer,who, although he had a wife and sixchildren, was on the point of beingcompelled, by a clamorous creditor, tosell his commission, the prince haddetermined on saving him from utterruin, by presenting him with the sumin question ; which, in order to preventany mistake, his royal highness hadhimself carried to the officer's lodgings,in some obscure court in the neighbourhoodof Covent Garden.At SL Germaine, he caused a splendidmonument to be erected for the receptionof James the Second's recentlydiscovered remains ; and the Stuartpapers were afterwards arranged andpublished by his express command.Literature, science, and the fine arts,during his reign, were far from beingdestitute of royal encouragement. Tomusic he was particularly attached : heperformed well on the violoncello, andat the Sunday concerts, given by personsof quality, towards the close of thelast century, he frequently played theprincipal bass with Crossbill, his teacher.He also sang with considerable taste,and often displayed his vocal powers inglees, &c. at his own parties, both beforeand after his accession. Atwood,who was the son of one of the personsGEORGE THE FOURTH.in his household, is said to have beenindebted to the prince for his musicaleducation at Vienna, under Mozart.To Michael Kelly, he allowed 100per annum, and, in addition, procuredhim a free benefit at the opera houseyearly. Lindsey, and J. B. Cramer,were honoured with his especial regard.At the latter part of his life, hehad a private band of unequalled excellence.Cramer, the leader, it is said,notwithstanding the strong antipathyentertained by the king towards menof colour, employed, as kettle-drummer,a person, who although a native ofEngland, was " of so dark a hue, that,at a short distance, he might be mistakenfor a recent importation from the coastof Guinea." On the new performer'sfirst appearance in the royal musicroom, the king was evidently displeased; but on approaching towardsthe band, and perceiving that the offensiveindividual was, in fact, manyshades lighter than ebony, he said toCramer, " I perceive, sir, that you wishto accustom me to a black drummer bydegrees."He patronised the drama, and duringthe early and middle portion of hiscareer, was rather partial to the societyof actors; with Johnstonee, the Irishcomedian, he condescended to be onremarkably kind and familiar terms.When Lewis's son was about to departfor India, Johnstonee solicited from theprince the favour of a letter of introductionfor the young man, " which," saidthe actor, " would be the making ofhim." The prince paused for somemoments, and Johnstonee expressed afear that he had taken too great aliberty. "No," replied the prince, "butI am considering whether a few linesfrom my brother Frederick, would notbe more beneficial." In a day or twoafterwards, his royal highness sentJohnstonee a letter for young Lewisfrom himself, and another from theDuke of York.He had some inclination for scientificpursuits, and highly respected thosewho were eminent for mechanical inventions.He contributed largely towardsthe erection of a monument tothe memory of Watt. Of his medicalinformation, slight as it undoubtedlywas, he is said to have been particularlyproud. Carpue had demonstrated tohim the general anatomy of the humanbody, in his younger days ; and for anumber of years, the ingenious Weisssubmitted to his inspection all the newsurgical instruments, in one of whichthe king suggested some valuable improvements.His taste in architecture was almostbeneath censure ; he squandered enormoussums on grotesque edifices thatblemished the spots which they wereintended to adorn. It seems probable,however, that to his zealous encouragementof building many splendid improvementsin the metropolis may, insome measure, be attributed. In furniture,he appears to have admired thecostly and magnificent, rather than thechaste. Previously to the last dinnerwhich he gave to his ministers, he hada sumptuous sideboard prepared for thedisplay of his most gorgeous service ofplate on that occasion: it was inlaidwith gold, lined with looking-glass, andaltogether so obnoxious glaring, aseven to overpower the surroundingdecorations. The king, however, wouldnot consent to its removal ; but, at thesame time, allowed a magnificently decoratedarch which its lower part supported,to be cut away, directing thatthe remainder of the gewgaw shouldbe left untouched, for the use to whichit had originally been destined.His talents were, undoubtedly, abovethe level of mediocrity : they have,however, been greatly overrated, onthe supposition that several powerfullywritten documents, put forth under hisname, but composed by some of hismore highly-gifted friends, were hisown productions. His style was, infact, much beneath his station : it wasinelegant, destitute of force, and evenoccasionally incorrect. He read hisspeeches well, but not excellently : hepossessed no eloquence, although, as aconvivial orator, he is said to have beenrather successful.At one time, while an associate ofSheridan, Erskine, Fox, &c., he affected,in conversation, to be brilliant,and so far succeeded, as to colloquialliveliness, that during their festiveintercourse, according to the wittybarrister's own admission, "he fairlykept up at saddle-skirts" even withCurran. Notwithstanding this compliment,his pretensions to wit appear toTHE ROYAL FAMILY.have been but slender: the best sayingsattributed to him being a set ofmiddling puns, of which the followingis a favourable selection : When language'sdistillery was plundered, duringthe riots of 1780, he asked why theproprietor had not defended his property." He did not possess the meansto do so," was the reply. " Not themeans of defence !" exclaimed theprince, " and he a brewer a man whohas been all his life at cart and tierce /"Sheridan having told him that Foxhad cooed in vain to Miss Pulteney, theprince replied, " that his friend's attempton the lady's heart was a coupmanque." He once quoted from Suetonius,the words, "Jure casus vi-deter,"to prove, jestingly, that trial byjury was as old as the time of the firstCaesar. A newspaper panegyric onFox, apparently from the pen of Df.Parr, having been presented to hisroyal highness, he said that it remindedhim of Machiavel's epitaph, " Tantonomine nullum Par eulogium." Acavalry officer, at a court ball, hammeredthe floor with his heels so loudly,that the prince observed, " If the warbetween the mother country and hercolonies had not terminated, he mighthave been sent to America as a republicationof the stamp act." While hisregiment was in daily expectation ofreceiving orders for Ireland, some onetold him, that country quarters in thesister kingdom were so filthy, that therich uniforms of his corps would soonbe lamentably soiled : " Let the menact as dragoons, then," said his royalhighness, "and scour the country."When Home Tooke, on being committedto prison for treason, proposed,while in jail, to give a series of dinnersto his friends, the prince remarked, thatas an inmate of Newgate, he wouldact more consistently by establishing aKetch-c\u\i." Michael Kelly havingturned wine-merchant, the prince ratherfacetiously said, " that Mick importedhis music, and composed hiswine!"George the Fourth's public charactermerits some eulogium. He appearsto have been much less faulty as amonarch than as a man. His regencyand reign were, on the whole, brilliant.Great Britain, while under his sway,was brought safely and honourably outof a perilous and expensive war, for thesuccessful termination of which, it isbut fair to afford him, as " the supremehead of the government," some portionof credit. Although naturally indolent,his spirit was lofty, and on some publicoccasions, he roused himself into positiveenergy. From the time of hiselevation to the regency, he never descendedto be the tool of a party ; hesuffered no set of men to hold him inpolitical thraldom. However secludedand apparently inactive he may havebeen, in his latter years, the assertion isuntrue that he dwindled into " a royalpuppet." In the first choice, and subsequentchanges of his ministers, he appearsto have acted, conscientiously andfearlessly, with a view to the welfare ofthe country. He was firm to his purpose,without meriting the charge ofobstinacy. No political Drawcansircould intimidate, although a parasitemight, perhaps, in some degree, influencehim. He was not absurdly blind tothe signs and tokens of the times ; but,conforming himself to the temper of hispeople, and the liberal opinions whichgradually obtained during his sovereignty,he prudently adopted a changeof measures under a change of circumstances.Perceiving the inexpediencyof that narrow, bigotted, and arbitrarytone of policy, which, at one time, prevailedin the cabinet, he admitted lessprejudiced and more enlightened statesmento his counsels. Great Britain,consequently, resumed her loftiness ofcharacter; she withdrew from the detestablealliance of the great continentalpowers against the rights and libertiesof man ; her conduct to those stateswhich had struggled, with success, fortheir freedom, was eminently liberal jwhile, at home, that boon of tolerationwas, at length, conferred on a large andimportant class of the people, whichmay, perhaps, be deemed a moreglorious monument to the memory ofGeorge the Fourth, than any other actof his reign.DUKE OF YORK.FREDERICK AUGUSTUS AND FREDERICA CHARLOTTE,DUKE AND DUCHESS OF YORK.THE second son and child of Georgethe Third and Queen Charlotte, FrederickAugustus, was born on the 16th ofAugust, 1763, and educated, with hiselder brother, on a system of extraordinarystrictness and seclusion ; firstunder the protectorship of Dr. Markhamand Cyril Jackson, and subsequentlyunder that of Bishop Hurd andMr. Arnald. When an infant, he wasappointed to the episcopal throne ofOsnaburg, by his father; and duringhis boyhood, became a knight of theBath, and a companion of the order ofthe Garter. At an early period of hisyouth, he is said to have been attachedto a country girl, in the neighbourhoodof Kew, at whose humble abode hewas, on one occasion, discovered inthe act of shelling pease ; and before hehad reached his eighteenth year, heattended the stolen interviews of thePrince of Wales and Mary Robinson.Nothing," says that lady, " couldbe more delightful, or more rational,than our midnight perambulations. Ialways wore a dark-coloured habit;the rest of the party generally wrappedthemselves up in great coats to disguisethem, except the Duke of York, whoalmost universally alarmed us by thedisplay of a buff coat, the most conspicuouscolour he could have selectedfor an adventure of this nature."Having finished his education withtolerable credit, and received the appointmentof brevet-colonel, he proceededto the continent, principallywith a view of acquiring a knowledgeof the King of Prussia's military tactics.He attended several reviews of thatmonarch's troops ; and while at Berlin,became acquainted with his future wife,the Princess Frederica. In November,1784, he was created Duke of Yorkand Albany in Great Britain, and Earlof Ulster in Ireland ; and before hisreturn to England, in 1787, was appointedcolonel of the Coldstreamguards, with the rank of lieutenant-general.At the latter end of 1788, he deliveredhis maiden speech in the houseof peers, during a debate on the regencyquestion ; and, in the followingyear, fought a duel with Lieutenant-colonelLennox, afterwards Duke ofRichmond. This meeting appears tohave taken place under the followingcircumstances: His royal highnesshaving stated, that Colonel Lennoxhad heard words spoken to him atDaubigny's club, to which no gentlemanought to have submitted, thecolonel, on parade, asked the dukewhat the words he alluded to were, andby whom they were spoken : to whichthe duke replied only by ordering himto his post. After the parade, his royalhighness told Lennox, that " if he hadgiven him any offence, he abandonedthe protection of his rank, either as aprince or a commanding officer, andwas willing, as a private gentleman,who when npt on duty wore a browncoat, to give him satisfaction." Thecolonel then wrote to all the membersof the club, requesting that they would,by a certain day, state, if to theirknowledge, any remarks had beenmade, in his hearing, derogatory to hishonour as a soldier and a gentleman.Having, however, received no reply,he called for a retraction of what theduke had asserted; which his royalhighness declined making, and a hostilemeeting was the consequence.The particulars of the duel, which tookplace on the 26th of May, 1789, havebeen thus detailed by the seconds :In consequence of a- previous dispute,the Duke of York, attended byLord Rawdon, and Colonel Lennox,accompanied by the Earl of Winchelsea,met at Wimbledon common. Theground was measured at twelve paces,and both parties were to fire at a signalagreed upon. The signal being given,Colonel Lennox fired, and the ballgrazed his royal highness's curl. TheDuke of York did not fire. LordRawdon then interfered, and said,THE ROYAL FAMILY.That he thought enough had beendone.' Colonel Lennox observed,That the duke had not fired.' LordRawdon said, ' It was not the duke'sintention to fire : his royal highnesshad come out upon the colonel's desireto give him satisfaction, and hadno animosity against him.' ColonelLennox pressed that the duke shouldfire, which was declined, upon a repetitionof the reason. Lord Winchelseathen went up to the Duke of York,and expressed a hope, ' That his royalhighness could have no objection tosay, that he considered Colonel Lennoxas a man of honour and courage.' Hisroyal highness replied, ' That he shouldsay nothing : he had come out to givethe colonel satisfaction, and did notmean to fire at him : if Colonel Lennoxwas not satisfied, he might fire again.'Colonel Lennox said, ' He could notpossibly fire again at the duke, as hisroyal highness did not mean to fire athim.' On this, both parties quittedthe ground. The seconds think itproper to add, that both parties behavedwith the utmost coolness andintrepidity. RAWDON.WINCHELSEA."On the 26th of January, 1791, atreaty was concluded for the marriageof his royal highness with FredericaCharlotte Ulrica Catherine, eldestdaughter of Frederick William, Kingof Prussia, by a princess of the houseof Brunswick Wolfenbuttel. The brideelect was born at Berlin, on the 7th ofMay, 1767; and is said to have beenequally eminent for her virtues, as heraccomplishments. The union was solemnized,first in Prussia, on the 29thof September, and again in England,on the 23rd of November, 1791. Parliament,on this occasion, voted the duke18,000 per annum; which, with hisincome from other sources, placed himin the enjoyment of 35,000 a year.With so ample a provision, and with anaccomplished, youthful, and amiablewife, who is said to have been tenderlyattached to him, it appearedprobable that his domestic careerwould have been peculiarly felicitous.But the reverse was the case. By hisprofligacy and extravagance he soonlost the affections of his wife, and becameinvolved in pecuniary difficulties,from the thraldom of which he couldnever afterwards emancipate himself.Within six years from their union, theduke and duchess parted; her royalhighness, much to her honour, on thismelancholy occasion, sought comfortin a seclusion, which appears to havebeen embittered by no reproaches ofher conscience, rather than in recklessgaiety and fashionable dissipation.In 1793, the Duke of York, assistedby Sir Ralph Abercrombie,and Sir WilliamErskine, was placed at the headof a body of British forces, destined toaid the grand army, commanded by thePrince of Saxe Coburg, in Holland.During the campaign that ensued,and in which, at first, the allies weredecidedly successful, his royal highnessevinced much intrepidity ; particularlyat the siege of Valenciennes,which surrendered to the troops underhis command, on the 26th of July,1793. In the following month, he besiegedDunkirk ; from the investmentof which he was, however, compelledto retire with the loss of his artillery ;and as soon as the allied forces hadwithdrawn into winter quarters, theduke returned to England.Early in 1794, he again embarkedfor the continent, and, on the 26th ofApril, defeated a French corps of 35,000men, under General Chapuy. Afterhaving obtained some minor successes,he was attacked, on the 18th of May,by the celebrated Pichegru, and routedat all points. The duke .displayed hisusual spirit in this battle; and evennarrowly escaped falling into theenemy's hands; but unhappily for thebrave men whom he commanded, hisskill was lamentably unequal to hiscourage. On the 8th of July he receiveda reinforcement of 10,000 menunder Earl Moira. He was, however,still unable to make head againstPichegru, who forced him to cross theMeuse, and on the 19th of September,after a sanguinary contest, to retreatbeyond the Wall. Success continuedto attend the French forces, and atlength, on the 14th of April, 1795, theskeleton of the British army embarkedin the Weser for England. During thesame year the duke was appointedcommander-in-chief.In 1799, his royal highness was againsent out, at the head of a body of troops,to act against the French in Holland.He commenced the campaign with anDUKE OF YORK.army of 35,000 men, including Russians,which, however, was fatally reducedin numbers, on the 19th of September,by the loss of some thousands of hisauxiliaries, who were surprised by theenemy while cooking their dinners.The duke, subsequently, achieved somevictories over the enemy ; but at theloss of such a number of men, that onthe 17th of October, he found it expedientto enter into a convention withthe French general, by which it wasstipulated, that in consideration of thesurviving portion of the duke's armybeing permitted to evacuate Holland,several thousand seamen, then prisonersof war in England, should begiven up to the French government.On account of his disasters abroad,the duke's reception at home was cooland even upbraiding. He was bitterlyreproached for want of judgment;and, during a considerable period,laboured under severe public displeasure.Various circumstances contributedto the continuance of his unpopularity,which reached its zenith,in 1809, on accounts the charges, thenbrought forward, in the house of commons,against his royal highness, ascommander-in-chief. He was accusedof having allowed a female, namedMary Anne Clarke, who had long beenhis kept mistress, to influence him inawarding military preferments. It wasproved that some individuals, after havingbribed this woman to exert herinterest with the duke in their behalf,had obtain promotion ; but, as no satisfactoryevidence was adduced, that hisroyal highness had guiltily participatedin her schemes, a motion for generalinquiry into his conduct was negativedby a majority of eighty-two. A strongopinion, however, prevailed, that Mrs. !Clarke had, either through the duke's jweakness, or want of vigilance, duped |him out of commissions, to the greatprejudice and disgrace of the service;and his royal highness, consequently,after having sent a letter to the speakerof the house of commons, declaratoryof his innocence, thought proper toresign. The charges were originated,it is said, by a person named M'Cullum,who, conceiving himself to have been,in some manner, injured by the duke,determined, if possible, on effecting hisruin. With this view, and after muchlabour, he procured evidence of Mrs.Clarke's corrupt disposal of her influenceover the duke, which he forthwithcommunicated to those who broughtforward the charges against his royalhighness in the house of commons.Although lodging in a garret, and frequentlypassing twenty-four hourswithout food, M'Cullum, as it is stated,laboured night and day to achieve hisobject, and perished of want shortlyafter the duke's resignation.Mrs. Clarke, having differed with hisroyal highness, threatened further exposures,unless he granted her a pension; which being refused, she wrote,and caused to be printed, a voluminousaccount of her intimacy with the duke,illustrated with a great number of hisletters. The work was advertised, andon the eve of publication, when theduke thought proper to purchase hersilence by complying, it is said, withher previous demand. This womanevidently possessed extraordinary acuteness.Many years after her separationfrom his royal highness, she appearedas a witness in the court of king's bench,while Lord Ellenborough was chiefjustice. On her cross examination,counsel asked her this question : " Underwhose protection are you at present,madam?" "Under Lord Ellen-borough's,"was the ingenious andevasive reply.One of the first acts of his elderbrother, on becoming regent, in 1812,was the re-appointment of the duketo the exalted post of commander-in-chief.His official conduct, during theremainder of his life, was not onlyabove reproach, but worthy of themost unqualified approbation. On thedeath of Queen Charlotte, in 1818, hewas appointed custos of the king'sperson, with an allowance of 10,000a-year for his trouble. His acceptanceof so extravagant a remuneration,for paying a few additional visits to hisafflicted father, was much censured ; butpressing pecuniary embarrassments,arising from love of high play, losseson the turf, and the heavy arrears ofdebt, produced by past imprudence,rendered this accession to his incomeexceedingly desirable ; and he consented,without the least scruple, toreceive it, although the country wasthen in a state of extraordinary distress.THE ROYAL FAMILY.The death of the Duchess of Yorktook place on the 6th of August, 1820.In person she was rather below themiddle size: she had blue eyes, fairhair, and a light complexion. Duringher long seclusion at Garlands, althoughsomewhat eccentric, she wascertainly amiable, patient, inoffensive,and beneficent She founded and endowedschools for the destitute childrenin her neighbourhood; instituted andencouraged benefit societies, and allowedpensions to a number of agedindividuals. In these, and variousother charitable acts, she dispensed aconsiderable portion of her income ;but it must be confessed that somepart of the residue was much lesslaudably employed in the gratificationof her expensive and absurd attachmentto the brute creation. Everyfine morning, her motley pack ofpoodles, pugs, and lap-dogs, wasformally taken out for an airing in thepark. Their progeny were not unfrequentlyboarded out, under carefulsuperintendence ; and, as a climax tothe absurdity of the duchess, with regardto her canine favourites, a patchof ground, near her residence, was setapart for their burial-place, where thename, character, and services of eachwere recorded on a tomb-stone placedat the head of its grave. The ridiculousexcess to which she carried her benevolenceto animals, is strikingly at variancewith the good sense and soundfeeling which she displayed on othersubjects. It is related, to her credit,that when her foreign servants declinedbeing present at the delivery ofa charity sermon by an itinerant methodist,in a barn, at Weybridge, on theplea that they did not understandEnglish, she replied warmly, " Youhad no objection, some time ago, at myrequest, to attend the performance ofa play, in the same place, when youknew less of the language than you doatpresent ; you shall, therefore, all gowith me to hear the sermon." Theremains of her royal highness weredeposited in a small vault, which badbeen prepared, by her own orders,under Weybridge church.On the 25th of April, 1826, the dukedelivered a speech, more remarkablefor energy than eloquence, in the houseof lords, against catholic emancipation,which rendered him exceedingly popularwith that class of persons whoseideas on the question coincided withhis own. It was as follows : " MyLords, I present a petition to yourlordships, praying that further concessionsmay not be made to theRoman catholics. I so seldom addressthe house, that I shall probably take nopart in the debate upon the relief bill.Allow me now, therefore, to declare mysentiments upon this most importantmatter. My lords, twenty-five yearshave now passed since measures of thisnature were first contemplated, butprofessedly with ample securities forthe established church; securities admittedand avowed to be necessary.What the effect of the proposal of suchmeasures was, at that day, your lordshipsknow. The fear that the sovereignmight be called upon to differ from hisparliament, in the discharge of his duty,to adhere to his coronation oath thecontract which he had made at thealtar of God led to affliction, and tothe temporary dismissal of the best, thehonestest, and the wisest minister thecrown ever had. That minister alwaysheld out that there must be sufficientsecurities for the protestant establishmentfor the maintenance of thoseprinciples which placed the sovereignupon the throne, and that, with suchsecurities what ought to be satisfactoryto the Roman catholics, might safelybe granted. What is the case now,my lords ? You are to grant all thatcan be asked, and without any satisfactorysecurities. 1 am a friend tocomplete toleration ; but political powerand toleration are perfectly different.I have opposed the concession ofpolitical power from the first momentin which it was proposed. I have soacted throughout, under a conviction,whenever 1 have been called upon toact, that I was bound so to act ; I shallcontinue to oppose such concession tothe utmost of my power. The churchof England, my lords, is in connexionwith the crown. The Roman catholicswill not allow the crown or the parliamentto interfere with their church :are they, nevertheless, to legislate forthe protestant church of England ? Mylords, allow me to call your attentionto what must be the state of the kingupon the throne (here he read theDUKE OF YORK.coronation oath :) the dread of beingcalled upon of having it proposed tohim, to act contrary to his understandingof that oath, led, or naturally contributedto his late majesty's sufferings,in the last ten years of his life. Mylords, if you have taken oaths, and differabout their meaning, those who thinkthe proposed measures contrary to theiroaths, are overcome by a majority.They do their duty, they act accordingto their oaths, the measure is carried,without their violating their contractwith God. But recollect that it is notso with the king. He has a right, ifhe is convinced that it is his duty, torefuse his assent when the measure isproposed to him. His refusal is a constitutionalbar to the measure. Hisconsent, if given contrary to his understandingof his oath, is that for whichhe must ever be responsible. My lords,I know my duty, in this place, too wellto state, what any other person may ormay not feel, with respect to thesemeasures ; \N hat any other person mayormay not propose to do, or to forbeardoing. I speak for myself only formyself only I declare an opinion anddetermination. But I apprehend Imay, in this place, be allowed to call foryour attention to what may be the stateof the sovereign, to whom measuresmay be proposed, who is not to considerwhat oath might have been administeredto him, and taken by him,but who has taken an oath, accordingto which, and by which, and to whatmay be his conviction as to the obligationwhich that oath has created, hemust conceive himself bound to act. inconsenting or withholding consent.My own opinions, are well known :they have been carefully formed, andI cannot change them. I shall continueto act conformably to them, inwhatever circumstances and in whateverstation I may be placed, so helpme God!"Up to this period, the duke hadbeen remarkably healthy ; but his constitutionnow began to break up withalarming rapidity. For some time, heappears to have indulged a hope thathis life might yet be considerably prolonged; but, in the course of the summer,he became aware of his danger,and, on visiting his intended palacefor the last time, he was heard toejaculate, " I shall never live to see itcompleted." At the duke's request,Sir Herbert Taylor had solemnly promised,as soon as his case should beconsidered desperate, to acquaint hisroyal highness with the fact. Accordingly,on the 19th of August, SirHerbert informed him that, in theopinion of his medical attendants, thesymptoms of his disease, which wasdropsy, had become decidedly serious.The duke received this intimation withgreat calmness, and slept unusuallywell during the following night. Shortlyafterwards he sent for the Bishop ofLondon, from whom he received thesacrament On the 3rd of Septemberhe suffered the operation of tapping ;from which, however, he derived onlytemporary relief. Recourse was, subsequently,had to other powerful expedients,with a view to check theprogress of his malady ; and they sofarsucceeded, that his royal highnesslived through the year; but, afterhaving endured great agonies, whichhe bore with admirable resignation, heexpired on the 5th of January, 1827.In person, the Duke of York morenearly resembled George the Third,perhaps, than any of that monarch'sother children ; and, to adopt the languageof Sir Walter Scott, he spokerather with some of the indistinctnessof utterance peculiar to his royalfather. His features were manly andhandsome, his form was large androbust, and his deportment particularlyurbane.In politics, with which, however, heseldom meddled, the duke was athorough Tory. His intellectual powersdid not merit admiration, nor hismoral qualities respect He appearsto have been an easy dupe to therapacity of his associates, as well as anunresisting slave to his own passions.His bravery bordered on rashness, andhis generosity on profusion. By reasonof his extravagance, those acts of kindness,which materially added to hispopularity, were performed at the expenseof his creditors. Few men havebeen at once so much beloved and sorecklessly dissipated. His whole careerwas profligate, yet not absolutely depraved: there were many fine redeemingpoints in his character, whichso dazzled the public, that, towardsTHE ROYAL FAMILY.the latter part of his life, the darkershades became almost imperceptible.The immediate influence of his errorswas circumscribed ; his indiscretionsseverely afflicted a few, but they wereneither felt nor much censured bythe many. His frank and familiarmanners, and the known kindness ofhis disposition, obliterated, from thememory of the multitude, his attachmentto the gaming-table, his devotionto the turf, his expensivegallantry, his neglect of an inoffensivewife, his enormous debts, his defeats inFlanders, and his once unpopular conductas commander-in-chief. Neitherof his faults were, in the opinion of thepeople, without some extenuation orcounterpoise. The whole of his indiscretionswere attributed, in the gross,to the generous warmth of his temperament,to the restraint of his earlyyears, and to the strong temptationswith which he had been assailed on hisentrance into life. If a spendthrift, hewas evidently benevolent ; notwithstandinghis rank, his condescensionwas boundless ; although separatedfrom his wife, he had always treatedher with respect ; and his imprudenceas a general, and the disasters of hiscampaigns abroad, were deemed unworthyof remembrance, when contrastedwith his zeal, and successfulexertions, as commander-in-chief, toameliorate the state of the army, notonly in discipline and efficiency, but insatisfaction and comfort ; for which, ontwo occasions, in 1814 and 1815, hehad deservedly been honoured withthe approbation of parliament.During the latter part of his life, hewas incapable of holding tangible property,as, though his person was sacred,any effects that he might possess wereliable to be taken in execution, at thesuit of his creditors. It is said that hiscarriage, on one occasion, having beenseized in the street, his royal highnesswas compelled to alight, and went to alevee, whither he was proceeding, in ahackney coach. For a long period,being without any settled residence ofhis own, he was constantly the guestof one or other of his friends ; evenduring his last illness, he was withouta home, and ended his days underthe hospitable roof of the Duke ofRutland.Although carelessly profuse in his expenditure,the duke sometimes evinceda laudable feeling of consideration forhis creditors, and a singular economyin trifles. One day, he said to Messrs.Arundel and Bridge, of Lydgate hill,to whom he was deeply indebted, " Yourprofits are so large, that I presume youare making a handsome fortune." " Weshould, perhaps, be rich, your royalhighness," was the reply, " if peoplewould pay us." The duke immediatelylaid down a gold snuff-box, which hehad been about taking on credit, and,the next morning, forwarded Arundeland Bridge a cheque for 300, in diminutionof his account. Having ordereda new blue ribbon, it was sentto him as usual, with a gold buckleattached ; for which, however, he directedthat a gilt one should be substituted.Not long afterwards, althoughlabouring under an enormous and constantlyincreasing load of debt, he beganto erect a palace, the ultimate costof which would not have been lessthan 200,000!No doubt exists of his kindness ofheart, or that, had not his purse beencompletely drained by his extravagance,he would have been eminently bountifulto the deserving. Before his separationfrom the duchess, he severelyreprimanded a servant, whom he detectedin the act of churlishly driving afemale mendicant from his door. " She'sonly a soldier's wife," said the servant.Only a. soldier's wife !" exclaimed theduke ; " and pray, sir, what is yourmistress but a soldier's wife? Fetch thewoman back, and let her necessities beforthwith relieved."Andrewes, once the oldest soldier inthe army, was accosted by the duke,during a review on Leaden heath, inthe following terms: " Well, Andrewes,what age are you, pray ; and how longhave you been in the service?" " I amnow ninety," replied the veteran, " andI entered the army at twenty." " Youhave worn that suit of regimentals,"observed the duke, " for a number ofyears, I should think." " About forty,I believe," replied Andrewes. " Ah !"said the duke, feeling the skirt of theold man's coat, " they don't make suchcloth now-a-days." " No, egad !" rejoinedthe veteran, " nor such meneither!" Within a few days his royalDUKE OF CLARENCE.highness caused the old soldier, whohad long retired from active service, tobe placed on full pay, without employment,for the remainder of his life.Although strongly opposed to emancipation,in private he evinced as muchkindness to catholics as to protestants.M'Dermott, a respectable priest, whohad once been in the army, havingwritten to the duke, while commander-in-chief,stating, that he had two sons,who were well educated, and felt astrong inclination for the service, butthat he was so impoverished that hecould not, for either of them, purchasea commission, his royal highness immediatelyinquired into the truth of thestatement, and finding it correct, conferredon each of the young men amilitary appointment The greater partof a regiment who were Roman catholics,having represented to the duke thattheir colonel would only permit themto attend chapel in the afternoon, sothat they lost the ceremony of highmass, which was performed in themorning, his royal highness gave positiveorders that the grievance of whichthey complained should be forthwithredressed.Many other anecdotes have been recorded,in proof of his liberality andbenevolence, but they are of too littleinterest to merit repetition. One laudabletrait in his character, mentioned bySir Walter Scott, it would, however, beunjust to omit. Two officers were contendingat his table, on the subject ofimplicit obedience to a military superior.One of the disputants declared that hewould not scruple, in compliance withorders from the commander-in-chief,to commit an act which he knew to beunlawful, on the ground that in sodoing, he should be, morally, as well aslegally, a passive and irresponsible agent.The other, on the contrary, stated, thatfor his part, he should always avoidany violation of the laws or libertiesof his country, even at the hazard ofbeing shot for disobedience. " Spokenlike yourself!" exclaimed the duke;and I trust that every British officerwould be as unwilling to execute, as thehead of the army to issue, any thinglike an illegal command."WILLIAM HENRY AND ADELAIDE, DUKE ANDDUCHESS OF CLARENCE.WILLIAM HENRY, third son ofGeorge the Third, was born on the21st of August, 1765. He is described,in his childhood, by Mrs. Charon,niece to Dr. Thomas, Bishop of Winchester,as being little of his age, butso sensible and engaging, that he wonthe bishop's heart. " His conversation,"continues Mrs. Charon, " wassurprisingly manly and clever for hisage ; yet, with the young Butlers, hewas quite the boy, and said to JohnBuller, by way of encouraging him totalk, ' Come, we are both boys, youknow.' " So early as 1778, he wasentered as midshipman, on board the ,Prince George, a ninety-eight gun ship, icommanded by Admiral Digby. Hisfather had previously declared, that heshould win his way to promotion in thesame manner as the most friendless ladin the fleet ; and the young prince wasaccordingly placed on a level, in everyparticular of duty and discipline, withhis fellow midshipmen. He served inthe engagement between Rodney andthe Spanish admiral, Don Juan deLanger ; who, on being brought asaprisoner on board the Prince George,observed, with great animation, ofyoung William Henry, whom he sawdoing duty as a midshipman, " Wellmay England be mistress of the ocean,when the son of her king is thus employedin her service!" Rodney, inhis despatches announcing the victoryhe had gained, stated that he had calleda captured man-of-war the Prince William," in consequence of her havinghad the honour to be taken in the presenceof his royal highness."The young prince was in action at thesubsequent capture of a French man-of-war,and three other vessels; andTHE ROYAL FAMILY.served, during a great portion of theresidue of his time as a midshipman,in the West Indies, and off Nova Scotiaand Canada. The following anecdotesof this part of his naval career arestrikingly illustrative of his character :During his first trip to sea, having hadsome altercation with one of his brothermidshipmen, of the name of Sturt, thelatter said to him pettishly, " I wouldteach you better manners, sir, if youwere not the king's son." The prince,in reply, stated, that he was abovebeing mean enough to derive any advantageover his associates from thesuperiority of his birth, and offered, atonce, to fight his opponent, after themanner of seamen, across a chest.Sturt, however, declined the proposedcontest ; which, he said, would be unfair,on account of the superiority that hepossessed over his royal highness inyears and strength. This generousobjection so charmed the prince, thathe immediately offered his hand toSturt ; a reconciliation took place, andthey soon became much attached toeach other.While the prince was at Port-royal,in 1783, a midshipman, named Lee,was condemned to be shot, for disrespectto a superior officer. " Thewhole body of midshipmen," says ayoung gentleman in the service, whowas then on the same station, " weredeeply affected at this sentence, butthey knew not how to obtain a mitigationof it, as Mr. Lee was ordered forexecution, while they had not time foran appeal to the admiralty, and considereda petition to Admiral Rowleyuseless. However, Prince Williamgenerously came forward, drew up apetition, to which he was the first toset his name, and solicited the rest ofthe midshipmen in port to follow hisexample. He then carried the petitionto the admiral himself, and, in the mosturgent manner, begged the life of anunhappy comrade; and Mr. Lee is reprieved.We are all grateful to ourhumane, brave, worthy prince, whohas so nobly exerted himself in savingthe life of a brother sailor." Duringthe same year, Prince William successfullyinterceded with the governor ofLouisiana for the lives of some Englishmen,who had been sentenced to deathfor a violation of fidelity to the Spanishgovernment: their pardon, as he observedin a letter of thanks to thegovernor on the occasion, was the mostagreeable present that his excellencycould have offered him.Having served his full time as a midshipman,he was promoted in the ordinarymanner; and, for several years,commanded the Pegasus frigate. Onthe 20th of May, 1789, he was createdDuke of Clarence and St. Andrews, andEarl of Munster. He shortly afterwardstook his seat in the house oflords, and frequently sp oke in defenceof the war with revolutionized France.In 1790, he became rear admiral ofthe blue; but, notwithstanding his gallantry,his intimate acquaintance withnaval tactics, and his notoriety as astrict disciplinarian, he was not permittedto gratify his ardent inclinationto engage again in active service.pn the llth of July, 1818, he wasunited, at Kew palace, to AdelaideLouisa Theresa Caroline Amelia,daughter of the Duke of Saxe CoburgMeinengen, (born on the 13th ofAugust, 1792) who, on account of theexcellence of her disposition, and theunimpeachable purity of her morals,had been strongly recommended to thenotice of his royal highness, by QueenCharlotte, his mother. Parliament havinggranted an addition of 6000 perannum only, to the duke's income, onthis occasion, the royal couple, fearingthat their allowance was too limited forthem to live with proper dignity in thiscountry, after having passed a few daysin retirement at St. James's palace, proceededto Hanover. Long before hismarriage, the duke had formed a connexionwith the fascinating Mrs. Jordan,the fruits of which were several children,who have all received the strongestproofs of paternal affection on the partof their royal parent, the cause of whosesudden and final separation from theirmother still remains a mystery. Mrs.Jordan died in France, about two yearsbefore the duke's union with the PrincessAdelaide.At the latter end of the year 1819,the duke and duchess set out on theirreturn to England; and just beforethe close of 1820, she became themother of a seven months' child, (thePrincess Elizabeth) who died in herinfancy. On three other occasions,QUEEN OF Wittenberg.twice in 1819, and again in 1821, theduchess had the misfortune to be prematurelyconfined.On the death of his brother, FrederickAugustus, in 1827, the duke being renderedby that circumstance heir-presumptiveto the crown, obtained anadditional parliamentary grant, whichraised his income to nearly 40,000, perannum. In the course of the sameyear, he was appointed lord highadmiral. While in this important station,his meritorious conduct procuredhim the warm attachment of the navy,and the most hearty approbation of thepublic. When the Duke of Wellingtonbecame premier, some objectionswere made to the expense of his progresses,in consequence of which hisroyal highness thought proper to resign.The frankness and affability of hismanners, his sterling good sense, theliberality of his opinions, and the zealwith which, in 1829, he advocated thecause of the catholics, insured him acontinuance of that high popularitywhich he had attained while in office,up to the period of his elder brother'sdemise : to record his subsequent careerdoes not fall within the plan of thiswork ; we follow the illustrious subjectof our present notice only to the foot ofthe throne, the period of his accessionbeing the allotted bourne of our labours.CHARLOTTE AUGUSTA MATILDA,QUEEN OF Wittenberg.THE eldest daughter of George theThird, Charlotte Augusta Matilda, wasborn on the 29th of September, 1766.She received a careful education, and hertalents being naturally good, she becamea very well-informed and accomplishedwoman. On the 18th of May, 1797,she was married, at St. James's palace,to Frederick Charles William, hereditaryPrince of Wirtemberg, whomshe accompanied to Germany, early inthe following month. Her marriageportion was *100,000, one half of whichwas invested for her separate use in thegovernment securities of this country.By the treaty of Neville, in 1803, herhusband, who had found it expedientto form an alliance with the French,was raised to the dignity of elector;at the convention of Pressure, his thenaggrandized dominions were convertedinto a monarchy ; and he was proclaimedking of Wirtemberg on the 1stof January, 1806. His conduct as oneof the members of the Rhenish confederacy,afforded especial gratificationto Napoleon Buonaparte ; who, on morethan one occasion, visited the queenat her court, and, according to theMoniteur, bestowed on her a varietyof splendid presents. The king died,without issue by her, on the 30th of October,1816, and she soon afterwardsretired to the castle of Louisburg,where she displayed such active benevolence,as speedily to acquire the gratifyingappellation of " The good QueenDowager."When George the Fourth went tothe continent, shortly after his coronation,she met him on his progress, andsportively welcomed him at the entranceof a house, in front of whichshe had caused to be erected the signof the Hanover Arms. In the springof 1827, she visited this country ; and,during her residence here, she found itnecessary to undergo the operation oftapping ; from which, however, shedenyed no permanent relief. Whileon her return to the continent, a violentstorm for some time threatened destructionto the vessel in which shehad embarked. Her conduct, on thisoccasion, was admirably serene : ' Iam here," said she to her attendants,in the hands of God, as much as if Iwere at home in my own bed." Soonafter she had reached Wirtemberg, shewas found to labour under symptomsof water on the chest ; but no apprehensionsof immediate danger wereentertained, and she continued to receivethe visits of her friends, withwhom she conversed in her usual vivaciousmanner, until two days beforeher demise, which took place on the6th of October, 1828.THE ROYAL FAMILY.Her character appears to have beendecidedly admirable. By the peopleof Wirtemberg she was regarded withthe utmost affection and respect ; andd, byfirst wife, loved and honoured heras though she had been their ownmother.EDWARD AND VICTORIA, DUKE AND DUCHESS OF KENT.EDWARD, the fourth son of Georgethe Third, was born on the 2nd ofNovember, 1767. His education wascommenced in this country, and completedat Hanover. He entered thearmy at an early age, and soon becamean enthusiastic admirer of militarydiscipline. Having attained the rankof colonel, he served during the years1790 and 1791, under General O'Hara,at Gibraltar, where he rendered himselfso unpopular by his strictness, thathis regiment repeatedly mutinied, andhis life is stated to have been, on morethan one occasion, in considerable peril.On quitting Gibraltar, he was sentout as commander of the forces inCanada. In 1794, he received ordersto join the expedition under Sir CharlesGrey, against the French West Indiaislands ; and, during the campaignthat ensued, his impetuous braveryprocured him the general admirationof his companions in arms. He headedthe flank division at the storming ofseveral strong and important forts inMartinique and Guadaloupe ; and sobrilliant were its exploits, that, " TheFlank Corps" became a standing toast,as well at the admiral's table, as atthat of the commander-in-chief. Theprince was subsequently appointed governorof Gibraltar, where the rigorousmeasures which he adopted for thepurpose of repressing various abuses inthe garrison, produced such excitementand insubordination, that it was deemedprudent to recal him. In 1799, he wascreated Duke of Kent, and obtained aparliamentary grant of 12,000 perannum. A large portion of this allowancehe set apart for the liquidation ofhis debts; and, in the year 1816, hewent abroad in order to abridge his expences.On the 29th of May, 1818, hewas united to Victoria Maria Louisa,widow of the late Prince of Leinengen,(by whom she had had two children),and sister to the Prince of Saxe Coburg,who was then in the thirtieth year ofher age, having been born in 1788.The duke and his amiable bride, whosecharacter has been most highly anddeservedly eulogized, shortly afterwardsarrived in this country, andwere re-married according to the ritesof the church of England. In 1819, theduchess gave birth to a daughter, (thePrincess Victoria) ; and, in the latterpart of the year, with a view to the reestablishmentof her health, which hadbeen materially affected by her confinement,she proceeded to Sidmouth,in Devonshire, where the duke, whohad accompanied her royal highness,was attacked by an inflammation of thelungs, and died, after a brief illness, onthe 23rd of January, 1820.His person was tall and athletic ; hisappearance dignified ; his understandingstrong ; his deportment affable,and his bravery chivalrous. The coursewhich he pursued in politics, appears tohave been almost invariably tolerant,liberal, and conciliatory. Towards thelatter part of his life, he had becomeexceedingly popular, and his death wasdeeply regretted by the nation.ERNEST AUGUSTUS AND FREDERICA, DUKE ANDDUCHESS OF CUMBERLAND.ERNEST AUGUSTUS, fifth son ofGeorge the Third, was born on the 5thof June, 1771. He received his educationat the university of Gottingen,where he was entered, July 6, 1786, withhis two younger brothers ; each beingDUKE OF SUSSEX.accompanied by a governor, a preceptor,and a gentleman. They were lodgedin one house, and had their table fixedat six hundred crowns a week, includingtwo grand institution dinners, to whichthe professors and some students wereinvited. They were taught Germanby Professor Meyer; Latin by Heine ;religion by Less, ecclesiastical counsellor; and morality by counsellorFever ; for which duties, each receivedan appointment of one thousand crownsper annum.On the 23rd of April, 1798, his royalhighness was created Duke of Cumberlandand Tiviotdale, and obtaineda parliamentary income of 12,000,which was increased in 1819, to 18,000per annum. In 1815, he marriedFrederica Sophia Charlotte, of MecklenburghhStrelitz, widow of the Princeof Salis, (born on the 20th of May,1778,) with whom the duke remainedon the continent for a very considerableperiod. The duchess visited this country,for the first time, in 1829, duringwhich year she appeared at a drawing-roomheld by George the Fourth.AUGUSTUS FREDERICK, DUKE OF SUSSEX.J. HIS prince, the sixth son of Georgethe Third, was born on the 27th ofJanuary, 1773. He received his educationon the continent, where he formedan union, which was solemnized accordingto the forms of the church ofRome, with Lady Augusta Murray,a daughter of the Earl of Dunmore.Lady Augusta," ludicrously observesa cotemporary writer, " soon becamepregnant, and returned to England; hisroyal highness did the same." Ontheir arrival in this country, they wereagain married by banns, in St. George'schurch, Hanover square, and the dukeproposed to resign whatever claims hemight possess as a member of the royalfamily, on condition that his marriageshould not be disturbed : it was, however,some time afterwards declaredillegal and invalid by the ecclesiasticalcourt, as being contrary to the provisionsof the royal marriage act. Nosooner was the sentence published thanLady Augusta, who had become themother of two children, separated fromhis royal highness, and the remainderof her life was passed in dignified retirement.The prince was created Earl of Invernessand Duke of Sussex, in 1801,when he obtained a parliamentary grantof 12,000 per annum, to which ayearly addition of 9,000 was subsequentlymade. His attachment to theWhigs, the frankness with which heavowed his political sentiments, and thecourse which he adopted with regardto the differences in the family ofthe king, his brother, rendered him astranger at court during the reign ofGeorge the Fourth ; with whom, however,during his majesty's last illness,the duke was cordially reconciled. Asaspeaker, he possesses considerablefacility: his opinions are decidedlyliberal, and his manners frank and condescending.ADOLPHUS FREDERICK AND AUGUSTA WILHELMINA,DUKE AND DUCHESS OF CAMBRIDGE.ADOLPHUS FREDERICK, theseventh son of George the Third, (bywhom he was much beloved,) was bornon the 24th of February, 1774. Hereceived a military education, and enteredthe army at an early age. In1793, he served with the British forcesbefore Dunkirk, and on the 13th ofSeptember, in that year, he is stated tohave returned to England, wearing acoat that exhibited several sabre marks,and a helmet, through which he hadTHE ROYAL FAMILY.been wounded in the eye. In 1794, heattained the rank of colonel: in thefollowing year he was raised to thedukedom of Cambridge, and parliamentgranted him a yearly allowance of12,000, which was subsequentlyraised to 27,000 per annum. In1803, he was placed at the head of anarmy of 14,000 men, destined for thedefence of Hanover : but, finding onhis arrival in the electorate, that itsinhabitants evinced but little inclinationto aid him against the enemy,he soon solicited his recal, and aftersome delay, procured permission toreturn to England, leaving the armyunder the command of Count Wal-modern,who was shortly afterwardscompelled to surrender.The duke gradually rose to the rankof field-marshal, and on the restorationof Hanover, he was appointed itsgovernor general. On the 7th of May,1818, he married Augusta WilhelminaLouisa, niece of the Landgrave of Hesse.This amiable and accomplished ladywas born on the 25th of July, 1797 :her education is said to have been conductedwith remarkable care, and herunion with his royal highness is statedto have been attended with the decidedapproval of the whole of theirrespective relatives.The private conduct of the duke appearsto have been always unexceptionable: his public career can scarcelybe said to have been brilliant ; but althoughit may have procured him littleapplause, it has decidedly entitled himto public esteem. His political opinionshave rarely been censurable ; as anorator, he may be pronounced acute,well-informed, correct, but not altogethereloquent His habits are saidto be studious, and his acquirements asascholar are reputed to be much moreconsiderable than is generally supposed.On the whole, the duke, who has nevercourted notoriety, appears to be deservingeven of a larger share of admirationand respect than he actuallyenjoys.WILLIAM FREDERICK AND MARY, DUKE ANDDUCHESS OF GLOUCESTER.WILLIAM FREDERICK, son ofWilliam Henry, Duke of Gloucester,by his wife, the Countess Dowager ofWaldegrave, was born at Rome, inJanuary, 1776. His education wascompleted at the university of Cambridge;which he had but recentlyquitted when he entered the army. Heserved a campaign under the Duke ofYork, in Holland, and subsequentlyattained the exalted rank of field-marshal.In 1816, he married Mary,the fourth daughter of George theThird, born on the 25th of April, 1776,to whom he was supposed to have beenlong attached. On this union takingplace, he stipulated that it should byno means be expected to influence hispublic conduct: he, accordingly, continuedto support his previous politicalconnexions, the Whigs ; and while thebill of pains and penalties against QueenCaroline was pending, he uniformlyacted in her majesty's favour. Theduke has always kept within the boundsof his income, which is stated to be14,000 per annum; he is utterly devoidof ostentation ; and frequently appears,either alone or accompanied bythe duchess, (with whom he is said toenjoy great domestic felicity,) in thestreets of the metropolis, and at itsplaces of public amusement, with muchless of " pomp and circumstance," thanmany whom he surpasses as much inrank as affability.PRINCESS CHARLOTTE.PRINCESS AMELIA.AMELIA, youngest daughter ofGeorge the Third, was born on the7th of August, 1783. In childhoodand youth, although delicate, she possessedgreat vivacity : her talents weregood, and her temper excellent Unfortunately,she was afflicted with aglandular disease, which, even in itsincipient state, occasioned her considerablesuffering ; and shortly aftershe had entered her twenty-fourth year,it assumed a hopeless form; but shelingered, in great agony, which she borewith the most admirable resignation,until the latter end of 1810. Her deathtook place on the 2nd of November inthat year.George the Third appears to havebeen particularly fond of her royalhighness : and it is even asserted, thathis last mental aberration was materiallyaccelerated by the deep grief withwhich he contemplated the prospect ofher approaching decease.PRINCESS CHARLOTTE OF SAXE Coburg.THE only child of George the Fourthby his consort, Caroline of Brunswick,was born on the 7th of January, 1796,and baptized Charlotte Caroline Augusta,on the llth of the followingmonth. Bishop Porteus describes her,in 1801, as having been " a most captivatingand engaging-child. She repeated,"continues he, " several of herhymns with great correctness and propriety; and being told, when she wentto Southern, in Essex, she would thenbe in my diocese, she fell down on herknees, and begged my blessing."Her education was conducted, firstunder the superintendence of theCountess of Elgin, and subsequentlyunder that of the Baroness de Clifford.She was removed from the immediateguardianship of her mother, about theperiod when the delicate investigationof the charges made by Sir John andLady Douglas against the Princess ofWales took place, and was placed atWarwick house, by command of Georgethe Third, who had claimed the privilegeof bringing her up under hisown protection, as she was a child ofthe state. Queen Charlotte, whom theyoung princess appears to have hated,exercised, it is said, a secret interferenceas to her studies, and employedHannah More to write an elementarywork for her use.In 1809, Fisher, Bishop of Salisbury,became her preceptor, and DoctorsNot and Short his assistants. At anearly period of her life, she had displayedmuch waywardness and caprice ;and although she at length became sufficientlytractable and diligent to passthrough her studies in a manner decidedlybrilliant, yet, her naturally highand irritable spirit was still unsubdued.When in her thirteenth year, thebishop, her tutor, having deemed itexpedient mildly to rebuke her forsome inattention, she snatched off hiswig, dashed it on the floor, and indignantlyquitted the room. At anothertime, Queen Charlotte, who had previouslysent her a handsome shawl,having reminded her that she had notyet acknowledged the gift, the princesstook the present alluded to from hershoulders, and thrust it into the fire.As, however, she advanced towardswomanhood, her pride and violence oftemper subsided, and she became, on thewhole, of a decidedly amiable, but stilllofty and uncompromising character.To her mother, who was rarely permittedto see her, she displayed greataffection ; and the coolness with whichthe Princess of Wales was treated bymost of the royal family, appears tohave occasioned her considerable pain.In 1814, her attempts to indulge in aTHE ROYAL FAMILY.closer correspondence with her motherthan had previously been permitted,excited the anger of the prince regent,who intimated, in rather harsh terms,his intention of removing her, withoutdelay, to his own residence. Theyoung princess, however, contrivedto quit Warwick house unperceived,stepped into a hackney coach, anddrove off to her mother's house atBlockhead. After some negotiation,and on receiving an assurance thatshe should not be immured, nor treatedwith severity, she was eventually prevailedupon to trust herself to the regent'sprotection.The Princess of Wales soon afterwardswent to Italy, and all restraintupon her royal daughter was then removed.In the following summer, duringan excursion to the coast, the youngprincess accepted an invitation to goonboard the Leviathan man-of-war;on reaching which, she said to thelieutenant who escorted her party, " Iresign the accommodation-chair, providedto hoist us on deck, to the bishopand the ladies: do you, sir, take careof my clothes, and I will go up theladder."The young Prince of Orange waslong consist red her accepted lover ; butin1814, Prince Leopold of SaxeCobourgbegan to be honoured with her especialnotice; and, on the 2nd of May, 1816,she was united to him at Carl ton house.Parliament, on this occasion, voted60,000 as an outfit to the royalcouple ; 10,000 per annum as pinmoney for the bride; and 50,000 ayear during their joint and severalfives. Previously to her marriage, oneof the ministers waited on her, for thepurpose of settling some details, relativeto her income ; but not deeminghis propositions sufficiently liberal, sheaddressed him in the following terms :My lord, I am heiress to the throneof Great Britain, and my mind hasrisen to a level with the exalted stationI am to fill : therefore, I must be providedfor accordingly. Do not imaginethat, in marrying Prince Leopold, Iever can, or will, sink to the rank ofMistress Colour g. Entertain no suchidea, I beg of you."The princess and her husband, soonafter their marriage, retired to Claremont,where they enjoyed much domestichappiness, until the fatal accouchementof her royal highness, inNovember, 1817. On the 5th of thatmonth, she gave birth to a still-bornmale child. On the following morning,although she had been supposed, " tobe doing extremely well," she was attacked,first with faintness, and soonafterwards with convulsions. Her medicalattendants, on being summoned,found her at the point of death. Shereceived the announcement of her approachingdissolution with extraordinarycalmness, and continued to expressher affection to Prince Leopold by themost eloquent signs, even up to themoment when she expired. The griefexhibited by the people for her loss,was entirely without a parallel : herdeath being almost as deeply and generallylamented, as though she hadbeen a member of every family in thekingdom.In person, she was of the middlestature, stout, but of elegant proportions: her eyes were blue, large, andintelligent ; her complexion was unusuallyfair; the expression of her featuresdignified ; and her whole appearanceprepossessing. Her spirit washigh, her temper irritable, and herinclination somewhat despotic ; but, onthe other hand, her affections werewarm, her mind was cultivated, and herbenevolence boundless. She had beenbrought up in sound moral, religious,and constitutional principles ; and, hadshe lived to ascend the throne, it seemsprobable that, with many of the frailties,she would have displayed all thebetter qualities of an Elizabeth.THE PRETENDERSTHEIR ADHERENTS.PRETENDERS AND THEIR ADHERENTS.JAMES FREDERICK Edward STUART.-I HE parents of this unfortunateprince were James the Second, andMaria D'Este, sister to Francis, Dukeof Modena, who were united in 16-73.The bride was then only in her fifteenthyear, by no means beautiful, and sopoor, that the king of France paid hermarriage portion. She possessed, however,in the opinion of her consort, aninestimable charm, in being stronglyattached to the Roman catholic faith.For the first fourteen years of hermarriage she had no children ; but atlength it was announced, in the LondonGazette, that her majesty had becomepregnant ; and, on the 10th ofJune, 1688, she was delivered of ason. The birth of a Prince of Walesexcited an extraordinary ferment inthe nation : the catholics gloried in theevent; but the majority of the protestantsbroadly insinuated, that thepretended heir-apparent was not thequeen's child. One party asserted thatshe had never been pregnant ; a secondinsisted that she had miscarried; anda third allowed that she had borne ason, but contended that the royal infanthad died soon after its birth. Theseimputations of fraud appear, however,to have been utterly destitute of foundation.On the 15th of October, the youngprince was christened James FrederickEdward. On account of the gloomyaspect of affairs in this country, thequeen withdrew with him to Franceearly in the following month j andbefore the year closed, his father hadceased to be a reigning king.The exiled monarch died at St. Germaine,on the 16th of September, 1701.Just before his dissolution took place,he conjured the young prince, in themost earnest manner, " never to barterhis salvation for a crown, or to let anyworldly views wean him from his attachmentto the holy catholic faith."In pursuance of a pledge which Louisthe Fourteenth had given the expiringmonarch, James Frederick was, immediatelyafter his father's demise, acknowledged(but without ceremony) asKing of England by the French court.The pope, the King of Spain, and theDuke of Savoy, did him the sameempty honour ; but no steps weretaken to procure his restoration. InEngland, acts of attainder were passedagainst him, and also against his mother; who, however, succeeded in obtaining50,000, as a composition forthe unpaid balance of her dowry, bymeans of a suit in chancery.The acts of attainder were followedby the introduction of a bill abjuringthe Pretender, and declaring Williamthe Third to be rightful king of theserealms ; against the passing of which,however, several members, in bothhouses, solemnly and vehemently protested.During the reign of QueenAnne, the Jacobite party in this countryincreased, as well in political influenceas numbers. The queen herself, whowas a daughter of James the Secondby his first wife, although she had ascendedthe throne to the exclusion ofJames Frederick, still regarded him asabrother. On one occasion, when aproposal was made in her presence, atthe council board, to set a price uponhis head, she burst into tears, andabruptly left the room. So strong washeraversion to the Elector of Hanover,that she did all in her power to preventany of his family visiting England ;and no doubt exists, but that, had sheTHE Prate Dispossessedthe power of peremptorilynominating her successor, James Frederickwould have ascended the throneon her demise.In 170C, he sent over an agent, namedHooke, to confer with his adherents inEngland and Scotland ; and they, inreturn, despatched a Captain Strattonas their representative, to his littlecourt at St. Germaine. At this time,although his friends, the Tories, " werefor keeping quiet during the queen'slife," the Scotch Jacobites, who appearto have been enthusiastically attachedto the descendant of their native kings,evinced so strong an inclination to risein his behalf, that an insurrectionwould probably have taken place, hadnot Stratton failed in obtaining anyassurance of help from Louis theFourteenth, whose powers were thenfully employed by the forces underthe Duke of Marlborough.In 1707, Jacobitism was openly professedin all the chief cities in scotland; and the rejoicing in Edinburghon James Frederick's birth-day were asopen and general, as though he hadbeen seated on the throne. In 1708,the French king secretly fitted out anexpedition against Scotland, at Dunkirk,which it was determined thePretender should accompany ; and themost sanguine hopes were entertainedof its success ; the Scotch being, at thattime, exasperated against governmentby the act of union, which had recentlybeen passed. The day beforeJames Frederick, who now assumed thetitle of the Chevalier de St. George,departed from St. Germaine, Louis theFourteenth presented him with a sword, and wished himsuccess in the approaching contest.The Chevalier stated in answer, " Thatif it should be his good fortune to getpossession of the throne of his ancestors,he would not content himself withreturning his thanks by letters andambassadors, but would shew his gratitudeby deeds ; nay, he would comein person to acknowledge the royalprotection and assistance which he hadexperienced." " The best I can wishyou, sir," replied the French king, " is,that I may never see you again !"After some delays, the Chevalier embarkedwith the French armament ;which, however, was compelled toreturn to France without having landeda single soldier in Scotland. Shortlyafterwards, the Chevalier joined theFrench army in Flanders, and appearedin arms against those whoseallegiance he claimed, at the battle ofOudenarde ; where, according to theFrench writers, he displayed prodigiesof valour, while the Dutch accounts,on the contrary, state, that he calmlywitnessed the contest from the summitof a steeple.Humbled by defeat, Louis the Fourteenthat length offered to acknowledgeQueen Anne as rightful sovereign ofthese kingdoms, and no longer to affordthe Chevalier an asylum in France. Nopacification, however, was effected, andJames Frederick still continued to resideat St. Germaine. In Scotland, he hadlost none of his adherents : and theycontinued to display their sentimentsin his favour, with an audacity whichappears, at that time, to have been byno means remarkable. In 1711, theDuchess of Gordon sent a medallionportrait of him to the faculty of advocatesat Edinburgh ; and, on a discussiontaking place as to the proprietyof receiving it, the meeting decided,by a large majority, (sixty-three againsttwelve,) that the duchess should bethanked, in the warmest terms, " forhaving presented them with a medalof their sovereign lord the king."Soon after the peace of Utrecht, theFrench minister at the Hague declared,that his sovereign would no longercountenance the Chevalier, or any ofhis adherents : and when, on the deathof Queen Anne, James Frederick postedto Versailles, Louis the Fourteenth notonly refused to see him, but requestedthat he would immediately quit theFrench territories. " I am surprised,"added he, " at the Chevalier's returnto my dominions ; knowing, as he does,my engagements with the house ofHanover, and that I have already acknowledgedGeorge the First."The Chevalier appears to have indulgedin a hope that he should havesucceeded Queen Anne : but notwithstandingseveral meetings were held,for the purpose of procuring a repealof the act of settlement, and of conferringon her majesty the right of appointinga. successor, and although hepossessed a number of powerful friendsJAMES FREDERICK EDWARD STUART.in this country, nothing decisive waseffected on his behalf; and his causewas ruined, as much by the weak andvacillating conduct of the Tories, as bythe skilful and energetic measures of theElector of Hanover's Whig supporters.On the day before the arrival ofGeorge the First at Greenwich, a proclamationwas issued, offering a rewardof 100,000 for the apprehension ofthe Pretender, on the event of hislanding in this country ; and soon afterwards,James Frederick sent copies ofa spirited declaration of his rights, tomost of the English nobility. Thesedocuments being dated at Plombiferes,in the territories of the Duke of Lorraine,the latter received a remonstrancefrom England, for harbouringthe personal enemy of the king. Theduke replied with civility, but stillpermitted the Chevalier to reside inLorraine.The zeal of the Scotch Jacobites, onbehalf of James Frederick was materiallyincreased by their antipathy tothe reigning monarch ; and at length,early in September, 1715, he was proclaimedking, at Castlewood, and hisstandard set up by the Earl of Mar.A large body of his adherents speedilyassembled ; many parts of England, aswell as a large portion of Scotland, weredecidedly in his favour ; he was openlyproclaimed in Cornwall ; and at Oxfordhe was so popular, that a collegian therethus addressed one of his friends inLondon : " We fear nothing, but drinkKing James's health daily." Had heappeared among his friends at thisauspicious period, there would havebeen some probability of their exertionsbeing crowned with success ; but omittingto take the tide of his affairs at itsflood, he loitered abroad, until his adherentshad become so disheartenedby defeat, and diminished in numbers,as to be totally incapable of makingany important attempt on his behalf;and amused himself by issuing a longdeclaration from Commercy, when heought to have been at the head of histroops, fighting a battle on the borders.The Scots," says Bolingbroke, whoat that time was the Chevalier's secretaryof state, " had long pressed himto come amongst them, and had sentfrequent messages to quicken his departure,some of which were deliveredin terms much more zealous than respectful."At length, on the 22nd of December,1715, he arrived at Peterhead, in thenorth of Scotland, " when," says ," there remained no hope ofa commotion in his favour among theEnglish, and many of the Scotch beganto grow cool in his cause. No prospectof success could engage him in thisexpedition, but it was become necessaryfor his reputation. The Scotchreproached him for his delay, and theFrench were extremely eager to havehim gone."From Peterhead he proceeded, apparentlyat his leisure, with a few adherents,who, as well as himself, weredisguised as naval officers, throughNewburg and Aberdeen, to Fetterosse,where he was met by about thirtynoblemen, including the Earl of Mar,and a small party of horse. He nowappeared in public, and went throughthe absurd mummery of forming acourt, appointing his officers of state,conferring the honour of knighthoodon some of his adherents, and grantingpeerage to others. He was proclaimedwith a solemnity which his circumstancesrendered truly ridiculous, infront of his lodgings ; and received variouscongratulatory addresses on hisaccession.Having re-issued the Commercy declaration,he sent copies of it all overScotland, and many of the constitutedauthorities thought proper to publishit, in obedience to his orders. On the2nd of January he quitted Fetterosse,and early on the morning of the 5thmade his public entry into Dundee,where he remained a full hour on horseback,in the market-place, permittingthe people, indiscriminately, to kiss hishand. On the 7th he arrived at the palaceof Scone, where the coronation of theScottish kings had formerly been celebrated.Two days afterwards he visitedPerth, but returned to Scone in theevening, after having reviewed a smallbody of troops, in the highland costume,which, it is said, he had neverbefore seen. He then issued severalproclamations, by one of which he appointedhis coronation to take place onthe 23d of January, and called a grandcouncil of the rebel chiefs, to whom hedelivered the following speech:THE Pretender RS.I am now, on your repeated invitation,come amongst you. No otherargument need be used of the greatconfidence I place in your loyalty andfidelity to me, which I entirely relyon. 1 believe you are convinced of myintentions to restore the ancient lawsand liberties of this kingdom : if not,I am still ready to confirm to you theassurance of doing all you can requiretherein. The great discouragementswhich presented were not sufficient todeter me from placing myself at thehead of my faithful subjects, who werein arms for me ; and whatever mayensue, I shall leave them no reason forcomplaint, that I have not done theutmost they could expect from me.Let those who forget their duty, andare negligent of their own good, beanswerable for the worst that mayhappen. For me, it will be no newthing if I am unfortunate. My wholelife, even from my cradle, has shewn aconstant series of misfortunes ; and Iam prepared (if so it please God) tosuffer the threats of my enemies andyours. The preparations against uswill, I hope, quicken your resolutions,and convince others, from whom I havepromises, that it is now no time to disputewhat they have to do. But if theyare unmindful of their own safety, Itwill be my greatest comfort, that Ihave done all that could be expectedfrom me. I recommend to you whatis necessary to be done in the presentconjuncture, and, next to God, rely onyour counsel and resolution."This address produced a flash of enthusiasmin the council ; which, however,reflection speedily extinguished ;and before the meeting broke up, itwas determined that the enterpriseshould be abandoned, as being utterlyhopeless. But it was necessary, forthe Chevalier's safety, that the peopleshould not become acquainted with theresult of their leaders' deliberations,until the Chevalier had effected a retreat.Preparations for the defence of Perth,against the approaching royal army,were therefore made ; some villagesin the outskirts were even burnt, onthe ostensible motive, that a besiegingforce might occupy them, to the imminentdanger of the town ; and expresseswere sent out to hurry in all the expectedreinforcements.It appears, that although withoutmoney, food, or arms, the Chevalierwished to maintain Perth, or even tohazard a battle. " The enemy," saysthe Earl of Mar, " was more than eightthousand strong, and we had but twothousand five hundred that could berelied on ; we were in the midst of asevere winter; were without fuel ; andthe town was utterly indefensible. Wetherefore retired to Montrose, wherethere is a good harbour. It was nowrepresented to the Chevalier, that as hehad no immediate hope of success, heowed it to his people to provide for hissafety, by retiring beyond sea. It washard to bring him to think of this,though the enemy was in full marchtowards us, and our only chance was toretreat among the mountains : besides,that while he was with us, the dangerto all parties was increased, owing totheir eagerness to seize his person. Atlength he consented, though with greatunwillingness, and I dare say no consenthe ever gave was so uneasy tohim."After having forwarded to the Dukeof Argyle, the king's general, a considerablesum, for the relief of thosewhose property had been destroyed inthe burnt villages near Perth, he directedthat nearly all the remainder ofhis money should be distributed amonghis adherents, reserving little or nothingfor himself. Fearing some obstructionto his departure, he ordered his horsesand guard to be drawn up in front ofthe house where he lodged, as thoughhe intended to proceed on the marchwith his forces. He then slipped outat the back door, and having reachedthe water-side undiscovered, embarkedwith those whom he had selected asthe companions of his flight, on board asmall vessel, which had been destinedto carry a gentleman on an embassy tosome foreign court After a voyage offive days, although nine men-of-warwere cruising off the coast to preventhis escape, he arrived, on the 8th ofFebruary, in safety, at Gravestones.The Chevalier," says Bolingbroke,was not above six weeks in his expedition.On his return to St. Germaine,the French government wishedhim to repair to his old asylum withthe Duke of Lorraine before he hadtime to refuse it. But nothing wasJAMES FREDERICK EDWARD STUART.leaned by this but to get him out ofFrance immediately. I found him in nodisposition to make such haste, for hehad a mind to stay in the neighbourhoodof Paris, and wished to have aprivate meeting with the regent. Thiswas refused; and the Chevalier, atlength, declared that he would instantlyset out for Lorraine. His trunkswere packed, his chaise was ordered tobe ready at five that afternoon, and Isent word to Paris that he was gone.At our interview he affected much cordialitytowards me ; and no Italianever embraced the man he was goingto stab with a greater show of affectionand confidence. Instead of taking postfor Lorraine, he went to the little housein the Bois de Bologna, where hisfemale ministers resided ; and therehe continued lurking for several days,pleasing himself with the air of mysteryand business, whilst the only real businesswhich he should have had at thattime lay neglected. The Thursday following,the Duke of Ormond broughtme a scrap of paper in the Chevalier'shandwriting, and dated on the Tuesday,to make me believe it was writtenon the road, and sent back to his grace.The kingly laconic style of the paperwas, that he had no further occasionfor my services, accompanied by anorder to deliver up all the papers in myoffice to Ormond, all which might havebeen contained in a moderate-sizedletter-case. Had I literally compliedwith the order, the duke would haveseen, from his private letters, howmeanly the Chevalier thought of hiscapacity ; but I returned those papersprivately."Notwithstanding the failure of hisrecent attempt in Scotland, the Chevalierstill possessed a great number ofwell-wishers on both sides of theTweed. Oxford was still eminentlydisloyal: white roses, the avowed symbolof Jacobitism, being openly wornthere on James Frederick's birth-day.Having been compelled, at the instanceof George the First, to retirefrom Avignon, which he had for sometimemade his place of residence, theChevalier crossed the Alps, and repairedto Rome, where he was received withgreat cordiality by the pope. His habitshad hitherto been so disgracefullylicentious as to render him contemptibleeven to his own servants ; and hisbest friends, as much in the hope thatmatrimony would reform him, as forthe purpose of continuing his race, earnestlyurged him to marry. He, accordingly,made proposals, in 1718, toespouse a daughter of the Emperor ofRussia; but, principally through theintrigues of George the First, his offerswere rejected. Before this period, theking of Sweden, in order to annoythe English monarch, had professed awarm friendship towards him, without,however, making any effort in hisbehalf; and the Chevalier began todespair of obtaining assistance fromforeign princes, when, in 1718-19,Cardinal Alberti, prime minister ofSpain, sent him a pressing invitationto visit the court of Madrid. Theemissaries of the English governmentwatched him so closely, that, in orderto effect a secret retreat from Italy,he was compelled to have recourse tostratagem. Exchanging dresses withhis courier, whom he sent forwardwith instructions, to declare, if he werestopped, that the clothes he wore werehis own, the Chevalier followed at somedistance, and safely reached Return,where he embarked for Spain, and arrivedin Catalonia without accident.The Spanish court received him in amost gratifying manner, and a powerfularmament was prepared at Cadifor the invasion of England in his behalf;but the expedition was so decidedlyunsuccessful, that, on accountof bad weather, the greater part of thevessels were disabled, having onlyapproached within many leagues oftheir destination.Meanwhile, a treaty for his marriagehad been concluded with ClementinaMaria, a daughter of Prince Sobieski,eldest son of John, King of Poland.The princess, to the deep dishonour ofall the parties concerned in the transaction,was seized while passing throughthe Tyrol, in her journey towards Rome,on the instigation, it is said, of the Britishminister at Vienna. After having beenkept a close prisoner for some time, atInstruct, early in May, 1719, sheescaped, in the disguise of a page, toBologna, where she was married toJames Frederick by proxy. So eagerdid she feel to behold her husband,who was still in Spain, that she wasTHE Pretenders.with difficulty prevented from proceedingat once to Madrid. The Chevaliersoon afterwards returned, and, in commemorationof her escape, caused amedal to be struck, bearing her portrait,and the legend, " Clementina,Queen of Great Britain, France, andIreland," on one side ; and, on theother, a female figure in a triumphalcar, drawn by horses at full speed, withthe words, " Fortuna causamquesequor;" and underneath, " Deceptioncustodis, 1719."The Chevalier expected a vast fortunewith his wife ; but he only received aportion out of the Sobieski estate,which, on account of its previous encumbrances,was of very little value.He had two children by the princessCharles Edward and Henry Benedict;but as matrimony had not the effectof weaning him from his former illicitcourses, it added but little to his happiness.In 1720, his avowed friend, the Kingof Sweden, entered into a solemn engagementwith George the First, torender the Chevalier no assistance ;and, in the following year, died Clementthe Eleventh, whose favour andprotection he had for a long time enjoyed.The expiring pontiff, in thepresence of several cardinals, recommendedthe exiled prince most stronglyto whomsoever should succeed to thepapal chair; entreating that he mightbe permitted to reside, so long as hepleased, in the palace which he had forsome time past occupied, that his pensionmight be continued until he recoveredhis crown, and that his legitimateviews might, on all occasions, bezealously forwarded.In 1722, the Chevalier sent to thiscountry a declaration of his rights, whichwas voted a scandalous libel by parliament,and ordered to be publicly burntat the exchange. For several yearsafterwards, James Frederick and hispersonal adherents amused themselvesby forming visionary schemes for hisrestoration ; but, at length, he becameindolent, and apparently hopeless. Hetook no part in the romantic expeditionof his son, in 1745. " By the aid ofGod," said the young Pretender to hisfather, when preparing to depart forScotland, " I trust I shall soon be ableto lay three crowns at your feet." " Becareful, my dear boy," replied the Chevalier,'-for I would not lose you forall the crowns in the world."The failure of his son's attempt toprocure "his restoration does not appearto have had any material influence onhis health, however it might have affectedhis spirits. During the remainderof his long life, he resided at Rome,under the protection of the pope, butneither honoured nor beloved. He livedto be pitied by the house of Hanover,and almost forgotten by the children ofthose of his party who would willinglyhave died for his benefit. The followingis an abridgment of Kepler's noticeof James Frederick, published in 1756:The figure made by the Pretenderis in every way mean and unbecoming.The pope has issued an order that allhis subjects should style him King ofEngland; but the Italians make a jestof this, for they term him, ' The localking, or king here,' while the realpossessor is styled ' The king there,'that is, in England. He has an annualincome of 12,000 scud, or crowns,from the pope, and though he may receiveas much more from his adherentsin England, it is far from enabling himto keep up the state of a sovereignprince. He is very fond of seeing hisimage struck on medals ; and if kingdomswere to be obtained by tears,which he shed plentifully at the miscarriageof his attempts in Scotland, hewould have found the medallists workenough. Not to mention the formermedals, the one at present in hand,shews that his life is not very thick setwith great actions, for it relates to thebirth of his eldest son, and representsthe busts of the Pretender and hislady, with this legend ' Jacob. III. R.Clementina R.' On the reverse is alady with a child on her left arm,leaning on a pillar, as the emblem ofconstancy, and with her right handpointing to a globe, on which is seenEngland, Scotland, and Ireland thelegend ' Providential obstetric,' and below,' Carlo Prince. Vallies, nat. die ultimaA. 1720.' The Pretender generallyappears abroad with three coaches,and his household consists of aboutforty persons. He lately assumed someauthority at the opera, by calling ' Encore!' when a song that pleased himwas performed ; but it was not untilJAMES FREDERICK EDWARD STUART.after a long pause that his order wasobeyed. He never before affected theleast power. At his coming into anassembly, no English protestant risesup, and even the Roman catholicspay him the compliment in a very superficialmanner. His pusillanimity,and the licentiousness of his amours,have lessened him in every body's esteem.His lady is too pale and thin to bethoughthandsome ; her frequent miscarriageshave brought her very low,so that she seldom stirs abroad, unlessto visit a convent. She allows her servantsno gold or silver lace on theirliveries, and this proceeds from whatis called her piety ; but it is partlyowing to her ill health, and partly tothe jealousy, inconstancy, and other illqualities of her husband ; and one ofthese provocations affected her so much,that she withdrew into a convent,whilst the Pretender, to be more atliberty to pursue his amours, went toBologna. But the pope disapproved oftheir separate households, and to inducehim to return to Rome, and be reconciledto his lady, discontinued his pension.Yet the reconciliation was merelyformal ; he pursues his vices as muchas ever, and she can never entertain acordial affection for him again. Mr.S , who affects to be an antiquary,narrowly watches the Pretender andhis adherents, being retained for thatpurpose by the British ministry. Afew years since, Cardinal Alberti, tosave the Pretender's charges, proposedthat the palace Alia Langhara shouldbe assigned for his residence. Thishouse lies in the suburbs, and in aprivate place, and has a large gardenwith a passage to the city walls, so thatthe Pretender's friends might havevisited him with more privacy, and hehimself be absent without its beingknown in Rome. This change wasobjected to, on the part of England, byMr. S , and did not take place ; butanew wing was built to the Pretender'sold mansion, he having represented itas too small for him."For five years before his death, JamesFrederick was too infirm to leave hisroom. He lost his wife on the 18thof January, 176.5, and his own deathtook place on the 12th of the samemonth, in the following year. Hisremains were interred with extraordinarymagnificence.Some interesting observations occurwith regard to the Chevalier's character,in Bolingbroke's letter (beforequoted) to Sir William Windham, fromwhich the following are extracts : " TheChevalier's education renders him infinitelyless fit than his uncle, and,at least, as unfit as his father, to beKing of England : add to this, thatthere is no resource in his understanding.He is a slave to the weakest prejudices; the rod hangs like the swordof Damocles over his head, and hetrembles before his mother and thepriest." " His religion is not foundedon the love of virtue and the detestationof vice ; the spring of his wholeconduct is fear fear of the horns ofthe devil, and of the flames of hell.He has all the superstition of a capuchin,but none of the religion of aprince." " When the draught of adeclaration, to be circulated in GreatBritain, (that dated at Commercy,) wasto be settled, his real character wasfully developed. He took exceptionagainst the passages in which the securityof the protestant church waspromised. He said, he could not, inconscience, make such a promise ; andasked warmly, why the Tories wereso anxious to have him, if they expectedthose things from him whichhis religion did not allow. I left thedraughts with him, that he mightamend them ; and, though I cannotabsolutely prove it, I firmly believethat he sent them to the queen, to becorrected by her confessor. QueenAnne was called, in the original, ' hissister, of blessed and glorious memory ;'in that which he published, ' blessed'was left out. When her death wasmentioned, the original said, ' whenit pleased Almighty God to take her tohimself:' this was erased, and the followingwords inserted : ' when itpleased God to put a period to her life.'He also refused to allow the term ofblessed martyr' to be applied toCharles."Horace Walpole thus spoke of JamesFrederick, in 1752 : " The Chevalierde St. George is tall, meagre, and melancholyin his aspect : enthusiasm and disappointmenthave stamped a solemnityon his person, which rather createsTHE PRETENDERS.pity than respect. He seems the phantomwhich good-nature, divested ofreflection, conjures up, when we thinkon the misfortunes, without the demerits,of Charles the First. Withoutthe particular features of any Stuart,the Chevalier has the strong lines andfatality of air, peculiar to them all.""He never gave the world very favourableimpressions of him : in Scotland,his behaviour was far from heroic.At Rome, where to be a good RomanCatholic, it is by no means necessaryto be very religious, they have littleesteem for him : but it was his ill treatmentof the Princess Sobieski, his wife,that originally disgusted the papal court.She who, to zeal for popery, had unitedall its policy, who was lively, insinuating,agreeable, and enterprising, wasfervently supported by that court, whenshe could no longer endure the mortificationsthat were offered to her byHay and his wife, the titular Countessof Inverness, to whom the Chevalierhad entirely resigned himself. ThePretender retired to Bologna, but wasobliged to sacrifice his favourites, beforehe could re-establish himself at Rome.The most apparent merit of the Chevalier'scourt, is the great regularity ofhis finances, and the economy of hisexchequer. His income, before therebellion, was about 23,000 a year ;arising chiefly from pensions from thepope and from Spain, from contributionsfrom England, and some irregulardonations from other courts : yet, hispayments were not only most exact,but he had saved a large sum of money,which was squandered on the unfortunateattempt in Scotland. Besidesthe loss of a crown, to which he thoughthe had a just title ; besides a series ofdisappointments from his birth ; besidesthat mortifying rotation of friends,to which his situation has constantlyexposed him, he has, in the latterpart of his life, seen his own littlecourt, and his parental affections, tornto pieces, and tortured by the seeds offaction, sown by that master-hand ofsedition, the famous Bolingbroke ; whoinsinuated into their councils a projectfor the Chevalier's resigning his pretensionsto his eldest son, as morelikely to conciliate the affections of theEnglish to his family. The father,and the ancient Jacobites, never couldbe induced to relish this scheme : theboy and his adherents embraced it aseagerly as if the father had really hada crown to resign. Slender as theircabinet was, these parties divided it."In opposition to Bolingbroke, theEarl of Mar, a devoted adherent tothe Stuartss, describes the Chevalier ashaving possessed " all the great andgood qualities that are necessary formaking a people every way happy;"and Lesley, a non-juring divine, whomthe prince entertained in his household,for the purpose of officiating to theprotestants in the family, declares thathe was magnanimous, tolerant, anddevout; courteous, sensible, and diligent.Bolingbroke, it is probable, exaggeratedsome of the Chevalier's vices:Lesley and Mar, on the other hand,and particularly the former, have givenhim virtues which, in reality, he neverpossessed. There were apparently butfew, if any, bright points in his character.His courage is at least questionable; his dilatory conduct, in notjoining his adherents until his causewas ruined, although, according toBolingbroke and Mar, not without excuse,is altogether unexplained ; andhis assumption of the empty forms ofsovereignty at Perth and Fetterosse,while at the head of a defeated remnantof his friends, was vain, silly, andcontemptible. The absence of power,only, appears to have prevented himfrom displaying the more obnoxiousqualities of his race. In him, the bloodof Mary of Modena had deteriorated,rather than improved, that of theStuartss. Bigotry descended to him asan heir-loom ; but he disgraced thereligion he professed, by scrupulouslyfollowing its forms while his conductwas totally at variance with his principles.Unrestrained by marriage, hebecame grey before he had ceased tobe incontinent. At once weak andlicentious, he not only entertainedmistresses, but courted their adviceand direction in his most importantaffairs. What can be said in his favour? This : he was badly educated ;and thrown, at an early age, uponthe world, a royal wreck, without pilotor helm.CHARLES EDWARD STUART.CHARLES EDWARD STUART.THE subject of our present article,Charles Edward Louis Philip Casimir,eldest son of James Frederick EdwardStuart, the Pretender, and Maria Clementina,his wife, was born at Rome,on the 30th of November, 1720. Hiseducation, it is alleged, was neglected,on account of his governor having beenin the pay of the British court. In hisyouth, he made a tour through the northof Italy, under the title of the Count ofAlbany ; but with this exception, up to1744, his residence appears to have beeninvariably at Rome.At the latter end of 1743 he was summonedto Paris, for the purpose ofjoining a body of forces, which theFrench government had destined forthe invasion of Britain : accordingly, onthe 9th of January, 1744, he departedfrom Rome, under the avowed intentionof going to hunt the boar, and rode postto Genoa; where he embarked in afelucca, and proceeded by Monaco, toAntibes; whence he continued hisjourney to Paris, with all possible despatch.Notwithstanding the precautionshe had taken to conceal his movements,the British government obtained informationof his arrival at Antibes, onhis way to the French capital, andimmediately called upon his mostChristian majesty to give orders, inpursuance of treaties then existing, forCharles Edward's removal from theterritories of France. A few days afterthis application had been made, aFrench fleet, of fifteen sail of the lineand five frigates, appeared off Torbay ;and it was understood, that a largebody of troops was about to be embarkedin transports at Dunkirk, forthe purpose of making a descent, underconvoy of the fleet, on the British coast.The greater part of our naval forcewas at that time in the Mediterranean; but, by great exertions, twenty-onesail of the line, and several frigates,were soon collected from the differentparts of the channel, and despatched,under the command of Sir John Norris,to blockade Dunkirk. On the 23rd ofFebruary, one of the frigates made thesignal for an enemy's fleet in sight ; andthe English ships having the tide withthem, beat down the channel againstthe wind, and at four in the afternoon,came up with the French, off Dungeness:but as the tide was spent, bothfleets were compelled to come to ananchor.In the mean time, Marshal Saxe,who had been appointed to the commandof the land forces, arrived withthe young Pretender, at Dunkirk, andbegan to embark his troops. During thefollowing night, the French admiral,sensible of his inferiority, gave ordersthat all his ships should run down thechannel ; and the whole of the Englishfleet, with the exception of two sail ofthe line, parted from their cables, bystress of weather, and drove. In thiscritical posture of affairs, it was fearedthat the invading army would be able toreach England unmolested, before SirJohn Norris could return to the Downs :but all apprehensions from the Frencharmament had now become groundless ;a large portion of the troops havingperished on board some of the transports,which it appears, were wreckedby the gale that had driven the Englishfleet from its anchorage. A great quantityof warlike stores was also lost ; andthe expedition was abandoned, as beingutterly hopeless.Charles Edward now retired to Gravestones,where he assumed the name ofthe Chevalier Douglas. During thesummer, he earnestly solicited theFrench government, by means of hisagents, to make another effort in hisbehalf; and early in the following winter,he proceeded to Paris, for thepurpose of personally urging his suit.Failing to procure any positive assuranceof immediate aid, he becameimpatient, and determined, contrary tothe advice of his friends, on embarkingfor Scotland at the first favourable opportunity;and on trying his fortune,unassisted by foreign troops, at the headof his father's adherents. Accordingly,on the 20th of June, 1745, soon afterthe battle of Fontenoy, in which theTHE PRETENDERS.British army had been defeated, CharlesEdward left Nantes in a fishing boat,and proceeded 'to St. Navarre, wherehe embarked on board a frigate ofsixteen guns, called the Nouvelle.He was shortly afterwards joinedby the Elizabeth, an old sixty gun ship,which had been granted by the Frenchgovernment, to two merchants of Irishextraction, who were also proprietorsof the frigate. These persons had notonly lent Charles Edward their vessels,but had also furnished him with all thearms and money they could procure.To what extent they assisted him inthese particulars does not appear ; but itis certain, that he set out on his expeditionagainst the existing governmentof Great Britain, with a few attendants,five or six hundred broadswords,about two thousand muskets,and rather less than four thousandpounds in cash.Soon after the Doutelle and Elizabethhad set sail from Beileisle, the latterwas attacked by the Lyon man of war,of sixty guns; an obstinate contest ensued,in which the Elizabeth was somuch disabled, as to be obliged toabandon her consort and return to port.Charles Edward pursued his course inthe Doutelle, which, after avoidinganother man-of-war, was safely broughtto an anchor between South Uist andErica. The young Pretender immediatelylanded on the latter island, inthe assumed character of a young Irishpriest, and despatched a messenger, toinform Boisdale, Clanronald's brother,of his arrival. He passed the night atErica, and returned on board the Nouvelle,on the following morning. Bois-dalesoon afterwards arrived, but flatlyrefused to persuade his brother, or youngClanronald, his nephew, who was thenat Moidart, to take up arms in CharlesEdward's behalf: nor would he undertakea mission from the prince to Macdonaldand Macleod, those chiefs havinglately, as he stated, expressed their determinationnot to join the Jacobitestandard, unless Charles Edward shouldland in Scotland at the head of a bodyof regular troops. Unmoved by theentreaties of the young adventurer,Boisdale soon after quitted the frigate,with a determination to take no part inso rash an enterprise.Charles Edward then pursued hiscourse towards the main land; and havingbrought the Doutelle to an anchornear Moidart, he sent a boat to the shorewith a letter for young Clanronald, who,with his cousin, Kinloch Moidart, sooncame on board. Almost driven to despairby the refusal of Boisdale to assisthim, Charles Edward, with great emotion,besought the two chieftains tostand by their prince in his utmost need.But Clanronald and Moidart, althoughwarmly attached to his family, repliedthat it would be pulling destruction ontheir heads to join him in asserting hisrights, without concert at home, or assistancefrom abroad ; and in spite of allhis arguments and entreaties, they werepreparing to depart, when a youngerbrother of Kinloch Moidart, who stoodon the deck, armed at all points, attractedCharles Edward's notice, bythe emotion which he betrayed onhearing Moidart and Clanronald refuseto take up arms for one whom he consideredto be their lawful prince. " Willyou not assist me?" said Charles Edward,turning briskly towards him.I will, I will !" was the spirited reply;although no other man in the Highlandsshould draw a sword in yourcause, I am ready to die for you!"This gallant declaration had an immediateeffect on Clanronald and Moi-dart,for they at once agreed to do theirutmost in Charles Edward's behalf.The young Pretender then went ashore,with the Marquess of Tullibardine, SirThomas Sheridan, and three or fourmore of his adherents, who had comewith him from France, and proceededto Boradale, on the estate of Clanronald.Cameron of Lochiel was next madeacquainted with his arrival, and soonappeared at Boradale, for the purposeof dissuading Charles Edward frompersisting in his rash attempt. He hadcalled on his brother, John Cameron, ofFassefern, while on his way to Boradale,and stated his determination not toimplicate himself in so desperate anundertaking. Fassefern approved ofLochiel's resolution, but advised him toimpart it to the prince by letter. " No,"said Lochiel, " I ought, at least, to waiton him, and state my reasons, whichadmit of no reply." "Brother," repliedFassefern, " I know you better thanyou know yourself. If once the princesets eyes upon you, he will make youCHARLES EDWARD STUART.do whatever he pleases." Lpchiel, however,confident of his inflexibility, wenton to Boradale, and with all the eloquencehe possessed endeavoured to persuadethe prince to return to France,and reserve himself and his friends forabetter opportunity. But Lochiel'sarguments and entreaties had no effecton the young adventurer. " In a fewdays," said he, "with the handful offriends who are about me, I will erectthe royal standard, and proclaim to thepeople of Britain, that Charles Stuart iscome to claim the crown of his ancestors,to win it, or to perish in the attempt !Lochiel, who, my father has often toldme, was our firmest friend, may stay athome, and learn from the newspapersthe fate of his prince 1" " No," saidLochiel, "I'll share the fate of myprince, and so shall every man overwhom nature or fortune has given meanypower." It is an admitted fact, thathad this interview terminated otherwisethan it did, the hopes of Charles Edwardmust have been destroyed in their bud ;for none of the other chiefs would havejoined the young Chevalier, if Lochielhad declined to assist him.On the morning of the 19th of August,Charles Edward, attended by abouttwenty-five of his adherents, proceededto Glenfinnin, where he was met byLochiel, at the head of seven hundredof the Cameron, escorting two companiesof the king's troops whom theyhad surrounded and made prisoners.The Marquess of Tullibardine then unfurledthe young prince's standard, andMacdonald of Keppoch soon afterwardsarrived with three hundred men.Sir John Cope, the commander-in-chieffor Scotland, now put himself atthe head of a body of the king's forces,at Stirling ; but notwithstanding he hadreceived positive orders from the lordsof the regency, (the king being abroad,)to march into the Highlands, and attackthe rebels wherever they might be,he declined giving them battle, on accountof the strength of a position whichthey had taken, on the summit of ,and marched towards Inverness.Charles Edward immediately proceededin a different direction, with a view ofgetting possession of Edinburgh. Onthe 4th of September he entered Perth,where he remained for several days,and proclaimed his father at variousplaces in Angus and Fife. He wasnow joined by the titular Duke ofPerth, and Lord George Murray, brotherto the Duke of Athol, whom he madelieutenant-general of his army, whichhad been daily increasing in numberssince he had first set up his standard atGlenfinnin. Lord George is describedas having been a man of so much militarytalent, that had Charles Edward,as the Chevalier Johnstonee states, givenhim the sole command, and then goneto sleep, when he awoke he would havefound the crown of Great Britain encirclinghis brows.On the 16th of September, the rebelsmarched towards Edinburgh, of whichLochiel and his followers obtained possession,without difficulty, the nextmorning. About ten o'clock the mainbody of the Highlanders marched intothe king's park, where a vast numberof persons had assembled, for the purposeof seeing the prince. His figureand presence, according to Home, whowas present on the occasion, were notill suited to his lofty pretensions. Hewas tall, handsome, of a fair complexion,and wore the Highland dress,with the star of St. Andrew at his breast.The Jacobites compared him to RobertBruce, whom he resembled, as theythought, in figure as in fortune ; theWhigs, however, said that he lookedlike a gentleman and man of fashion,but not like a hero ; and that even whenabout to make a triumphant entryinto the palace of his ancestors, heappeared melancholy and languid.Within three days after Charles Edward'sarrival at Edinburgh the battleof Preston Pans was fought, in whichthe royal forces, under Sir John Cope,suffered a complete and most ingloriousdefeat. Johnstonee asserts that theHighlanders, on this occasion, threwtheir opponents' ranks into irretrievableconfusion, by slashing, with their broadswords,at the noses of the horses,which, on being wounded, turned round,and, becoming unmanageable, threwthe whole line into disorder. CharlesEdward, it is said, would have led hisadherents on to the charge at thisbattle, but for the remonstrances of hischiefs, who declared, that if he persistedin his avowed intention of takingthe post of danger, they would at oncereturn home and make the best termsTHE PRETENDERS.they could for themselves, as their utterruin would be inevitable, if any accidentoccurred to him, even although thecontest should terminate in their favour.The prince was consequently obliged tocontent himself with accompanying thesecond line of his forces ; which hadmerely to join in the pursuit, the royaltroops having been broken and routedby the impetuous charge of the firstThe next morning Charles Edwardreturned to Edinburgh with his victoriousarmy, a nd immediately began toexercise, as prince regent, various actsof sovereign authority. He appointed acouncil, ordered regiments to be leviedfor his service, and held drawing-rooms,which were, for the most part, brilliantlyattended, and generally endedin a public supper and a ball. It is related,in a narrative of James Maxwell,of Kirkconnell, published in the notesto Waverley, that while the young Chevalierwas at Edinburgh, it was proposedto send one of his prisoners to London,to demand a cartel for the exchange ofprisoners taken on both sides during thewar, and to consider the refusal of thecourt of St James's tantamount to adeclaration, that they meant to give noquarter ; in which case the prince wouldhave been justified in retaliating, andmight thereby have prevented his adherentsfrom being executed as traitors,when taken by the royalists. But althoughthis measure was justly regardedas very important by the prince's friends,he could not be brought to accede to it;declaring, that it was beneath him tomake empty threats, and that he nevercould take, in cold blood, those liveswhich he had saved, in the heat ofaction, at the peril of his own.Meanwhile, a large body of the royaltroops, with six thousand Dutch auxiliaries,had arrived from Flanders, andCharles Edward saw that further inactionwould be fatal to his cause. Manydeliberations were held by his council,as to what would be the best course toadopt; and it was, at length, determined,to push the enterprise to the utmost, bymarching at once into England. Accordingly,on the last day of October, therebels, whose numbers were now somewhatunder six thousand, quitted Edinburgh,and proceeded towards Carlisle,which capitulated to them on the 14thof November. On the 29th they reachedManchester, where they were joinedby two or three hundred men. But,except in this instance, scarcely anytestimonies of zeal for the cause of theStuartss was exhibited by the English,and the situation of Charles Edwardbecame daily more dangerous. He,however, boldly pursued his course, byregular marches, through Macclesfieldto Derby, where he arrived on the 4thof December. He was now nearerLondon than the royal army underthe command of the Duke of Cumberland;but the rashness and follyof a further advance had become soevident, that the majority of thechiefs determined on a retreat towardsthe north with all possible expedition.The young prince, it appears, was exceedinglyaverse to a retrograde movementIn the march forward he hadalways been up at break of day, andusually accompanied the men on foot ;but, during the retreat, he rose late,and when he appeared, mounted ahorse, and rode straight on to hisquarters, apparently absorbed in gloomand discontent.The Duke of Cumberland, as soon ashehad obtained information of their retreattowards the north, pursued the rebelforces with the whole of his cavalryand some mounted infantry. A portionof his troops came up with them on the29th of December, at Clifton, near Penrith,and a skirmish ensued, in whichthe royalists were defeated. On the followingday, Charles Edward and hisfollowers entered Carlisle, which theygarrisoned with three hundred men,(who surrendered in a few days afterwards,)and proceeded towards Glasgow,where they levied a heavy contributionon the inhabitants, the greater part ofwhom were violent Anti-Jacobites.On the 17th of January, 1746, aftersome movements of minor importance,the insurgents attacked a body of veterans,under the command of Hawley,at Falkirk, over whom they achieveda victory which was at once gloriousto themselves, and disgraceful to theiropponents. They derived, however, butlittle ulterior advantage from theirsplendid success on this occasion ; theapproach of the Duke of Cumberland'sarmy compelling them, shortly afterwards,to raise the siege of Stirling castle,and retreat into the Highlands.CHARLES EDWARD STUART.A long period elapsed before anothergeneral action took place. Charles Edwardeventually fixed his head-quartersat Inverness, and the duke encamped inthe neighbourhood of Nairn. The 15thof April being his royal highness's birthday,it was supposed that his men woulddrink so freely on the occasion, thatthey might, without much difficulty,be surprised during the night. CharlesEdward determined on making the attempt:the rebels, accordingly, begantheir march towards the position occupiedby the royal army, about eight inthe evening, in two columns, the first ofwhich was led by Lord George Murray,and the second by the prince in person.On account of the darkness of the night,great confusion occurred during themarch, and the Highlanders were sowidely dispersed, that on arriving,within a mile of the English, LordGeorge saw the absolute necessity ofhalting until the straggling parties cameup. Charles Edward, however, insistedon hazarding an immediate attack,which Lord George not only opposed,but, finding the prince obstinate, hegave orders for an immediate retreat, alledgingthat it would be daylight beforethe insurgents could reach the enemy'scamp, when the king's troops mightdestroy them with ease. Charles Edwardwas dreadfully incensed, on thisoccasion, against Lord George, whomhe accused, but without the least foundation,of treachery, and publicly declared,that no one, for the future, shouldcommand his army but himself.An alarm having been given, theduke's forces pursued the insurgentswith great rapidity. On the arrival ofthe latter at Culloden, although theywere dreadfully fatigued by their marchandhad eaten only a biscuit each duringthe preceding day, Charles Edwardrashly and obstinately determined ongiving the enemy battle, in spite ofthe remonstrances of Lord George, andhis other experienced leaders, who urgedhim, but in vain, to retire to the highgrounds, beyond the waters of theNairn, where he could have refreshedhis men, and set the duke at defiance.We might," says Lord George, in oneof his private letters, "have retreatedto this secure post, even when the enemywere in sight ; and why it was not done,let them answer who were resolvedagainst a hill campaign, as they called it.What I can aver is, that myself and mostof the clans were for this operation ; andthe prince could have supported thefatigue as well as any person in thearmy. It's true there were some ofour sleek gentlemen who could nothave undergone it : so we were obligedto be undone for their ease."The rebels advanced to the attack withtheir usual impetuosity ; but the royaltroops received them with unexpectedfirmness : the artillery, according toJohnstonee, swept away whole ranks ofthem at once, and they who had chargedlike lions, soon fled in the greatest disorder.Charles Edward, who had postedhimself on an eminence behind his secondline, with two troops of cavalry forhis guard, had his face bespattered withdirt by a cannon ball, and a servantwho stood near him with a led horsewas killed. Johnstonee accuses theprince of not acting with proper spiritin this crisis of his affairs. " It was,"says our author, " a moment when heought to have displayed the courage ofa grenadier, by immediately advancingto put himself at the head of hisarmy, and commanding himself thosemanoeuvres which he wished to beexecuted. In the desperate expeditionon which he had entered, though it wasproper that he should guard againstdanger, he ought to have done so in amanner which showed that life or deathwas equally indifferent to him ; conductinghimself with valour and prudence,according to circumstances.Lord Echo also declares, that heearnestly besought the prince to chargethe enemy at the head of his left wing,which remained unbroken, and eitherachieve a victory, or fall like a man ofhonour; but that, his counsel beingdeclined, he left the prince, swearingnever to look upon his face again. Itis, however, asserted by Home, that,but for the entreaties of his friends, theprince would have advanced to rallythe Highlanders, when he saw them repulsed; and, in another account of thebattle, by an eye witness, it is stated,that such entreaties would have beenineffectual, had not Sir Thomas Sullivanseized the bridle of the prince'shorse, and turned the animal completelyround.The prince left the field, with a few ofTHE PRETENDERS.his guards and attendants, and crossedthe river Nairnee, at a ford about threemiles distant, where he dismissed most ofhis followers, and proceeded to GothsHaving taken some refreshmentand changed his dress, he set out forInvergarie, about ten o'clock the samenight, and reached that place early onthe following morning. All his attendantsnow took leave of him, exceptSullivan, O'Neal, and Burke, one ofAlexander Macleod's servants, who wasretained as a guide. From Invergariehe went on to Locharkaig, and thenceto Glenbeisdale, where he remained fortwo or three days.In the meantime, Lord GeorgeMurray had taken precautions to guardthe passes into the Highlands ; and twodays only after the defeat at Culloden,many noblemen and chieftains, withabout five thousand men, had collected,without any previous concert, at Ruth-even.Lord George sent a messenger tothe prince, to acquaint him with theseand other propitious circumstances, andinvited him to come and place himselfat the head of his adherents, who wereeager for the renewal of hostilities, andwhose numbers would doubtless, in afew days, amount to eight or ninethousand, at the least. On the 20thof April, Lord George's messenger returnedto Ruthven, as Johnstonee states,with the following " inconsiderate andheart-breaking" answer from CharlesEdward : " Let every man seek hissafety in the best way he can." Accordingto another authority, the youngPretender thanked his adherents fortheir attachment, and complimentedthem on their bravery, but, at thesame time, recommended them to thinkonly of their own preservation untila more favourable opportunity shouldoccur of exerting themselves in hisbehalf.From Glenbeisdale, the young adventurerwent to Boradale, where heembarked in a boat with eight oars, onthe 26th of April, and after havingbeen tossed about in a violent stormduring the night, landed, with great difficulty,the next morning, at Rossini,in Benbecula, one of several islandslying due west of Scotland, and which,together, are termed the Long Island.Stormy weather still continuing, CharlesEdward, and his companions, Sullivan,O'Neil, Burke, Donald Macleod, (apilot), and the boatmen, were compelledto remain for two days and nights atRossini, in a miserable hut, and withnothing to subsist on but a little oatmealand water. On the third daythey endeavoured to reach Stornaway,in the island of Lewis, another of theLong Island group, where Charles hadbeen informed he could hire a vessel tocarry him to France ; but they wereobliged to put in at Glass, whencethe pilot proceeded, in another boat,to Stornaway, and succeeded in hiringthe vessel. Macleod then sent for theprince, who immediately put to sea,but was compelled, by the boisterousstate of the weather, to land at a distantpart of the island of Lewis ; whence,setting out on foot, during a dark rainynight, he lost his way, through theignorance of his guide, and did notarrive at Stornaway until eleven o'clockthe next morning. In the meantime,the master of the ship, having heardfor whom Macleod had hired it, refusedto abide by his bargain.Charles then returned to his boat,and coasted the Long Island towardsSouth Uist, another of the group, wherehe arrived about the middle of May,after having narrowly escaped beingtaken prisoner by asloop-of-war duringhis progress. Clanronald, the proprietorof the greater part of the island, kindlyassisted him with various necessaries,of which he had become dreadfully inwant, and placed him in a house,where he remained for above a fortnight.But his condition soon afterbecame apparently desperate, and hepassed nearly the whole of the month ofJune amid perils from which it is almostmiraculous that he effected his escape.A number of vessels of war, up to fortygun ships, were lying off the LongIsland, and from fifteen hundred to twothousand men were traversing it insearch of him ; a guard was placed atevery ferry, and no one was permittedto quit it without a passport. Hishealth had become affected by the hardshipshe had undergone, and, as a climaxto his distress, it was rumoured, asJohnstonee asserts, that the commandersof the various parties who were insearch of him, had received orders fromthe Duke of Cumberland to make noprisoners, from which it was understoodCHARLES EDWARD STUART.that they were expected to kill theprince if he fell into their hands.Through the devoted attachment ofthe islanders, who informed him of everymovement of the troops, he was enabledto avoid his enemies, whose posts heoften passed and repassed during thenight, but not without extraordinaryhazard. At length he was deliveredfrom the perils which surrounded him,by Flora Macdonald, a step-daughter ofMacdonald of Armadale, in Skye, whowas senior captain of the companiesbelonging to that island, which werethen posted at South Uist. She happenedto be on a visit at the house ofher kinsman, Clanronald, when Neilcame to him, with a message fromCharles Edward. Having expressedher earnest desire to befriend the prince,O'Neil shortly afterwards introducedhim to her at a farm-house. Althoughgreatly debilitated, Charles Edward displayed,at this interview, to use his fairdeliverer's own words, a cheerfulness,magnanimity, and fortitude, remarkablygreat, and incredible to all but such asthen saw him. She was so struck withhis forlorn situation, that she at onceconsented to conduct him to Skye, inthe dress of a maid-servant Returningto Clanronald's, she procured from herstep-father a passport, in which herdisguised attendant was mentioned asaBetty Burke, an excellent spinner offlax, whom Captain Macdonald warmlyrecommended to his wife. The eveningbefore his departure, Charles Edward,in his female attire, met Miss Macdonaldand Lady Clanronald on the sea-shore :while they were at supper, a messengercame to acquaint the latter that GeneralCampbell and Captain Ferguson, of thenavy, had arrived, with a number ofsoldiers and marines, in quest of theyoung adventurer, at Clanronald's.Four armed cutters soon after appearedin sight, from the crews of whichCharles Edward concealed himself asthey passed, by retiring behind somerocks near the shore. The next morninghe left South Uist in a six-oaredboat, with Miss Macdonald and a manservant.On approaching Waternish,in Skye, a party of militia levelled theirguns at the boat, but the fugitives proceededon their course, and landed insafety near Mugstot, the seat of SirAlexander Macdonald. Flora wentforward to prepare for the young Chevalier'sreception, but as there were severalof the king's officers in the house, hewalked on to the residence of Sir Alexander'sfactor, Macdonald of Kings-burgh,where he passed the night.On the following morning, while Florawas putting on his cap, Pittsburgh'swife desired her, in Gaelic, to ask for alock of his hair : Flora declined, and saidto Mrs. Macdonald, " Why cannot youask him yourself?" The prince theninquired what they were talking about,and on being told what had passed, heplaced his head in Flora's lap, and desiredher to cut off a lock, which sheimmediately did, and gave one half ofit to Mrs. Macdonald. After breakfast,he went out with Kingsburgh to aneighbouring hill, where he exchangedhis female apparel for a Highland dress.With the assistance of a guide, whomKingsburgh had provided, he soonreached Port-Ree, at which placeFlora Macdonald, who had travelledby another road, in order to preventdiscovery, again met, and finally partedfrom him.From Port-Ree, he went in a boat,with two of Macleod's sons, to the littleisland of Ramsay ; which, having beenconcerned in the rebellion, had recentlybeen laid waste by a party of royalists.Alehouses were all burn sand the cattledestroyed, so that Charles Edward andthe two young Macleodss were compelledto live in a townhouse, and to subsistupon such scanty fare that the princesoon determined on returning to Skye.On his way back, the weather becameso boisterous, that the crew of the boatwished to put about, but the prince encouragedthem to proceed by exclaiming,Caesar veris ! Providence, my boys,that has carried me through so manydangers, will no doubt preserve me foranobler end than this !" He then cheerfullysang them a Highland song, andtook his turn in lading the water out ofthe boat.Having landed in safety, he took leaveof the two Macleodss ; to the youngerof whom he presented a case, containinga silver spoon, knife, and fork,which he desired him to keep untilthey met again. He then went off withCaptain Macleod, a relative of theMacleodss of Ramsay, to whom, afterthey had walked a mile together,THE PRETEND Hers.without speaking, he said, " I commitmyself entirely to your care : take meto Mackinnon's bounds, in Skye." Thither,they accordingly proceeded ; theprince, while it was daylight, carryinga small bundle, in order to pass for theservant of his companion. After travellingall night, they arrived at theplace of their destination, and the laird,with a Captain Mackinnon, embarkedwith the prince, (who now dismissedMacleod,) in a sailing boat, for Loch-nevis,a lake in the main land, wherethey put him ashore on the 5th of July.The royal troops in the neighbourhood,soon obtained information ofCharles Edward's landing, and formeda line of posts, so as, if possible, to preventhis escape. Having made his wayto Boradale, the prince sent for Macdonaldof Glenaladale, who immediatelycame to him with another of his adherentsof the same name, who hadformerly been in the French service.After some consultation, it was determinedthat, with the help of the twoMacdonaldss, he should endeavour toget through the line of posts that hadbeen established for his detention : butthis was a fearful undertaking, for sentinelswere placed at such short distancesfrom each other, that it was impossiblein the day time to evade them,and during the night, fires were lightedat every post. A couple of men constantlypatrolled between every two ofthese fires, each moving regularly fromone to the other, so that they met andcrossed each other in their progress ;and it consequently happened that atoneperiod of their transit, they weremarching back to back, towards thetwo fires, leaving the dark space betweenthem altogether unguarded. Betweentwo of these posts a rivulet had worna channel in the rock ; up which, inthe dead of night, Charles Edward andthe two Macdonaldss crept ; then, watchingfor the moment when the sentinelscrossed each other, they passed on, andsafely accomplished their escape.Macdonald of Glenaladale now proposedto conduct the prince towardsthe Ross-shire Highlands, where theMckenzie, having taken no part inthe rebellion, had not yet been visitedby the king's troops. Thither they accordinglyproceeded, on foot; and afterhaving suffered great privations, atlength reached the braes of Entail,inhabited by a barbarous clan of theMadras, of whom necessity enforcedthem to seek assistance. At the houseof Christopher Macraw, under the pleathat they were ready to perish, theprince and his companions obtainedfood and shelter ; for which, however,they paid most liberally. It appears thatMacraw, in the course of conversation,exclaimed against the Highlanders whohad taken up arms for the Stuartss ; andsaid, that those who knew where tolay their hands on the prince, wouldact wisely in delivering him up, andtaking the 30,000 offered by governmentfor his capture.During the night, another Macdonald,who had served in the rebelarmy, arrived at Macraw's, and instantlyrecognizing the prince, warnedGlenaladale to beware of their host.He also stated, on being apprized oftheir intention to seek refuge in theRoss-shire Highlands, that the royaltroops were then actually in the countryof the Mckenzie, and advised theprince to make the best of his waytowards Dorado, in the most remotepart of which there were seven men,living together, the greater part ofwhom had fought in his behalf; andwho, he was sure, would never betrayhim. This counsel being adopted,Charles Edward and his two friendsproceeded, under the guidance of thethird Macdonald, towards Dorado. Onarriving within a short distance of thecave, where the seven men alluded tohad taken up their abode, Glenala-dale and Macdonald the guide wentforward, and found six of the sevendining on a sheep which they hadrecently killed. After some conversation,he brought in the prince, whomhe introduced to them as young Clan-ronald,than whom they had previouslydeclared, that nobody could be morewelcome, for they would obtain foodfor him at the sword's point But nosooner did they behold Charles Edwardthan they recognised, and fell ontheir knees before him.With these men the prince remainedfor above five weeks ; during whichperiod they procured him a welcomesupply of linen, &c. by waylaying someofficers' servants, and despoiling themof their masters' portmanteaus. AboutCHARLES EDWARD STUART.this time, a most heroic act of self-devotion,with a view to preserve CharlesEdward's life, was performed by frederickMackenzie, one of his adherents,and to whom he was supposed to bearsome slight resemblance. While reposingin a hut, which he had enteredwith some of his followers, includingMackenzie, for shelter, the prince wassuddenly roused to be told that no possibilityexisted of saving himself, thehut being completely surrounded byroyal troops. " Then we must die likebrave men, with swords in our hands,"exclaimed Charles Edward. " No, myprince," replied Mackenzie, " a resourcestill remains : I will take yourname, and face one of the approachingparties. I know what my fate will be ;but while I keep our adversaries employed,your royal highness may findmeans to escape." He then dartedforth, sword in hand, towards the royaltroops ; and, upon falling covered withwounds, he exclaimed, " You knownot what you have done : I am yourprince !" The soldiers cut off his head,and conveyed it to the Duke of Cumberland,who immediately carried it,packed in his post chaise, to London ;where several persons deposed that itsfeatures were, to all appearance, identicalwith those of the young Pretender.The royal troops in Scotland, consequently,became less vigilant ; andCharles Edward, who had contrivedto escape from the hut, while hisenemies were occupied with poor Mac-kenzie,was, for some time afterwards,in much less danger than he had previouslybeen.But his perils were not yet ended.Cameron of Clunes, having appointedto meet him, on a certain day, near thehead of Glencoich, where Cameron hada little hut for his own security, CharlesEdward and his companions proceeded,on a very stormy night, along the topsof the mountains, to Drumnadial,where, after much difficulty, he hadhis promised interview with Cameron,with whose assistance he hoped toreach his two adherents, Lochiel andCluny. Cameron, however, informedhim, that it would not be safe for himto proceed further at that time ; andCharles Edward, therefore, remainedupon the mountain until Macdonald ofLochgary, and Dr. Cameron (Lochiel'sbrother), were sent by Lochiel andCluny in quest of him. Under theguidance of Cameron of Clunes, theysoon reached the prince's hiding-place.Perceiving them approach, and beingignorant as to whether they werefriends or foes, his two companions,Cameron's son, and Peter Grant, oneof the men of the cave, proposed animmediate flight ; to which CharlesEdward strongly objected, saying thatthey should certainly be overtaken orshot ; and that the best thing they coulddo was to conceal themselves behindthe stones, and fire upon their enemiesas the latter advanced. Fortunately,however, they very soon recognizedCameron of Clunes, and a friendlyparley ensued.It was then agreed that Dr. Cameronshould go among his brother's people,in Lochaber, to procure intelligence,while Macdonald watched the motionsof the troops, from the east end ofLoch-hoche. One morning, duringtheir absence, after having passed theprevious night on the mountain, theprince beheld a party of troops demolishinghis hut in the vale, andcarefully searching the adjacent wood.The adventurer and his friends nowdeemed it prudent to retreat to agreater distance : they accordingly proceededto a neighbouring hill, on whichthey passed the whole day withoutfood. In the evening they set forwardtowards a certain place in the mountains,where Cameron of Clunes, hadpromised to meet them with provisions ;but the journey was so toilsome, thatCharles Edward became exhausted beforethey reached the appointed spot,to which his faithful companions wereconsequently obliged to support him.At length, Dr. Cameron and Macdonaldof Lochgary, returned withintelligence that the passes were lessstrictly guarded than they had beenfor some time past ; and it was resolvedthat Charles Edward should attempt tocross Locharkaig, and proceed to thehiding-place of Cluny and Lochiel.After some romantic adventures, hereached Corineuir on the 19th of August,and soon afterwards met with the twochiefs, who conducted him to a remotepart of the mountain Beholder, wherehe remained until the 13th of September,when Cameron of Clunes broughtTHE PRETENDERS.him the welcome intelligence that twoFrench frigates had arrived off thecoast to convey him to France. CharlesEdward and his friends immediatelyset out for Boradale, which they didnot reach until the 29th, as they couldtravel only by night. The next dayhe embarked, with about a hundred ofhis adherents, to whom he had sentnotice of his intended departure, and,after a nine days' voyage, landed nearMorlaix, in Brittany.On Charles Edward's arrival at Fontainebleau,he was received with greatcordiality by the King of France, whomade him a present of eight hundredthousand livres, and assigned him aresidence in the palace of St. Germaine.But his importunities and imprudencesoon gave such offence to the court ofVersailles, that, it is said, he was confinedfor some time at the castle ofVincennes; and, on the conclusion ofthe treaty of Aix-la-chapelle, he wascompelled to quit France. He thenjoined his father in Italy.According to some accounts, heventured to visit England so early as1747 ; but the fact is doubtful. It isquite clear, however, that he appearedin London at the latter end of 1750.Dr. King, of Oxford, who was in theinterest of the Stuartss, being in themetropolis during the month of Septemberin that year, was sent for by LadyPrimrose, who introduced him to theyoung Chevalier in her dressing-room.His friends abroad had, it appears,formed a scheme, which Charles Edwardsoon found to be impracticable,and he, consequently, remained inLondon only five days. Dr. Kingstates that he never heard the youngChevalier express any generous sentiments,or speak with sorrow of thosewho had perished in his cause. Thedoctor adds some other interesting particularsrelative to the subject of ournotice, of which the following is anabridgment. The prince was indifferentas to religion, being a catholic withthe catholics ; and, in externals at least,so much a protestant, when amongprotestants, as to carry an English commonprayer-hook in his pocket. He lostmany of his adherents by retaining, inspite of their representations, a Scotchmistress, of the name of Walkenshaw ;who, as her sister happened to be inthe service of the reigning family, wassupposed to be employed as a spy bythe British court, to betray his secretschemes and correspondence, withwhich it was known he had the follyto entrust her. He peremptorily refusedto part with her even for a limitedperiod. " I have no particular regard,"said he, " for the female in question ;but I will not submit to receive directionsfor my private conduct fromany one."Disgusted by his refusal to complywith their reasonable wishes on thissubject, his adherents ceased to troublethemselves about him, and graduallybecame reconciled to the existing government.It appears, however, thathe opened a correspondence with someof them in 1755, when, in consequenceof some disputes between the twocourts, France seems to have meditatedan invasion of England; andCharles, it is said, even proceeded toNancy, for the purpose of holding aconference with Count Tally on thesubject ; but the existing differencesbeing soon accommodated, the designof invasion was abandoned, and CharlesEdward returned to Rome.He visited England at least onceafter this period. Earl Marischal toldDavid Hume, that the prince actuallywitnessed the coronation of George theThird ; and a gentleman, to whom hisperson was known, is said to have thusaddressed him, on that occasion, inWestminster-hall : " Your royal highnessis the last of all mortals whom Iexpected to have seen on this occasion."It was curiosity," replied Charles,that brought me here ; but I assureyou, that the person who is the objectof all this pomp and magnificence is theman I envy the least."On the death of his father he assumedthe title of king; but he failed to procurethat recognition from the papaland catholic courts with which thedeceased prince had been honoured.The French and Spanish governments,however, were anxious, for politicalpurposes, that his race should not becomeextinct. They accordingly temptedhim, by the offer of a large pension,to marry the young Princess LouisaMaximilian, of StolbergGcedern,(bornat Mons, in 1752,) who had previouslybeen a canoness. About this period heCHARLES EDWARD STUART.resumed the title of Count of Albanyand went to reside at Florence.His wife, by whom he had no children,according to Dutens, whose narrativewe shall abridge, soon became disgustedwith his conduct. He often beather ; and at length, driven to extremitiesby many revolting scenes, she determinedto free herself from his tyranny.But to escape was difficult, for he rarelypermitted her to quit his presence, andwhen compelled to lose sight of her, heinvariably locked her up. A schemefor procuring her freedom, was, however,eventually devised by Alfieri, thepoet, who had long been attached toher, which was executed by two of herfriends, the SignOrOrlandini and his wife.The latter, who, as well as her husbandand Alfieri, were intimate with CharlesEdward, persuaded him one morningto take her and the princess to see theworks of the nuns in a neighbouringconvent. Orlandini met them, apparentlyby accident, and escorted themup a flight of steps to the entrance door,which, by a preconceived arrangement,they were permitted immediately toenter. Orlandini then returned to meetCharles Edward, who came panting upthe steps after his wife. " These nuns,said the signor, " are very unmannerly :they shut the door in my face, andwould not let me enter with the ladies."Oh ! I will soon make them open it,"replied the prince. But he was mistaken.On reaching the door, heknocked for a long time without effect.At length the abbess came to the grate,and told him that his wife had chosenthat place for her asylum, and couldnot be disturbed. His rage at this intimationwas boundless : but his clamourswere of no avail, and he wassoon compelled to withdraw. Such is,in substance, the statement of Dutens.The princess afterwards sought anasylum in the house of her brother-in-law,Cardinal York, at Rome, whereshe resided for some time under theprotection of the pope. Alfieri followedher, and contrived to obtain the cardinal'spermission to visit her wheneverhe pleased : which he subsequently did,notwithstanding the frequent remonstrancesforwarded to the cardinal byhis brother on the subject. CharlesEdward now became addicted to excessivedrinking; and suffered himselfgradually to fall into the lowest state ofgross sensuality. His death took placeat Rome, on the 31st of January, 1788,in the sixty-eighth year of his age.To the Duchess of Albany, his naturaldaughter by some Scotch lady, (probablythe female named Walkenshaw,to whom allusion has already beenmade,) Charles bequeathed all his propertyin the French funds, which issaid to have been considerable. Hiswidow left Rome soon after his death,and proceeded to Paris, accompaniedby Alfieri ; who, it is said, eventuallybecame her husband. Many years afterhis death, she is stated to have secretlymarried an historical painter, namedFabre : but the fact is doubtful. Fabrewas, however, constituted her generallegatee, and in that capacity enteredinto possession of her effects, when shedied. Her decease occurred on the 29thof January, 1824.In the early part of his manhood,Charles Edward displayed a lofty spiritof enterprise, combined with a considerableshare of talent, courage, andperseverance. Few men have passedthrough greater perils; to avoid themas he did, he must have been possessedof an unusual degree of coolness, energy,and skill. Although affable in manners,in disposition he was arbitrary. Evidentlytainted with some of the leavenof his race, the misfortunes of his friendsdid not excite his pity, nor their devotionhis gratitude. In exile, he wasupon some occasions haughty ; while aproscribed wanderer in the dominions ofhis ancestors, self-willed ; and had it beenhis fortune to have become a monarch,he would, in all probability, have evincedan inclination to be despotic. In religionhe was rather a libertine than abigot; in morals lax and unprincipledas any of his royal contemporaries. Consideringhis disappointments, his age,and his troubles, the vices of his decliningyears have been dwelt upon, perhaps,with uncharitable severity. When enfeebledby years, depressed by calamity,and irritated by unsuccessful political intrigues,with his constitution impaired,his temper destroyed, and his intellectperhaps deteriorated, by what he hadundergone, the allurement of a pension,tempted him, in his poverty, totake a wife above thirty years youngerthan himself. This apparently gay andTHE PRETENDERS.*eddy young woman, doubtless, exasperatedhis temper and increased hismisery. If he beat her, as Dutens asserts,it is impossible to excuse him ;but that she deserved to be locked up,appears tolerably clear from her wildand indecorous deportment. It is possiblethat Charles Edward loved her :it is more than probable, that, suspectingthe intentions of Alfieri, he was jealousof his honour, and determined to affordthe princess no opportunity to disgracehim. Deprived of his wife, as heeventually was, by her admirer and hisaccomplices, and thwarted by his onlybrother, who suffered the poet to havefree intercourse with the princess whileunder his roof, his weakness, in seekingsolace from the bottle, although deplorable,is far from surprising. Theutter years of his life certainly displayeda violent contrast to the earlyand brilliant part of his career ; but, onthe whole, he appears to have totteredto his grave, as much deserving of pityas contempt.HENRY STUART, CARDINAL YORK.THE Pretender's second son, HenryBenedict Maria Clement, last (in thedirect line) of the house of Stuart, wasborn on the 26th of March, 1725, atRome, where he resided during nearlythe whole of his protracted life. In thememorable year, 1745, he went toFrance, for the purpose of joining sometroops which had been assembled atDunkirk, with a view to support hisbrother's operations in this country ; buton receiving intelligence of the decisivebattle of Culloden, he returned toRome, where, much to the displeasureof his brother, and the friends of theirfamily, he took holy orders. In 1747,he was made a cardinal, by Benedictthe Fourteenth, and afterwards becameBishop of Frascati, and chancellor ofthe church of St Peter. On his elevationto the purple, he assumed thename of Cardinal York, and, from thatperiod, devoted himself assiduously tothe duties of his sacred office. At hisbrother's decease, he caused medals tobe struck, bearing his own portrait,with the inscription, " Henries nonesAnglia Rex," on the obverse ; and acity, with the words, " Gratia Dei,sed non voluntary hominem," on thereverse.The cardinal had two rich livings inFrance, and a considerable pension fromthe court of Spain, all which he lost inthe troubles consequent on the Frenchrevolution. In 1796, in order to assistPius the Sixth in making up the sumlevied on him by Buonaparte, the cardinaldisposed of a matchless ruby, whichwas valued at 50,000, and the rest ofhis family jewels. He thus deprivedhimself of the means of independentsubsistence, and was reduced to greatdistress on the expulsion of Pius fromRome. He continued, however, toreside at his villa, near that city, till1798, when the French forced him toabandon the remnant of his property,plundering his valuable collection of antiquities,manuscripts, &c., to enrich thelibraries and museums of Paris; and hearrived at Venice, in the winter of thatyear, both infirm and destitute. Hisfriends, soon afterwards, it is said, causeda statement of his pitiable case to belaid before George the Third, wholiberally granted the amiable but unfortunatecardinal a pension of .4,000per annum.It appears that he had some legal,though antiquated, pecuniary claims onthis country : a jointure of 50,000 hadbeen settled, by act of parliament, onMary of Este, when that princess wasunited to his grandfather ; and, duringthe negotiations at Ryswick, it wasstrongly contended by the French diplomatists,on her behalf, that James theSecond, having been deprived, by theBritish legislature, of all his rights asamonarch, was, therefore, dead in law ;and that she had consequently becomeas much entitled to her dowry, as if hehad naturally ceased to exist. TheEnglish negotiators considered this apoint too delicate for their settlementand referred it to the personal considerationof William the Third. MarshaBoufflers, accordingly, had an interviewwith that monarch on the subjectVISCOUNT Censure.William did not deny the justice of theclaim ; but on the marshal's expressinga wish that the concession of the jointuremight be confirmed by at least asecret article of the treaty, the kingsaid, " What, marshal, will .not my wordsatisfy you !" Boufflers could only bowto this appeal, and departed in the persuasionthat he had obtained sufficientsecurity.On the first demand of payment,however, William insisted that the concessionhad been conditional ; but, althoughBoufflers positively denied thatsuch was the fact, no further applicationappears to have been made for themoney until 1786, when the young Pretenderempowered his natural daughterto take measures for its recovery, andLouis the Sixteenth was solicited to urgethe liquidation of the claim, throughhis ambassador at London, but in vain ;C'est une famille malheureuse," saidhe, " dont je ne veux plus entendreparler." Some efforts were subsequentlymade to obtain Pitt's sanction to a memorialon the subject being laid beforeGeorge the Third ; the minister, however,declined to sanction or support it,and the pension to Cardinal York wasgranted without any reference to hisgrandmother's undischarged jointure.In 1801 he returned to Rome, and atthe time of his death, which took placein 1807, he was dean of the sacred college,of which he had been one of themost virtuous, liberal, presuming,and disinterested members, for upwardsof sixty years. He has been slightlyreproached for having harboured thewife of his brother, when that princessran away from her husband, and forhaving permitted her, while under hisroof, in spite of the remonstrances ofCharles Edward, to receive visits fromher admirer, Alfieri : but it appears probablethat he was the dupe of his sister-in-lawand the poet, and acted in theaffair entirely according to the dictatesof his conscience.WILLIAM GORDON, VISCOUNT Censure.JL HIS unfortunate nobleman was therepresentative of one of the most ancientand noble families in Scotland,being descended from the famousAdam de Gordon, who was killedat the battle of Helicon Hill, in1333. He was born in 1643, marriedearly, had two sons by his lady, andwas enjoying all the comforts whicheasy circumstances, and the warm attachmentof relatives, friends, andcountrymen could bestow, when hisJacobite connexions tempted him tojoin the Pretender's adherents, at Mof-fate, in Annandale, on the 12th of October,1715. Patten describes him ashaving been a grave, full-aged gentleman,of great experience in politics,but of little or none in military affairs.He fell into the hands of the royaltroops at Preston, and being hurried toLondon, was forthwith impeached, andhaving pleaded guilty, condemned tosuffer death. Great exertions weremade to obtain his pardon, but in vain ;and he was beheaded on Tower hill,February the 24th, 1715-16.Kenmure displayed great calmnessand resolution on the scaffold, towhich he was accompanied by his son,a few friends, and two clergymen ofthe church of England. " I had solittle thoughts," said he, "of sufferingso soon, that I did not provide myselfwith a suit of black, that I might havedied with more decency; for which Iam very sorry." He repented ofhaving pleaded guilty, and prayedaudibly for the Pretender, as KingJames the Third. After placing hishead upon the block, he raised it again,gave the executioner some money, andsaid, " I shall make no sign, but whenI lay my head down you may do yourwork as you shall see good." Havingpassed a few moments in fervent devotion,he finally prepared for the fatalweapon, and his head was severedfrom his body at two blows of the axe.Smollett says that Lord Kenmurewas a virtuous nobleman, calm, sensible,and resigned ; a devout protestant,and a benevolent man ; the shedding ofwhose blood added no stability to thenew government, and exposed it to theimputation of vindictiveness and cruelty.THE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.WILLIAM MURRAY, LORD NAIRN.THIS favourite of the Jacobite historianswas born in 1657. He distinguishedhimself at an early age, inseveral naval actions with the Dutch,against whom he served as a volunteer.While yet a minor, he married theheiress of Nairn ; and in 1683, whenshe succeeded to her father's dignities,he assumed the title of Lord Nairn,according to the custom of Scotland.The Earl of Mar having raised thePretender's standard, in 1715, LordNairn was summoned, as a suspectedJacobite, to appear and surrender himselfat Edinburgh, under pain of beingdeclared a traitor. He, however, proceededat once to arm a number of hisfollowers, at whose head he marchedto join the Earl of Mar, in spite of themelancholy forebodings of his wife, towhom, on departing for the field, hesaid, " I hope shortly to see you acountess."After having distinguished himselfby several acts of gallantry, as a soldier,Lord Nairn, at length, had the misfortuneto be taken prisoner. On beingimpeached, he pleaded guilty, at. theurgent entreaty of his friends, who entertainedstrong hopes of obtaining hispardon. Having received sentence ofdeath, on the 9th of February, 1716, heimmediately afterwards, sent a petitionfor mercy to the king, which, however,was not honoured with the leastnotice. On the 14th, Lady Nairn, bya stratagem, procured an interviewwith his majesty, and earnestly imploredhim to save her 'husband's life;but the king gave her a rough andpositive refusal. At the intercession,however, of some influential Englishpeers, Lord Nairn was respited untilthe 7th of March, and ultimately obtainedhis liberty. It is said that henever after ceased to regret what hedeemed his disgraceful meanness, insuing for and accepting the clemencyof a prince, whom he considered anusurper. He died in 1725.JAMES BUTLER, DUKE OF ORMOND.JAMES, the son of Thomas, Earlof Ossory, and grandson of James, thetwelfth Earl and first Duke of Ormond,was born on the 29th of April,1665. He succeeded to the dukedomon the death of his grandfather, in1688. He was actively concerned inbringing about the revolution ; andfought, with great gallantry, at thebattle of the Boyne. He subsequentlyobtained the command of a body oftroops, destined to secure the quiet ofDublin ; and, during the campaign of1693, he served, as one of the king'said-de-camps, at the battle of Landed,where he was severely wounded. Hehad now become a great favourite withWilliam the Third, whose confidencehe continued to enjoy during the remainderof that monarch's life.On the accession of Queen Anne,he lost none of his influence at court :in 1702, he was appointed, jointly withAdmiral Rooke, to the command ofthe forces, sent out against Cadizz andVigo. Notwithstanding the reluctancewith which the admiral acted in thisexpedition, and his repeated declarationsthat it would end disastrously,and although he would not cordiallyco-operate with the duke, the armamentwas so decidedly fortunate, that,on its return, the queen, attended byOrmond, as chief staff officer, went ingreat state to St. Paul's cathedral, toreturn solemn thanks for the successwith which her arms had been crowned ;and, on the following day, the duke receivedthe thanks of both houses ofparliament for his services. He soonafterwards called for a public inquiryinto the conduct of Rooke ; who, as heDUKE OF ORMOND.asserted, had obviously endeavoured torender the expedition unsuccessful. Inconsequence,however, of the admiral'sinfluence, the duke failed to procurethe investigation he sought.By this time he had become the idolof the public, in whose applause heappeared to take a very undignifieddelight He had soon to experiencethe fickleness of those, to whose approbationhe attached so much importance.Being appointed lord-lieutenantof Ireland, in 1703, and havingadopted the views of his predecessor,his measures soon rendered him generallyunpopular. The Irish parliament,with which he was on very bad terms,severely annoyed him, by ordering aninspection of the public accounts: " for,"says Burnet, " though he was generous,and above all sordid practices himself,yet, being a man of pleasure, he wasmuch in the power of those who actedunder him, and whose integrity was notso clear."In 1705, he is said to have fomentedthe divisions between the protestantsand catholics, and to have renderedhimself deservedly obnoxious to both.During the latter part of his vicegerency,which continued until 1711, he appearsto have not only favoured the highchurch party, but to have laid himselfopen to a suspicion of encouraging theadherents of James Frederick. It is,however, altogether uncertain whether,at this period, he had so far abandonedhis Whig principles, as to be zealouslyinclined towards the exiled prince, oraimed at acquiring increase of favourwith the queen, by affording some countenancetowards the avowed friends ofher brother, whose pretensions to succeedher, she was apparently disposedto support.At the termination of his vicegerency,in which, notwithstanding the generalobnoxious character of his measures,he had displayed some redeeming goodqualities, that rendered him occasionally,or rather, locally popular, hejoined in the parliamentary clamouragainst the conduct of the Duke ofMarlborough ; who, he declared, hadevidently prolonged the war, to gratifyhis own sordid inclinations. Ormondwas soon afterwards appointed com-mander-in-chief of all the forces inGreat Britain; and, in April, 1712, hewas sent out to succeed the hero ofBlenheim, as captain-general of thearmy in Flanders.Although he had received positiveorders from the queen not to hazarda battle, he assured the Dutch authorities,that it was his intention to prosecutethe war with all the vigour inhis power ; but, on a favourable opportunityto attack the enemy occurring,he not only refused to march towardsthem, but declared that he wouldabandon the allies, unless they consentedto a cessation of arms. Thisunexpected and hypocritical conductwhile it greatly incensed the confederates,proved highly agreeable toQueen Anne ; by whom, on his returnto England, the duke was received inavery flattering manner.He continued to be a great favouritewith the multitude, and, about thisperiod, increased the sphere of his popularity,by zealously encouraging literatureand the arts. In June, 1713,he was appointed governor of Dovercastle, and warden of the cinque ports ;and, in addition to these valuable sinecures,he obtained a grant of 5000per annum, for fifteen years, out of theIrish revenue.The more auspicious part of theduke's career, terminated on the deathof Queen Anne. The new monarchrefused to admit him to the privychamber, and dismissed him from hispost as captain-general of the forces ;but a pitiful attempt was subsequentlymade, to allay his resentment, by appointinghim a member of the Irishprivy council, and giving him an invitationto make his appearance atcourt. He was still the darling of themob. On his birth-day, in 1715, thestreets of the metropolis were throngedby large bodies of his admirers, whoseverely assaulted all such as refusedto join in their shouts of " Ormondfor ever!" On the 28th of May, inthe same year, riots of a more alarmingcharacter took place ; the populace,on this occasion, mixing religion withpolitics, vociferated " High church andOrmond !" It was supposed that thesedisorderly acts were secretly encouragedby the duke ; threats of ah impeachmentwere, consequently, heldout to him by ministers : but, blind tothe probable consequences of his folly,THE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.he continued to render himself offensiveto government, until, at length,the menaces which he had despised,were actually carried into effect.The turbulence of his spirit, and hisgreediness for applause, led him tocommit a number of absurdities, forwhich, the moderate portion of hisfriends in vain endeavoured to excusehim. He displayed considerable pleasurein hearing his name shouted bythe mob : he became generous to profusion,in order to keep up his popularityamong the lower classes ; he heldlevees on stated days, at which hereceived his more distinguished partisans,with princely ostentation; and attemptedto justify his conduct, in apamphlet which was remarkable atonce for the boldness of its sentiments,and the pomposity of its language.About the middle of June, the followingadvertisement was artfully published,and without the least foundation,as it is suspected, for the purposeof exciting the feelings of the populacein his favour: " On Tuesday, the 7thinstant, her grace, the Duchess ofOrmond, on her return from Richmond,was stopped, in her coach, by threepersons in disguise, well-armed andmounted, who asked if the duke wasin the coach, and seemed to have adesign on his life ; and it has beenobserved, that many armed personslurk about in the Richmond road, bothday and night, no doubt with a viewto assassinate him."On the 21st of June, after a debateof nine hours' duration, in which severalof his friends spoke warmly in hisfavour, he was impeached by a majorityof forty-seven. He might stillhave been treated with more lenity,perhaps, than he merited, had hisconduct become moderate ; but hethought proper to persevere in his obnoxiouscourse, and even after arrangementshad been made for his obtaininga private interview with the king, fromwhom he had good reason to expecta kind reception, he abruptly quittedthe kingdom, and entered into theservice of the Pretender.On the 5th of August, articles of impeachmentwere exhibited against him,for having treacherously neglected tofight the enemies of England, whilehe was captain-general of the forces inFlanders, &c. Being subsequently attaintedof high treason, his name waserased from the list of peers, an inventorywas taken of his personal estate,and his achievement, as a knight of theGarter, was removed from St. George'schapel, at Windsor. On the 12th ofNovember, in the same year, the Irishparliament not only attainted him, butoffered a reward of 10,000 for hishead.It appears that he felt desirous ofpersonally engaging in the rebellionof 1715: having actually embarked forEngland, on receiving intelligence ofthe insurrection, and hovered, for severaldays, about the coast ; but withoutbeing able to effect a landing. In1716-17, he made an unsuccessful attemptto induce the King of Sweden,who had affected great considerationfor the Pretender, to invade Englandwith an army of Swedes. In 1718-19,the Spanish government determinedon making an attempt to place JamesFrederick on the British throne : anarmament, consisting of ten sail of theline, and numerous transports, with sixthousand regular troops, and twelvethousand stand of arms for the Pretender'sEnglish and Scotch adherents,was accordingly fitted out at Cadizz, andplaced under the Duke of Ormond'scommand. Rumours of the intendedinvasion having reached this country,the house of commons addressed theking to offer a reward of 5,000 for theduke's apprehension. The Jacobiteseagerly prepared for his landing; andgreat alarm appears to have prevailedamong the more loyal classes of hismajesty's subjects. But the expedition,which had occasioned such sanguinehopes on the one hand, and such contemptiblefears on the other, was altogetherunsuccessful. Many of thetransports drifted ashore, and went topieces ; most of the troops were renderedunserviceable ; and the duke,after having narrowly escaped shipwreck,was compelled to return toCadizz, without having seen an enemy,but utterly discomfited by the elements.In 1722, a Jacobite, named Layer,was executed for having, partly, it issaid, at the instigation of Ormond, attemptedto enlist a body of recruits forthe service of the Pretender, in Essex.LOUD LOVAT.In 1726, the duke appears to havemade some fruitless efforts to engage theSpanish government in a new projectfor the invasion of this country. Fromthis period, he gradually dwindled inimportance, and spent the remainderof his life, chiefly at Avignon, in melancholyindolence ; wholly subsistingon a pension, from Spain, of 2,000pistoles per annum. His death tookplace on the 16th of November, in thememorable year 1745.The duke married at rather an earlyperiod of his public career : but he leftno children by his wife, for whom,although they lived upon tolerableterms, he appears to have entertainedbut very little affection. He was principallyindebted for that importance,which he so long enjoyed, to his rankand connexions. His abilities weregood, but not splendid ; his morals inprivate life, and his principles as apublic character, were equally lax ; hisjudgment was evidently weak, and hisvanity contemptible. He was neithergreat in his glory, nor grand in hisfall." He has been praised for hisfidelity to the Pretender ; but it doesnot appear that he ever received anytemptation to be treacherous to JamesFrederick, or that he could have betteredhimself by abandoning the Jacobitecause.SIMON ERASER, LORD LOVAT.SlMON, the eldest son of ThomasFraser, of Beaufort, was born in 1668.While yet a mere boy, he acquired adisgraceful notoriety by his vices ; andbecame, in his manhood, one of themost dissolute and daring ruffians ofthe age in which he lived. His relative,Hugh, the tenth Lord Lovat,dying without male issue, in 1692,Simon, who then held a commission inLord Tullibardine's regiment, immediatelyentered into a contest for thesuccession, with Amelia, the deceasednobleman's eldest daughter. In orderto devote himself wholly to the prosecutionof his claim, he resigned hismilitary appointment ; but feeling impatientat the tardy progress of thelegal measures which he had instituted,and fearing that they might not beultimately successful, he determinedon achieving his object, by a compulsorymarriage with his rival claimant.Having waylaid Lord Saltoun andhis son, the latter of whom was aboutto be united to the heiress of Lovat,he erected a gibbet, and induced them,by threats of instant death, in case oftheir refusal, solemnly to renounce theintended alliance. He next endeavouredto obtain possession of LadyAmelia; but being foiled in the attempt,he seized the Dowager LadyLovat in her own house, and, againsther will, caused a priest to read themarriage ceremony between them inher presence. He then cut open herstays with his dirk ; his confederatestore off her clothes; and, with theirassistance, he forced her to his bed.Fearing that the consequences ofthis daring outrage might be fatal tohimself, its abandoned and execrableperpetrator thought proper to quit thecountry. While abroad, proceedingswere instituted against him, not onlyfor rape, but for treason, in havingviolated the laws at the head of anarmed retinue ; and he was outlawedfor not appearing. King William pardonedhim for the treason, but hisconviction for rape still remaining inforce,he could not with safety returnto Scotland. He therefore continuedto reside for some time on the continent;but having at length ingratiatedhimself with the Pretender, andprevailed on Louis the Fourteenthto advance him some money, for theavowed purpose of raising a Jacobiteforce in the Highlands, he ventured torevisit his native country. On his waythither, he had an interview, in London,with some of the English ministers,and being consequently suspected oftreachery, the French government, onhis return to France, immured him inthe Bastile. In order to obtain favourwith the Pretender, he had previouslybecome a Roman catholic ; and afterTHE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.having remained for some time in confinement,he at length succeeded inprocuring his liberty, by taking holyorders.Entering into a seminary of Jesuits,he secured the confidence of thoseabout him, by that hypocritical demeanourof which he was so consummatea master, and officiated in hisclerical capacity at Saint Omer, until1715; when he suddenly re-appearedin Scotland, as a furious partisan ofthe house of Hanover. For his servicesin securing Inverness from therebels, he was rewarded with the commandof a Highland company, the titleof Lovat, and, as it was generallybelieved, with a large gratuity in cash.The unhappy Dowager Lady Lovat,having died some time previously to1718, in that year he married a lady, bywhom he had several children ; and itwas hoped that his conduct would havebeen ameliorated. But his dispositionwas so utterly depraved, that he continuedto indulge in the lowest and mostrevolting propensities ; and for someyears before the insurrection of 1745,he had not only intrigued with the exiledfamily, but had become the general go-betweenof the various Jacobite partiesin the Highlands.It is related of him, that having hearda gentleman divulge a scheme for theprevention of any future rebellion, bytransporting the discontented to America,he procured a written statementof the proposition, which he forthwithtranslated into Gaelic, disseminated itamongst the Highlanders, and by assuringthem that the Duke of Cumberlandwas speedily coming to carry itinto execution, produced a feeling ofexasperation among the clans, whichproved highly favourable to the projectof Charles Edward, in 1745.His conduct had for some time pastbeen so suspicious, that when the youngPretender raised his standard in Scotland,Lord Lovat was placed underrestraint ; but he contrived to dissemblehis real intentions so effectually,that he was soon set at liberty. Thefirst use which he made of his freedom,was to join the rebel standard, with hiseldest son, and such of his retainers ashecould induce to follow him to thefield. Notwithstanding his notoriousvillany, he was received with open armsby Charles Edward, and admitted intothe most secret counsels of the Jacobitechiefs. His great age and infirmitiesprevented him from taking any activepart in the campaign ; but he exercisedan important influence on the movementsof the insurgents, whose leaderspaid considerable deference to hisopinions.Soon after the decisive battle of Culloden,he began to feel the effects of histreachery and ingratitude to the houseof Hanover : his castle was destroyed,his cattle were driven away, his landsravaged, and he found himself notonly reduced from affluence to comparativepoverty, but compelled toexert the whole of his great ingenuityto avoid a capture, which he knewwould, in all probability, lead to hisexecution.An apparently favourable opportunityat length occurring for his escapeto France, he endeavoured to makehis way to the coast, with two aid-de-campsand about sixty of his clan ; butadetachment of the Duke of Cumberland'sdragoons surprised and capturedhim. As he could neither walk, norride on horseback, the commandingofficer of the royal troops was compelledto carry him to head quarters inasort of litter resembling a cage. Onthe 15th of August, 1746, he arrivedat the Tower in an open landau, drawnby six horses; and, although lie hadpreviously displayed extraordinary indifference,it is said, that, when he camein sight of the platforms which hadbeen erected for the accommodation ofthose who were desirous of witnessingthe approaching execution of Balmerinoand Kilmarnoch, he lifted up his handsand exclaimed, " A few days, and itwill be my unhappy fate !"During his trial he evinced the mostconsummate skill and assurance ; butinspite of all his subterfuges and protestationsof innocence, he was foundguilty ; and, notwithstanding the exertionsof his friends, who endeavouredto procure a remission of his sentence,on account of his great age, and theservices which he had previously renderedthe house of Hanover, he wasexecuted on the 9th of April, 1746.His conduct, during his last hours,was so remarkably calm, firm, resigned,and decorous, that it may trulyEARL MARISCHAL.be said of him, " nothing, in his life,became him like the leaving of it."He supped heartily on the night precedinghis execution, and dressed himselffor the scaffold with peculiar care;observing that the event of the daywould be delightful to him. He tookhis breakfast with apparent nonchalanceand appetite, and conversed, duringthe repast, with the lieutenant of theTower and some of his own friends, inthe most easy and unembarrassedmanner imaginable. With some reluctance,and in order, as he said, notto appear singular, he admitted a Driestto his presence, from whom, it isstated, that he received absolution. Atthe house to which he was conductedfrom the Tower, previously to ascendingthe scaffold, he ate a morsel ofbread and drank some wine ; in helpinghimself to which, the remarkablesteadiness of his hand attracted particularnotice. He ascertained the sharpnessof the axe by passing his fingeracross its edge, jested with the executioneron his occupation, and died,says Smollett, like an old Roman, exclaiming," Dulce et decorum est propatria mori !" He was decapitated ata single blow, and his remains weredeposited in St. Peter's church, in theTower.Many" atrocious ruffians have displayedas much nerve under thegallows as Lovat exhibited at theblock ; but among those who haveequalled him in this respect, few haveexceeded him in low cunning and brutality.Basely sordid in his motives,he was alike devoid of humanity,patriotism, gratitude, and commonhonesty. That he possessed extraordinarytalents is indisputable; thathe grossly abused them scarcely admitsof a question ; and, finally, that hewas one of the most unprincipled,treacherous, and detestable charactersof his day, it is almost impossible todoubt.GEORGE KEITH, EARL MARISCHAL.THIS nobleman, the precise date ofwhose birth appears to be uncertain,was thus described by Mackay, whowrote in 1713: " Earl Marischal isrepresentative of the ancient and noblefamily of Keith, and hereditary greatmarshal of the kingdom ; he alwaysopposed the measures of King William'sreign, but waited on the queen, on heraccession to the throne, and acknowledgedher government. He is verywild, inconstant, and passionate ; doesevery thing by starts ; hath abundanceof flashy wit; and by reason of hisquality, hath good interest in the country.All courts endeavour to have himon their side, for he gives himself libertyof talking, when he is not pleased withthe government. He is a thoroughlibertine, yet sets up mightily for episcopacy; a hard drinker; a thin body;a middle stature ; ambitious of popularity; and is forty-five years old."He refused to take the oaths of allegianceon the accession of George theFirst ; and treated a citation, which, onaccount of his avowed principles, hadbeen served upon him to appear andsurrender himself at Edinburgh, withindignant contempt. Soon afterwards,he set out with a number of followersto join the Earl of Mar, in whose armyhe highly distinguished himself for talentand intrepidity. When James Fredericklanded, the Earl Marischal wasamong the first of those who met himat Fetterosse ; and on the prince's departurefrom Scotland, he was appointedto the command of a thousand horsewhich were destined to cover the retreatof the main body of the insurgentsfrom Aberdeen. While thus employed,his skill and bravery were equally conspicuous.He abandoned his arms onlywhen any further effort against theroyal forces would have been impotentand absurd, and soon afterwards succeededin making his escape to thecontinent.Meantime, being attainted as a traitor,his estates and honours became forfeited,and he sought to procure thatdistinction abroad, which he could nolonger hope to obtain in his native land.THE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.He resided successively at the courts ofFrance, Spain, Rome, and, eventually,at that of Prussia ; whence he was despatched,in 1750, as ambassador extraordinaryto the French king. Hisdiplomatic services on this occasionwere rewarded with the insignia ofthe black eagle. In 1750, he wasappointed governor of Neufchatel ;and, having procured his pardon fromGeorge the Second, he came over toEngland, in that year, for the purpose oftaking possession of his Kintore estate.After residing for a few months onlyin this country, he returned to the continent,and died at Berlin towards theclose of the year 1751. The celebratedMarshal Keith who, while yet a minor,distinguished himself for his braveryin the ranks of the insurgent army, atSheriff-muir, was a younger brother ofthis nobleman.JOHN ERSKINE, EARL OF MAR.JOHN Erskine, the eleventh Earlof Mar, was born in 1671, and afterhaving received the rudiments of educationin Scotland, passed some timeat the university of Oxford ; where,however, he did not remain longenough to obtain a degree. Previouslyto attaining his majority, he made anextensive tour on the continent, duringwhich he is supposed to have formedan intimacy with the Pretender thatultimately led to his ruin and exile.Having received intelligence of hisfather's death, while at Genoa, towardsthe close of 1691, he forthwithreturned to Scotland, where he soonacquired great popularity. To theusual influence attendant upon highbirth and large possessions, he addedthat great abilities, combined with extensiveacquirements, amenity of manners,and a most daring spirit. Theeloquence with which he supportedhis patriotic professions in the Scottishhouse of lords, rendered him thedarling of the people, while the zealwhich he affected, but, perhaps, did notfeel, for the government, procured himthe high consideration of Queen Anne.In September, 1705, he became oneof the secretaries of state. During thedebates which subsequently took placeon the union act, his conduct was sowavering, that although, perhaps, heavoided giving serious offence to anyparty, he satisfied none. He renderedhimself conspicuous at the trial ofSacheverel, evidently leaning, on thatoccasion, towards the high church politicians,by whose intrigues the nationwas then considerably agitated. In1711, he entered into a warm competitionwith the Duke of Hamiltonfor the Scotch secretaryship ; which itwas deemed prudent by governmententirely to abolish, rather than offendeither of the claimants, by conferringit on his rival ; or, rather than incenseboth, by giving it to a third person.In June, 1713, he opposed the extensionof the malt tax to Scotland, andbecame so troublesome in other respectsto his official superiors, that, with aview to appease him, they nominatedhim third secretary for Scotland, in thefollowing August.On the accession of George the First,who appears to have considered hima secret partisan of the exiled Stuartss,the earl was dismissed from his Englishsecretaryship. He had evidently foreseenhis approaching disgrace, and hadendeavoured to avert it, by sending acongratulatory letter to the king, onhis majesty's arrival, wherein he expresseda hope that the new sovereignwould not believe any maliciousrepresentations to his discredit. " Myfamily," continued the earl, " has hadthe honour, for many years, of beingfaithful and devoted servants to thecrown ; a predecessor of mine washonoured with the care of your majesty'sgrandmother, when young ; andI have letters under her hand, owningher gratitude to my house. I wasalways honoured by the late queen'sfavour, and since your happy accession,I trust I have not been wanting in myduty. You shall ever find in me asfaithful a subject as ever any kinghad," &c. &c.EARL OF MAR.Soon after his dismissal, the earl,disgusted with the new government,rashly attempted to effect the restorationof James Frederick. On the 8th ofAugust, 1715, he embarked in a collier,at Gravesend, with two servants anda few friends, for Newcastle; whencethey proceeded, in a small vessel, toElse, in Fife. On the 16th, havingassembled a small party of the disaffected,he set up the Pretender'sstandard at Kirk Michael, and causedhim to be proclaimed King of GreatBritain, by the title of James the Third.A few days afterwards, he proceededwith his party, which only consistedof sixty men, to Hogarth, where thecountry people joined him in considerablenumbers. From Hogarth, hemarched to Ducked, and thence ledhis followers, who now amounted tonearly two thousand, towards Perth,which had previously been secured forhim by Hay, a brother of the Earl ofKinnoul. At Perth, he was joined byfive hundred of the Mackintoshes, allof whom were well-armed and disciplined; and during his stay there, succeededin procuring arms for his otherfollowers, partly at the public depotsand in private houses, but principallyby the capture of a vessel laden withwarlike stores, which had been shippedfor the Earl of Sunderland's tenantsin the north, who were, by this time,making preparations to act against theinsurgent forces.The earl soon found himself at thehead of four thousand men ; and theirnumbers were so magnified by report,that the loyal part of the nation wasthrown into a state of extraordinaryalarm. On the 6th of September, heset up his standard at Brae Mar, andagain proclaimed the Pretender asking.James Murray soon afterwardsjoined him, with several French officerswho had been sent over to disciplinethe insurgents. At this period, in consequenceof the death of Louis theFourteenth, who had been long esteemedthe Pretender's best friend, aquestion arose, among the rebel chiefs,as to the expediency of abandoningtheir enterprise ; but the earl successfullyopposed the proposition. He nowassumed the title of lieutenant-generalof James the Third's forces; issued amanifesto, setting forth the grievancesof the nation, which he called upon hisfellow-subjects to redress, by restoringthe direct heir of their ancient monarchsto the throne, and sent messengersto France for the purpose ofhastening the promised arrival of JamesFrederick in Scotland.Early in September, an abortiveendeavour was made by the rebels tosurprise the garrison of Inverlochy ;and, on the 8th of the same month,Lord Drummond, with ninety pickedfollowers, all of whom were gentlemen,attempted to seize the castle of Edinburgh,by stratagem. They had previouslycorrupted a few soldiers of thegarrison, by whose assistance theywere to have scaled the walls ; but theirladders being too short for the purpose,an alarm was raised before they couldremedy the blunder, and the enterpriseconsequently failed. Notwithstandingthese disappointments, aid althoughthe Jacobite cause had received a severeblow, by the discovery, and consequentfailure, of an extensive plot inEngland, for placing James Frederickpn the throne, the Earl of Mar stillremained in Fife, where his followerscommitted such outrages, that thecountry people avoided them as muchas if they had been beasts of prey. AtLesley, a troop of the insurgents, underpretext of searching for arms, forcedthe church doors, rushed into the burialplace of the noble family of Toties,and broke open the coffins in a mostbrutal and revolting manner. Withsupporters of such a character, the earlcould not rationally expect that his enterprisewould be successful ; yet heeither felt, or affected, a full confidenceas to its results. In a letter to the Earlof Breadalbane, dated soon after Forsterhad set up the Pretender's standardin Northumberland, he says, " You askfor news, and I have some very agreeable.Yesterday the king was proclaimedat Haddington, and all goes onvery promisingly. Forster has sentme some intercepted letters; one fromPrince Hopeful (the Prince of Wales)to Argyle ; it betrays much alarm,and all England seems in commotion.Forster thinks he shall be joined bythousands, and I consider our affairshere very prosperous!"At the latter end of October, he senta commission to Forster, whom heTHE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.thereby empowered to act as generalof the English insurgents, the extentof whose assistance he appears to haveconsiderably over-rated. Early in November,having been joined by thenorthern clans, he determined to passthe Forth, and march into England ;where he expected that his appearancewould encourage numbers of Jacobitesopenly to declare themselves in favourof James Frederick.The Duke of Argyle, at the head ofthe royal forces, after suffering him topass the Forth unmolested, determinedto engage the earl near Sheriff-muir.During the whole of the 12th, the twoarmies were in sight of each other ;and early the next morning, they preparedfor a battle. The duke drew uphis troops, which consisted of twelvehundred horse, and two thousand threehundred foot, on the heights, about amile and a half to the left of Dumblaine.The earl's forces amounted to aboutnine thousand men ; not above twothousand five hundred of whom were,however, property armed or disciplined ;the remainder being a disorderly gang,having no weapons but pikes, or poles,with knives, or long nails, fastened totheir tops. With more military skillthan he could have been expected todisplay, the earl determined on takingadvantage of his superior numbers, byextending his lines, and attacking theenemy in flank. On the right of theroyal army was a boggy morass, calledSheriff-muir, which the duke deemingimpassable, had taken no precautionsto defend ; but a slight frost had hardenedit sufficiently to allow a numberof the insurgents to pass, and the dukefound himself unexpectedly in dangerof being surrounded. A judiciouschange in his position, however, enabledhim to defeat the evident objectof the rebels, whose manoeuvre doesnot appear to have been materially, ifat all, disadvantageous to the royalists.Clanronald, one of the chieftains, beingkilled while bravely advancing at thehead of a body of Highlanders, plenary,another of the rebel leaders,starting from the line, waved his bonnet,and so animated his followers, byrepeatedly shouting " Revenge !" thatthey followed him close up to the royaltroops, whose bayonets they pushedaside with their targets, and then fellupon their adversaries, sword in hand,with such terrific vigour, that the footfell back upon the horse, and the wholeof the left wing was completely defeated.But, on the right, whereArgyle commanded in person, the insurgentssuffered a defeat, and werepursued, by the dragoons, for abovetwo miles from the field of battle.They rallied, however, no less thanten times during their retreat ; and thewhole line of the royal troops mighthave been eventually discomfited, hadthe reserve, under Hamilton, beenbrought up, pursuant to the Earl ofMar's directions, to support the leftwing of the insurgents ; but eitherthrough treachery, or mistake, the personwhom he despatched to Hamiltondelivered his message in such a manner,that Hamilton, conceiving the rebelswere totally beaten, immediately retreatedwith all the speed in his power.Each party claimed a victory, butit was decidedly a drawn battle ; theconsequences of which were, however,fatal to the insurgents, whose losses itwas impossible to supply; while theiropponents, on the contrary, daily receivedfresh reinforcements. Inverness,which had been the rallying point ofthe rebels, was soon afterwards occupiedby the king's forces ; and whenthe Pretender at length arrived atPeterhead, his adherents had abandonedall hopes of a successful terminationto their enterprise. After passinga few weeks in idle pomp amonghis friends, they determined on dispersingtheir followers; and the earl,as he himself asserts, much against hisinclination, accompanied James Frederickto the continent, where he passedthe remainder of his days.In 1716, he was attainted of hightreason, and his estates and honourswere consequently forfeited. The earlwas twice married : first, in 1693, to anear relation of the Buchan family;and secondly, in 1711, to Lady FrancisPierpoint, (sister to the celebrated LadyM. W. Montague,) by both of whomhe had children. His death took placeat Aix-la-chapelle, in 1732.In person ne is said to have beentall, athletic, and active. By habituallystooping, he became round-shouldered.His countenance, on ordinary occasions,was by no means remarkable ;THOMAS FORSTER.but when he was excited, it is describedas having been indicative of energy, cunning,and suspicion. His ruin should,perhaps, be attributed to the markedcoolness with which he was treated byGeorge the First, rather than devotednessto the Stuartss ; to whom he doesnot appear to have exhibited any strongattachment, until he had lost all hopeof obtaining that political eminenceto which he aspired, under the newmonarch. Some of his Highland confederatesin the rebellion were martyrsto their loyalty for the exiled descendantof the ancient kings of Scotland :had the Earl of Mar been taken, andexecuted for high treason, he wouldhave been the victim of self-interestand disappointed ambition. His talentswere above mediocrity, his dispositionevidently turbulent, and his spirit recklesslydaring.ROBERT Daniel, EARL OF CARNWATH.ROBERT, the sixth Earl of Carnwath,was born in 1673. He passed some timeat the university of Cambridge ; marriedyoung ; and had a large family, to whomhe appears to have been most tenderlyattached. Patten says of him, that hewas singularly good in his temper, ofan agreeable affability, and a handsomedelivery in his discourse. Although asincere protestant, he was an advocatefor the Jacobitical principles of hereditaryright, passive obedience, andnon-resistance, which had been instilledinto his mind at an early period of life ;and when the Pretender's standard wasset up, in 1715, he joined the rebelforces, with so large a body of followers,that he was appointed to the commandof what was ambitiously termed thefourth troop of James Frederick'sarmy.Having surrendered at Preston, withhis associates, he was immediately conveyedto London, and soon afterwardsE leaded guilty to an impeachment forhigh treason. On being brought uptoreceive sentence of death, he delivereda brief and humble speech, inwhich he besought the two houses ofparliament to intercede for his life, andprotested that if the king should thinkhim a fit object for the royal clemency,the rest of his days should be spent inconvincing the world of his penitenceand gratitude. It was generally supposedthat he would have been executed; but, after receiving numerousrespites, he was discharged by the actof grace, in 1717. His estates and titlewere, however forfeited ; and he lingeredout the remainder of his life,shunned by his friends, and despisedby his enemies. His death occurredsome time in the year 1726.THOMAS FORSTER.THIS gentleman was born in Northumberland,about 1675. For the first thirtyyears of his life, he was scarcely knownbeyond the precincts of his paternalestate. At length, he began to takea moderate share in politics ; and, in1710, became one of the representativesof his native county. He was nowrapidly drawn into the vortex of party,and adopted opinions which eventuallyled to his ruin. The partisans of JamesFrederick succeeded in rendering him sostaunch an adherent of the exiled prince,that, notwithstanding he was a mostzealous protestant, his house becamea rendezvous for all the disaffectedpapists and non-jurors of Northumberland.He soon found himself involvedin machinations, the full extent anddanger of which he had not foreseen ;but it was too late to extricate himselffrom his associates, whose views hetherefore continued to support withincreased energy, as his safety appearedto depend upon their success.Northumberland, late in the summerTHE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.of 1715, exhibited such decidedsymptoms of an approaching insurrection,that government, as a precautionarymeasure, issued warrantsagainst a number of the Jacobites inthat county. Having received intelligencethat mean* had been taken forhis immediate apprehension, Forsterquitted his house, and proceeded indisguise to the residence of a Mr. Fenwick,at Bywell ; whence, after havingnarrowly escaped capture, he hastenedto a place of comparative safety, andcalled a meeting of the neighbouringJacobites to consult on the means tobe adopted for their general benefit.An insurrection was immediately agreedupon ; and, accordingly, on the 6th ofOctober, Forster, with about twentyother gentlemen, assembled in armson a hill, called the Waterfalls, nearGreenrigg. They were soon joined bythe Earl of Derwentwater, his brother,and their attendants ; and the next daythey marched to Walworth, whereForster, disguising himself as a herald,proclaimed the Pretender as James theThird. On the 10th, they proceededto Morpeth, and the prince was againproclaimed by Buxton, a clergymanattached to the insurgent party. Theirnumber was, by this time, increased tothree hundred ; and it would have beenmuch larger, had not Forster declinedto accept the services of such as werenot well armed and mounted.His next movement was towardsNewcastle, where he expected to findmuskets and ammunition for the commonpeople who were desirous of joininghis standard ; but, on his arrival,finding, contrary to his expectation, thegates closed against him, he marchedto Hexham. At this place he was metby several of the prince's Scotch partisans.On the 19th, Kenmure, Nithis-dale, and some other noblemen, joinedhim, with their attendants, to the numberof three hundred, at Roxbury.On the 22nd, he received a large reinforcementof Highlanders at Elsewherehe continued, without any apparentmotive, until the 27th. He hadpreviously received a commission fromthe Earl of Mar, to act as general overthe insurgents, who were, by this time,formidable in point of numbers, althoughevery accession of force renderedthem more disorderly.Forster was destitute of energy, militaryskill, or influence over his subordinates,who were neither united nortractable. General Carpenter, at thehead of a body of royal troops, havingreached the neighbourhood of Kelso,and made dispositions for attacking therebels, some of the Highland chiefs proposedto march for the west of Scotland ;but the English violently objected toproceed in that direction. A plan wasthen brought forward for attacking theking's troops before they recoveredfrom the fatigue of their recent march ;but it was rejected bjr the majority,who, at length, determined to proceedto Jedburgh. Here they were throwninto a panic by mistaking some of theirown stragglers for the royal army ; anda second alarm, equally ill-founded, producedso extraordinary an effect uponthem, that two whole days were occupiedin the restoration of even their previousstate of discipline. It was now proposedto give Carpenter the slip, and hastenacross the mountains into England ;but the Highlanders refused to proceedsouthwards. They next marched toHawick, where Forster took up hisquarters, with some other Englishgentlemen, at the residence of theDuchess of Buccleugh. Their numbers,which had daily augmented, wereconsiderably decreased on the 30th,many hundreds of them having throwndown their arms and fled at the sightof some of their own paroles, whomtheir fears had converted into a formidablebody of Carpenter's dragoons.Some of the leaders now formed adesign of surprising Dumfries; which,however, was not carried into effect,the English insurgents being obstinatelybent on proceeding southward.The Highlanders, on the other hand,were equally averse to cross the border,and began to desert in great numbers,when they found that it had beenfinally determined to march into England.On the 1st of November, therebels reached Hampton ; and, afterhalting a night to refresh, advanced towardPenrith, where they heard thatthe Bishop of Carlisle had drawn outthe whole posse of Cumberland, which,however, dispersed in the most dastardlymanner on their approach.At Kirby-Lonsdale, in Westmoreland,where they arrived on the 6th,THOMAS FORSTER.a few Lancashire papists joined theirstandard. On the 7th they enteredLancaster; but, instead of remainingthere for the arrival of reinforcements,which they might have done withtolerable safety, they rashly went ontoPreston. At this place, the numericalforce of the insurgents was augmentedby the arrival of a multitude ofRoman catholics, who had been lurkingfor some time about the neighbourhood,in constant fear of arrest and imprisonment.Their services were, however,of little value ; and the Scotchlords, who had, it appears, been led toexpect that many of the high churchparty would have made common causewith them, began to evince great dissatisfactionat the general inefficiencyof the English recruits ; who were, almostexclusively, Romanists of no conditionor influence.General Carpenter had set out inpursuit of the rebels, as soon as he hadobtained correct information of theirroute. General Wills, with a considerablebody of troops, was also advancingtowards Preston, from the west ; butForster, strange as it may appear, wasso utterly ignorant of their movements,that Wills had advanced within sightof the town before the rebel commanderwas at all aware of his approach.On the alarm being given,E reparations were hastily made for tendingthe place ; in the conduct ofwhich considerable skill was displayed,not so much by Forster himself as byBrigadier Mackintosh, and others ofhis subordinates. On the 12th of November,the royal troops under Willsattacked the town, but were receivedundauntedly, and repulsed with considerableloss. The elevation of spiritproduced among the rebels by theirsuccess, was followed, in a few hours,by the most contemptible despair. Onthe 13th, General Carpenter arrivedbefore the town, and, in concert withWills, so disposed of the royal troops,that, without achieving a victory, itwas almost impossible for the rebelsto escape. The disorderly wranglingthat now prevailed among the Jacobiteforces was truly appalling: the leaderswere not only at bitter variance witheach other, but in actual fear of beingdestroyed by the troops. Had the counselof the Highlanders been adopted,the whole of the insurgent army wouldhave sallied out, and have either cuttheir way through the enemy's ranks,or died gallantly sword in hand. ButForster was timid, and, with some difficulty,persuaded the Scottish chiefs andEnglish gentlemen, that it had becomeadvisable to capitulate.Colonel Roxburgh was, accordingly,sent out, with a trumpet, to proposethat the forces in the town should submitto the king's mercy ; and, at thesame time, to express a hope thatGeneral Wills would exert himself toprocure their pardon. Wills replied,that, if they surrendered at discretion,he could only promise to prevent histroops from cutting them to piecesuntil he should receive further orders.Forster then requested further time todeliberate, which he obtained on givinghostages not to prepare any new defences.At seven o'clock the next morning,the two generals of the royal troopswere informed that the rebels had determinedto surrender at discretion ;and, within an hour afterwards, theyentered Preston at the head of theirforces. The insurgents, who had previouslybeen drawn up in the marketplace,then laid down their arms. Thenumber of prisoners was not, however,so great as had been expected ; manyof the rebels having escaped fromthe town, and others of them beingsecreted by the inhabitants.Early in January, 1715-16, Forsterwas expelled from his seat in the houseof commons, and it was subsequentlydetermined that he should be arraignedfor high treason on the 14th of April ;but, on the 10th, he contrived to effecthis escape from Newgate, where hehad been confined to await his trial.It does not appear by what means heeluded the vigilance of his keepers ;but he evidently acted on a preconceivedscheme, as horses were stationedin readiness for him to ride towardsthe coast, and a vessel was prepared atRochford, in Essex, to carry him toFrance, where he arrived without-theleast hindrance or accident. His estateswere forfeited to the crown on his nonappearanceto take his trial, and hecontinued in exile for the remainder ofhis life. His death is supposed to havetaken place at Paris, in 1734.THE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.Forster appears to have been a vain andimbecile man, whom circumstances exaltedto a temporary eminence. Events,over which he had no control, placedhim in a situation which he was totallyunqualified to fill. Without energy tocontrol his unruly subordinates, judgmentto take advantage of success, orresolution to bear up against misfortune,the inglorious termination of hisattempt in behalf of James Frederickis by no means surprising. His surrenderat Preston, has been severely reprehended.He might, it has been said,by a vigorous resistance, have kept theroyal troops for some time at bay, andeventually procured such terms as wouldhave saved many of his followers fromthe fate which befel them. He haseven been accused of treachery to thosewhom he commanded; and his mysteriousescape from Newgate has beennoticed as tending to support the justiceof the charge ; for which, however,there does not appear to have been anyreal ground. He was not corrupted, butdismayed: had he betrayed the Jacobites,James Frederick would scarcelyhave treated him with such high considerationas he did, not only on hisarrival in France, but during the remainderof his life.BRIGADIER MACKINTOSH, LAIRD OF BORLUM.THIS gallant chieftain was born in1 679. While yet a minor, he materiallyincreased his influence, which was previouslygreat, among the Highlanders,by marrying the heiress of Lancaster.He subsequently served, for severalcampaigns, as a volunteer in Germany,where he obtained the military rank ofbrigadier. Although he had becomepersonally acquainted with the Pretender,while abroad, no suspicion appearsto have been entertained, even bythe clan of which he was the head, thathis sentiments were Jacobitical, untilhe summoned his followers, in 1715, tojoin the insurgents under Forster j thesixth division of whose forces wasnamed, in compliment to their newally, Mackintosh's Brigade.During the short campaign whichensued, he evinced an acquaintancewith the military art which was of importantservice, on several occasions,to his confederates. At Preston, hebecame one of the hostages, that nofurther defences should be preparedwhile the rebel chiefs deliberated,during a suspension of hostilities, asto the propriety of surrendering atdiscretion to the royal forces. Whenan unconditional capitulation wasagreed to, he strongly protested againstit, on the part of his Highlanders jwho, he asserted, would rather diesword in hand than assent to suchterms. The commander of the king'stroops said to him, in reply, " Go backto your people, then, sir : I shall attackthe town ; and the result will be,that not a man of you will be spared."Mackintosh then went into the town ;but speedily returned, to state thatthe Highlanders would surrender onthe same terms as their Englishassociates.The rebels having accordingly submitted,Mackintosh and his son, a fineyouth, who was verging on manhood,were sent to London, and confinedtogether in Newgate. A true billhaving been found against the brigadier,for high treason, to which, onbeing arraigned, he had pleaded notguilty, his trial was appointed to takeplace on the 5th of May ; but, duringthe night of the 4th, he and his son,with several other prisoners, effectedtheir escape, by overpowering theturnkeys, when the latter came tolock them up in their cells. The fugitiveswere instantly pursued, and someof them retaken ; but Mackintosh andhis son, having reached Paternoster-row,darted, unperceived, through analley leading to St. Paul's church-yard,and ran down to the water side, wherethey got into a boat that had previouslybeen prepared for them, andsoon gained a place of security. Thebrigadier passed the remainder of hislife abroad, and died, as it is supposed,at Genoa, in 1736.LORD BALMERINO.ALEXANDER, LORD FORBES, OF PITSLIGO.THIS excellent man was born in 1680,and from a very early age displayeduncommon talents, united with greatmoral qualities. His benevolence wasonly limited by his means ; and sogreat was the affection displayed towardshim by all classes, that he persuadedhimself he had not a single enemyon earth. Although he did not thinkproper to take any part in the rebellionof 1715, his sentiments were known tobe in favour of the exiled family, and heconsequently became an object of suspicionto government. He was, however,permitted to cherish his opinionsunmolested, and might have ended hisdays peacefully and honourably in hisnative land, had he not been tempted,in an evil moment, to join the standardof Charles Edward, in 1745.This peer," says Home, " who drewafter him such a number of gentlemen,had only a moderate fortune, but hewas much beloved and greatly esteemedby his neighbours, who looked uponhim as a man of excellent judgment,and of a wary and cautious temper ; sothat when he, who was deemed so wiseand prudent, declared his purpose ofjoining Charles, most of the gentlemenin that part of the country where helived, who favoured the Pretender'scause, put themselves under his command,thinking they could not followa better or a safer guide than LordPitsligo."Although in the sixty-fifth year of hisage, he displayed a remarkable degree ofspirit and alacrity, and went throughthe fatigues and perils of the contestwithout once attempting to shrink fromhis most arduous duties. After thebattle of Culloden, he escaped to France ;and being attainted by parliament, hishonours and property became forfeited :but the liberal contributions of ibisfriends placed him far above pecuniarywant, and he would have been happy,even in exile, but for the hopelessdesire which he felt to breathe his lastin Scotland. He died at Paris, towardsthe close of J762.ARTHUR ELPHINSTON, LORD BALMERINO.J- HIS remarkable man was born in1688, and succeeded his brother James,as Lord Balmerino, in 1710. Havingentered the army at an early age, hewas captain of a company of foot, in thereign of Queen Anne, and served, withgreat credit to himself, during severalcampaigns in Flanders.He married in 1711, and from thatperiod, passed his time in retirement,and the full enjoyment of domesticcomfort, until 1715, when he imprudentlyjoined the Pretender's standard.Government, however, thought properto inflict no punishment on him, for hisexertions, on this occasion, in behalf ofthe exiled prince. But his narrow escapedid not teach him prudence, nordid the clemency of his sovereign renderhim grateful ; for, on the landing ofCharles Edward, in 1745, he took anearly opportunity of appearing amongthe insurgents, to whose first successes,he is said to have mainly contributedby his courage and military skill. Hewas present at the fatal battle of Culloden;and, although he contrived toescape from the field, was soon afterwardscompelled to give himself up tothe royal troops.On being brought to London, he wascommitted to the Tower, and at thelatter end of June, 1746, a true bill wasfound against him for high treason.His trial took place in Westminster hall,on the 28th of July, and witnesseshaving been called to prove that he hadentered Carlisle, (although not on theday named in the indictment,) swordin hand, at the head of a body of rebels,called Elphinston's horse, he was foundguilty by the peers, who ordered thatTHE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.he should be brought up for judgmenttwo days afterwards. He wasaccordingly placed at the bar to receivesentence on the 30th, but raised a technicalobjection in arrest of judgment,which was so far admitted, that counselwere assigned him to argue the point onthe 1st of August. The court again meton that day, but, as Horace Walpolerelates, in one of his letters to Mr.Montague, " poor, brave, old Balmerino,retracted his plea, asked pardon, anddesired the lords to intercede for mercy.As he returned to the Tower, he stoppedthe coach at Charing-cross, to buyhoney-blobs, as the Scotch call gooseberries."He heard his sentence with singularfortitude, and scarcely for a momentceased to be cheerful up to the timeof his execution. " Old Balmerino,"says Walpole to a correspondent, " keepsup his spirits to the same pitch of gaiety.In the cell at Westminster, he shewedLord Kilmarnoch how he must lay hishead ; bid him not winch, lest the strokeshould cut his skull or his shoulders;and advised him to bite his lips. Asthey were to return, he begged theymight have another bottle together, asthey should never meet any more tilland then pointed to his neck. Atgetting into the coach, he said to thegaoler, ' Take care, or you will breakmy shine with this d d axe !' "They have stopped up one of oldBalmerino's windows in the Tower,"says the same writer, on another occasion,"because he talked to the populace ;and now he has only one, whichlooks directly upon all the scaffolding.They brought in the death-warrant athis dinner. His wife fainted. He said,Lieutenant, with your d d warrant,you have spoiled my lady's stomach.'He has written a sensible letter to theDuke of Cumberland to beg his intercession,who has given it to the king."A strong disposition prevailed in hisfavour, and his friends exerted themselvesto procure a remission of hissentence, but the king was inflexible,and orders were issued for his executionon the 18th of August. Early on themorning of that day, he was conducted,with his fellow-prisoner, Kilmarnoch,to a house which nat been prepared fortheir reception, about thirty yards fromthe scaffold, on Tower hill. Hearingsome of the spectators eagerly ask whichwas Balmerino, he said, with a smile,as he entered the house, " I am LordBalmerino, gentlemen, at your service."Shortly after, he inquired if Kilmarnockknew of any order having beensigned by Charles Edward, to give noquarter at the battle of Culloden. Theearl replied in the negative. " Nor I,neither," said Balmerino ; " and therefore,it seems to be an invention ofgovernment to justify their own murders."" I do not think that a fairinference," rejoined Kilmarnoch, " forI was informed at Inverness, by severalofficers, after I had been taken prisoner,that such an order, signed GeorgeMurray, was in the duke's custody."George Murray !" exclaimed Bales" then they should not charge iton the prince !" He then took leave ofthe earl, in a most affectionate manner.My dear Lord Kilmarnoch," said he,I am only sorry that I cannot paythis reckoning alone, and suffer for usboth: once more, farewell for ever!"Kilmarnoch was then led forth to execution,and Balmerino, after solemnlyrecommending himself to the mercy ofhis Creator, began to converse cheerfullywith his friends, with whom hetook wine, desiring that they woulddrink to him, " Ain degree to Haven!"In a few minutes the sheriff enteredthe apartment, for the purpose of conductinghim to the scaffold, whichBalmerino ascended with extraordinarycoolness. He was dressed in a tie-wig,and the regimentals (a blue coat, withbrass buttons and red facings,) whichhe had worn at the battle of Culloden.After reading the inscription on hiscoffin, and examining the block, whichhe called " a pillow of rest," he took apaper from his pocket, put on his spectacles,and advancing to the rails of thescaffold, began to read, in a firm andaudible tone, an address which he hadcomposed for the occasion. His allegiance,he said, was, in his opinion, dueto the house of Stuart; and he protestedthat, in the late contest, he had actedconscientiously, and without any interestedmotives whatever.Having concluded his speech, he desiredthat the hearse in which his coffinwas to be placed, might be brought towardsthe scaffold, and after lookingupon it for a few moments, he inquiredEARL OF Wanton.for the executioner, who, on approaching,was about to ask his lordship'sforgiveness ; but Bahnerino stopped himby saying, that the performance of hisduty was commendable. " Friend,"continued he, presenting the man withthree guineas, " I never had muchmoney : this is all I possess at present."He regretted that the gift was so small,but observed that he could add nothingto it except his coat and waistcoat,of which he immediately divested himself,and placed them upon his coffin.On taking his last farewell of hisfriends, he said to one of them, " I amafraid there are some who may thinkmy behaviour too bold : but remember,sir, what I tell you; it arises from aconfidence in God, and a clear conscience."He then took the axe in hishand, and having felt the edge, returnedit to the executioner, whom he clappedon the shoulder, and tucking down thecollar of his shirt, showed him where toaim, encouraging and requesting himto strike with resolution ; " for in that,friend," added he, " will consist yourmercy." Immediately after, withouttrembling or changing countenance, heknelt down before the block, and exclaimed,with outstretched arms, " OLord ! reward my friends, forgive myenemies, and receive my soul !" Havinguttered these words, he gave the pre-concertedsignal (dropping his hands)for the executioner to strike : but thelatter was so unnerved by the earl'scoolness and intrepidity, or flurriedby the unexpected suddenness of thesignal, that it was only on the third fallof the axe that Balmerino was decapitated.In compliance with a desire which hehad expressed, the coffin containing hisremains was placed on that of the Marquessof Tullibardine, in St. Peter'schurch, in the Tower. " It is butjustice to the memory of Lord Balessays Douglas, " a great, but unhappyman, to assure the world, thathis whole deportment, previous to histragical end, was graceful without affectation,and cheerful without presumption."GEORGE SETON, EARL OF Wanton.J/HIS nobleman was born in 1690 :he married during his minority, andhad several daughters, but no son. InOctober, 1715, he joined the insurgentforces under Forster, a division ofwhich was subsequently denominatedThe Earl of Wanton's troop. Hesoon became obnoxious to the Englishcommanders, by his resolute independenceof opinion. In opposition to theNorthumbrian gentlemen, he invariablyrecommended a march towards thewest of Scotland, in order to join theinsurgent clans. Had this counsel beenadopted, the united forces of the rebelsmight have become formidable ; but itwas vehemently and successfully opposed,as was also the earl's project toattack General Carpenter's troops whenfatigued with their laborious march towardsKelso.The obstinacy of the Highlanders,who peremptorily refused to marchsouthward, and numbers of whomabandoned the rebel standard when themain body had determined to cross theborder, was attributed, by his associates,to the earl's advice; and he wasconsequently treated with such coolness,that he retired in disgust ; but,after a brief absence, feeling, perhaps,that he could not elsewhere obtain eventemporary security, he returned to thecamp of the insurgents ; and, althoughdissatisfied with their proceedings, andexcluded from their councils, he continuedto act with them until thecapitulation at Preston, when he wasconveyed, with the other prisoners ofquality, to the metropolis.Being impeached for high treason,he was found guilty, and sentenced todeath ; but, unlike several of his unfortunateassociates, he disdained toimplore the king's mercy, and wouldnot sanction any application to governmentfor his pardon. Great exertionswere, however, made to save his life;and they were so far successful, thatthe earl was respited during the royalTHE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.pleasure, and would, in all probability,have been included in the act of grace ;but he avoided the ultimate clemencywhich he had never sought to obtain,by bribing some of his attendants toconnive at his escape. He quitted theTower on the 4th of August, 1716,and passed the remainder of his lifeon the continent. His death took placeat Rome, in 1749.WILLIAM DRUMMOND, VISCOUNT STRATHALLAN.WILLIAM DRUMMOND, fourthViscount Strathallan, was born in 1690,and succeeded to his title in 1711. Hisprinciples were decidedly Jacobitical;and he would, in all probability, havejoined the rebels in 1715, but for theadvice of his friends, and the entreatiesof his young and amiable wife. Hiszeal for the house of Stuart increasedwith his years ; and, on the arrival ofCharles Edward, in 1745, he hastenedto display his attachment to the exiledprince, by joining the young Pretender'sarmy, with his eldest son, anda considerable number of his friends andretainers. He distinguished himselfthrough the whole of the adventurouscampaign, which terminated at Culloden; but did not live to see the totaldefeat and dispersion of his party ; forat the beginning of the engagement,while gallantly advancing at the headof his regiment, he received a musketshot in the breast, and died instantly.His son and heir, James, Master ofStrathallan, made his escape to France ;but being included in the act of attainderagainst his deceased father,under the denomination of JamesDrummond, eldest son of William,Viscount of Strathallan, though he wasat that time Viscount of Strathallanhimself, his honours were forfeited tothe crown. Towards the close of thelast century, an attempt was made toset aside the attainder, on the groundof this misnomer, but it proved unsuccessful.JAMES Radcliffe, EARL OF DERWENTWATER.THIS nobleman was born on the28th of June, 1691, and succeeded tothe earldom, in April, 1 705. Although acatholic, and avowedly favourable to theChevalier, to whom he was distantly related,he appears to have taken but littleshare in the intrigues of the Jacobitesfor the restoration of the exiled familyduring the reign of Queen Anne : noris it satisfactorily shewn, that he hadgiven any just cause of offence to thenew government, although suspectedof having secretly joined the parties ofarmed Jacobites, who had traversed thecountry in August, 1715, when, in thefollowing month, he received intelligencethat a warrant had been issuedby the secretary of state for his apprehension.Immediately proceeding to ajustice of peace, he boldly demandedwhat charges existed against him ; butthe magistrate either could not orwould not give him the information hedesired. The earl then thought proper,imprudently perhaps, to evade captureby concealing himself in a cottage belongingto one of his tenants ; and onForster's appeal to the neighbouringJacobites, to appear in arms for JamesFrederick, he joined the disaffected attheir appointed rendezvous, near Green-ring,with his brother, his servants, anda few of his tenantry, all well armed andmounted.The earl accompanied Forster toPreston, where he surrendered withthe rest of the insurgents. On the 9thof December, he entered London, incustody, and after a brief examinationbefore the privy-council, was committedto the Tower. On the 10th of January,1715-16, he was impeached for highEARL OF DERWENTWATER.treason, and on the 16th of the samemonth, thus addressed his peers, previouslyto pleading guilty : " My lords,The terrors of your just sentence,which will at once deprive me of mylife and estate, and complete the misfortunesof my wife and innocent children,are so heavy on my mind, that Iam scarce able to allege what mayextenuate my offence, if any thing cando it : my guilt was rashly incurred,without any premeditation ; for I beg toobserve, that I was wholly unprovidedof men, horses, or arms, which I couldeasily have provided, had I formed anyprevious design. As my offence wassudden, so my submission was prompt ;for when the king's general demandedhostages for ensuring a cessation ofarms, I voluntarily offered myself; andit was the repeated promises of mercywhich I received, that induced me afterwardsto remain with the royal army.I humbly entreat your intercession withthe king, and solemnly protest that myfuture conduct shall shew me not unworthyof your generous compassion."He received sentence of death on the9th of February, and a warrant wassoon afterwards issued for his execution.On the morning after it had been signed,the countess obtained an interview withthe king in his bed-chamber, and patheticallyentreated his majesty to spareher husband's life ; and she subsequentlywent down to Westminster, accompaniedby a great number of ladies, andpersonally implored both houses of parliamentto intercede with the sovereignon his behalf. The public were stronglyexcited in favour of the condemnedearl, and his friends entertained a hope,that he would have been pardoned.But, notwithstanding several peers andcommoners of distinction endeavouredto procure a remission of his sentence,it was carried into effect.His execution took place on the 24thof February. While ascending thescaffold he looked particularly pale :but in a few moments he regained hisnatural firmness and composure. Afterperforming a solemn act of devotion,he advanced to the rails of the scaffold,and read an address to those who hadassembled for the purpose of witnessinghis execution, in which he eulogizedthe Pretender, and asked pardon ofthose whom he had scandalized by hisplea of guilty, which, he stated, was abreach of loyalty to his lawful andrightful sovereign, King James theThird. He concluded by saying that,had his life been spared, he should haveconsidered himself bound in honournever again to take up arms againstthe reigning prince.The earl handed a copy of this declarationto the sheriff, observing thathe had given another to a friend. Hethen examined the block, and findinga rough part on the surface, desiredthat it might be chipped away with theaxe, as it would probably hurt his neckif suffered to remain. Having strippedoff his coat and waistcoat, he preparedto receive the fatal blow, and on givinga signal which he had previously arrangedwith the executioner, his headwas severed from his body at a singlestroke of the axe.It is said, that, on the precedingafternoon, he had sent for Roome, anundertaker, to receive directions for hisfuneral; but Roome having refused toprepare a plate for his coffin, bearingan inscription to the effect that he dieda sacrifice for his lawful sovereign, theearl immediately dismissed him, andmade no subsequent preparations forhis sepulture ; so that, instead of beingdeposited in a coffin, and carried awayin a hearse, his remains were wrappedup in a cloth, and borne by some of hisservants to the Tower, where theywere soon afterwards interred.The earl appears to have been possessedof many good qualities. " He wasformed by nature," says Patten, " to beuniversally beloved ; for his benevolencewas so unbounded, that he seemed onlyto live for others. He resided amonghis own people, spent his estate amongthem, and continually did them kindnesses.His hospitality was princely,and none in that country came up to it.He was very charitable to the poor,whether known to him or not, andwhether papists or protestants. Hisfate was a misfortune to many, whohad no kindness for the cause in whichhe died."THE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.CHARLES Radcliffe.THIS gentleman, a brother of theEarl of Derwentwater, was born in1693, and evinced, from his boyhood, amost enthusiastic attachment to theexiled Stuartss. Utterly reckless ofconsequences, he joined one of thosestraggling parties of Jacobites, thatappeared in anne for the Pretenderlate in the summer of 1715. He actedwith Forster throughout the whole ofthat inefficient leader's campaign ; displaying,whenever an opportunity occurred,a total disregard of personaldanger, and a sincere devotion to thecause he had espoused, which threw alustre over his rashness.Having surrendered with his confederates,at Preston, he was arraignedfor high treason, in May, 1716, and wassoon afterwards found guilty. He disdainedto petition for mercy, or to permitany interest to be used with theking in his behalf. But the blood ofone brother being deemed a sufficientatonement for the offences of both,soon after the Earl of Derwentwaterhad been executed, a free pardon wasgranted to Ratcliffe; which, however,he obstinately refused to accept. Hewas, consequently, detained in Newgateuntil the llth of December, 1716,when he contrived to effect his escape,as it is supposed, by breaking throughthe chimney of his apartment to theroof of the prison, and thence loweringhimself, with the aid of a rope, into thestreet.Patten, speaking of him about thisperiod, says, " He is young and bold,but too forward : he has a great deal ofcourage, which wants a few more yearsand a better cause to improve it. Thereis room to hope he will never employit in such an adventure again." Unfortunately,however, for himself, hecontinued to be an active partisan ofthe exiled prince ; and frequently venturedto quit his asylum on the continent,for the purpose of fomenting thediscontents of the Highlanders.In 1746, he received a naval commissionfrom the King of France, andtook the command of a vessel, ladenwith arms for the use of the Jacobitesin Scotland ; which, however, neverreached its destination, being capturedat sea by an English cruiser. Ratcliffewas brought a prisoner to London, andarraigned on his previous conviction,which had never been reversed. Heboldly denied the authority of thecourt, avowed himself to be a subjectof the King of France, produced hiscommission, and declared that he wasnot Charles Radcliffe, but the Earl ofDerwentwater. After some furtherquibbling on these and other points,his identity being satisfactorily proved,the attorney-general moved for theexecution of his former sentence. Theprisoner now attempted to set up hispardon in bar, but the judges beingof opinion that such a plea could not,under the circumstances, be legallyreceived, a writ was issued for his decapitation.His person and appearance,on this occasion, are thus described inthe British Chronologist : " He wasabout five feet ten inches high, upwardsof fifty, dressed in scarlet, facedwith black velvet, and gold buttons, agold-laced waistcoat, bag wig, and hada hat with a white feather." Hewore precisely the same dress on thescaffold, where he conducted himselfwith great fortitude. He was beheadedon Tower hill, on the 8th of December,1746.The courage of Charles Ratcliffeappears to have been a mere animalquality ; he was evidently the creatureof impulse, an inconsiderate slave tohis feelings, who possessed none of themental attributes of a hero. His doggedrejection of mercy, in 1716, was evenmore foolish than his attempt, on beingtaken in arms at a subsequent period,to avoid the execution of his sentence,by a series of absurd evasions, wasmean and contemptible.JAMES CAMERON, OF LOCH1EL.JAMES CAMERON, OF LOCHIEL.THIS gallant chieftain, the head ofthe Cameron, who idolized him for hisbravery, his social virtues, and, to usethe words of the talented author ofLochiel's Warning, his loyal, thoughmistaken, magnanimity, was born in1696. As he grew up, he imbibed allthe enthusiastic feelings of his familyin favour of the Stuartss. James Frederickis said to have described him tothe young Chevalier, as being amongtheir most trusty and influential adherents; and he was, accordingly, oneof the first whose aid Charles Edwardendeavoured to procure, on his arrivalat Boradale, in 1745. Lochiel, however,had sufficient wisdom to foresee,that, unsupported as he was by foreigntroops, the young adventurer couldhave but little chance of success, in theenterprise which he had so daringlyundertaken. He, accordingly, endeavoured,with all the eloquence he possessed,to prevail on him to abandonit; but finding Charles Edward invulnerableeither to entreaty or argument,the brave chieftain, at length, generously,although against his betterjudgment, determined on sharing thoseperils, which the prince would evidentlyhave to encounter.His followers, amounting to sevenhundred men, were the first of the insurgentsto commence hostilities ; havingsurrounded and captured two companiesof the king's troops, before theJacobite standard was raised at .They also distinguished themselvesby obtaining possession of Edinburgh,by stratagem, pending the negotiationsbetween Charles Edwardand the inhabitants for its surrender.In common with the other Highlanders,Lochiel, and his clan, displayed greatbravery, and did astonishing executionat the battle of Preston-Pans. It isrelated, that, on this occasion, a Highlandercaptured ten dismounted dragoons,on whom the mere sound of his ]voice produced so appalling an effect,that he drove them before him likesheep ; and a lad in the rebel army,under fourteen years of age, is reportedto have cut down, if he did not actuallykill, twelve of his opponents.These, and other equally improbablestories, obtained credence among theEnglish peasantry, who, in some parts,are said to have considered the Highlandersas monsters and cannibals, whoscarcely bore even an outward similitudeto humanity. During the march toDerby, the Chevalier Johnstonee relates,(but the story is almost incredible) thatone evening, as Lochiel entered thelodgings assigned to him, in an Englishvillage, his landlady threw herself athis feet, and, with uplifted hands, andtears in her eyes, supplicated him totake her life but to spare her two littlechildren. " He asked her," continuesJohnstonee, " if she was in her senses,and told her to explain herself; whenshe answered, that every body said theHighlanders ate children, and madethem their common food. Mr. Cameronhaving assured her that they wouldnot injure either her or her children,or any person whatever, she looked athim, for some moments, with an air ofsurprise, and then opened a press,calling out with a loud voice, ' Comeout, children, the gentleman will noteat you." "Lochiel remained with the youngChevalier's army until the 18th ofMarch, 1746, when he was despatched,with his own followers, and some auxiliariesfrom the clans of Macdonaldand Stuart, to attempt the reduction ofFort William; but, after besieging itfor several days, without making muchprogress, he was compelled to relinquishthe enterprise, the Duke of Cumberland'smovements having rendered hispresence important at the head-quartersof the prince. He accordingly returned,with his followers, to the rebel army;and, a few days afterwards, displayedhis usual intrepidity at the disastrousbattle of Culloden ; in which he wasso severely wounded, that he musteither have bled to death on the field,or been taken prisoner by the king'stroops, but for the desperate courageof some of his clan, by whom he wasTHE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.carried off, and concealed in a miserablehut, until he regained sufficient strengthto undergo the fatigues of a difficultand dangerous journey to the coast.After passing through many perils, hewas, at length, fortunate enough toeffect his escape to the continent,where he spent the remainder of hisdays, a hopeless, heart-broken wanderer,and died towards the close of 1758.His unfortunate clan was visitedwith remorseless vengeance by theroyal troops. "In the month of May,"says Smollett, " the Duke of Cumberlandadvanced with the army into theHighlands, as far as Fort Augustus ;where he encamped, and sent off detachments,on all hands, to hunt downthe fugitives, and lay waste the countrywith fire and sword. The castles ofPlenary and Lochiel were plunderedand burned : every hut, house, or habitation,met with the same fate, withoutdistinction ; all the cattle and provisionswere carried off. The men were eithershot upon the mountains, like wildbeasts, or put to death in cold blood,without form of trial. The women, afterhaving seen their husbands and fathersmurdered, were subjected to brutalviolation, and then turned out naked,with their children, to starve on thebarren heath. One whole family wasenclosed in a barn, and consumed toashes. Those ministers of vengeancewere so alert in the execution of theiroffice, that, in a few days, there wasneither house, cottage, man, nor beast,to be seen in the compass of fifty miles :all was ruin, silence, and desolation !"To justify such execrable atrocities asthese, even on the score of expediency,would be utterly impossible : they wereplanned in a spirit of cold-bloodedbrutality, and perpetrated by ruffiansunder the command of a savage.DOCTOR ARCHIBALD CAMERON.DR. ARCHIBALD CAMERON, abrother of the celebrated Lochiel, wasborn in 1698. From a very early periodof his life, he appears to haveentertained feelings of strong attachmentto the exiled family ; and on therebel standard being set up by CharlesEdward, in 1745, he joined the insurgentswith his brother, with whom heacted during the whole of the campaign.After the battle of Culloden, he escapedto the continent: but in 1753, althoughhe had been attainted of high treasonduring his absence, he rashly returnedto Scotland, with a view, as it was reported,of recovering a sum of money,belonging to the Pretender, which hadbeen embezzled by some of his adherents.Soon after his arrival in Scotland, hewas discovered, and taken. His arraignmentat the bar of the court ofking's bench, on the act of attainderpreviously passed against him, speedilyfollowed ; and his identity being clearlyestablished, the lord chief justice sentencedhim to be executed as a traitor.He behaved with great firmness anddecorum in court ; and took occasionto observe, that, in 1746, he had quittedFrance, for the purpose of surrenderinghimself, and that he was only preventedby an accident happening in his family,from throwing himself upon the king'sclemency. He had seven children, hesaid, at Lisle, in Flanders, who, withtheir mother, were totally dependenton him for support, and he respectfullyentreated, that he might be permittedto send for the latter, as he felt a verynatural desire to see her again before hedied. This request was humanely compliedwith; but no further indulgencewas shewn him ; his sentence, contraryto the expectations of the public, beingcarried into effect in less than a monthafter his arraignment.About ten o'clock on the morning ofhis execution, (June 7th, 1753.) he wasdrawn on a sledge, from the Tower toTyburn, amid a vast concourse of spectators.He was dressed, on this occasion,in a light coloured coat, red waistcoatand breeches, and a new bag-wig.During the dreadful procession, whichlasted upwards of two hours, he wasperfectly calm, and his fortitude neverforsook him up to the moment of hisexecution. After having been suspendedfor nearly half an hour, hisEARL OF NITHISDALE.body was cut down and decapitated.His heart was then taken from hisbody, and burnt to ashes in the presenceof the assembled multitude.The terror and resentment of thepeople," says Smollett, " occasioned bythe rebellion, having by this time subsided,their humane passions did not failto operate in favour of this unfortunategentleman. Their pity was mingledwith esteem, arising from his personalcharacter, which was altogetherunblemished, and his deportment onthis occasion, which they could nothelp admiring as the standard of manlyfortitude and decorum. The populace,though not very subject to tenderemotions, were moved to compassion,and even to tears, by his behaviourat the place of execution; and manysincere well-wishers to the house ofHanover thought that the sacrifice ofthis victim, at such a juncture, could notredound either to its honour or security."WILLIAM, LORD Warrington.WILLIAM, the fourth Lord Warrington,was born in 1701, and, duringhis minority, married a daughter of SirThomas Tempest, of Stella, in thecounty of Durham, by whom he hadfive children. He was among theforemost of those who engaged inForster's attempt on behalf of JamesFrederick, in 1715, and surrendered,with the other insurgents, to the royaltroops, at Preston. On being impeachedfor high treason, he pleaded guilty ; and, !when brought up to receive sentence,he asserted that the royal generals, towhom he and his associates capitulated,had assured them of mercy : he,therefore, expressed a hope that hisunhappy case, and the deplorable conditionof his unfortunate children, alreadydeprived of their mother, wouldinduce the two houses of parliamentto intercede with the king on his behalf.Sentence of death was pronouncedupon him, but his execution was respited,from time to time, until 1717,when he received his discharge underthe act of grace. He died at Bath, inpoverty and affliction, about the year1743.WILLIAM MAXWELL, EARL OF NITHISDALE.WILLIAM, the fifth Earl of Nithis-dale, was born in 1702. Loyalty for thehouse of Stuart had been instilled intohim from his childhood; and on thestandard of the Chevalier being setupin 1715, he joined the insurgents,at Moffat, in Annandale.He surrendered, at Preston, withthe other companions of Forster; andhaving been sent to London, was committedto the Tower, to abide his trialfor high treason. On being impeached,he pleaded guilty, and when broughtup for judgment, he declared that,when he surrendered at Preston, hewas led to hope much from the royalmercy, and still depended on the king'sgoodness.His young countess afterwards, bystratagem, obtained an interview withGeorge the Second, and patheticallyentreated him to save the life of her unfortunatehusband, but without effect.The intercession of many noblemen inhis behalf met with no better success ;a warrant was issued for his execution,and his doom appeared inevitable. TheDowager Countess of Nithisdale, however,in the noble enthusiasm of maternalaffection, determined on makinga desperate effort to procure his escape.She had then reached the forty-sixthyear of her age : like her son, she wasremarkably tall ; and she strikinglyresembled him, not oily in her featuresand the dignified expression of her countenance,but also in the tone of her voice.Having frequently visited the earlTHE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.during his confinement inthe Tower, thesentinels had become so well acquaintedwith her figure, that, at length, theysuffered her to pass to and from hisapartment without challenge or inquiry.On the evening before the dayappointed for his execution, she wentto the Tower, in a hackney coach, accompaniedby a lady, whom she hadpreviously made acquainted with theparticulars of her project. As theypassed the sentinels, the countessdowager held a handkerchief to herface, and sobbed audibly. On enteringher son's apartment, she proposedthat he should disguise himself in aportion of her dress, and endeavour toquit the Tower. The earl, however,refused to do so, alleging, that hewould rather die than expose her tothe slightest danger. But she chargedhim on his duty to obey her; andurging that the government would beashamed to keep her in confinementlonger than a few days, he, at length,consented to make the proposed attempt.Accordingly, putting on thehat, long mourning cloak, and deepblack veil, which his mother had worn,and taking the arm of her confederate,he knocked to apprise the guard outsidethat the dowager wished to withdraw.On the door being opened, theearl came forth with his companion,and, keeping a handkerchief close tohis face, proceeded along the passages,towards the outer entrance, at a slowand tottering pace, and seeming to sobincessantly ; the confederate, duringtheir progress, repeatedly adjuringher ladyship, to make haste and quitthat horrid place!" They passed thewhole of the sentinels without excitingsuspicion, and in a few minutes reachedthe hackney coach, which had been orderedto wait for the countess dowager.The earl succeeded in making hisescape beyond seas, and died at Rome,in 1744. His mother was closely confinedfor several months, but, at length,government thought fit to set her at liberty.Suspicions have been entertainedthat the sentinels on duty werebribed to connive at the earl's escape ;but no proof has been adduced thatsuch was the fact.WILLIAM BOYD, EARL OF Kilmarnock.THIS nobleman was born in 1702.His person is described as having beenremarkably fine ; his manners engaging; but his intellect feeble rather thanotherwise. In 1725, he married LadyAnne Livingstone, daughter of the Earlof Linlithgow, by whom he had severalchildren. Brought up, as he had been,in the strong Whig principles of hisfamily, and having no settled incometo depend on for the support of hislarge family, but a pension from government,it was, for a long time, supposedthat the house of Hanover did notpossess a more staunch adherent inScotland than Kilmarnoch.Temptations, however, which he had 'not sufficient energy to resist, involvedhim with the Jacobite party: his pensionwas consequently stopped; and,with a view, perhaps, to obtain, undera new order of things, at least thatdecent competence which he had lost,rather than from any sincere devotionto the Stuartss, he joined in therebellion of 1745. While the insurgentswere successful, he displayed much gallantryand confidence ; but after theirretrograde movement from Derby, hebecame inactive and desponding. Beingcaptured after the battle culloden, inwhich, although present, he had takenno part, he was sent to London, for trial,with other prisoners of quality. On the23d of June, 1746, a true bill for hightreason was found against him by thegrand jury of Surrey, and his trial wasappointed to take place before thelords, in Westminster hall, on the 28thof July. When placed at the bar, hepleaded guilty to his indictment, andon being brought up to receive sentenceof death, pathetically entreated, on accountof his children, and because hehad never entertained, as he protested,the slightest malice against the existinggovernment, that he might be recommendedas a proper object of clemencyto the king.I am assured," observes HoraceLORD GEORGE MURRAY.Walpole, " that the old Countess ofErrol made her son, Lord Kilmarnoch,go into the rebellion on pain of disinheritinghim. The man at the tenniscourt protests that he has known himdine with the man that sells pamphletsat Storey's gate ; ' and,' says he, ' hewould often have been glad if I wouldhave taken him home to dinner.' Hewas certainly so poor, that in one of hiswife's intercepted letters, she tells himshe has plagued their steward for a fortnightfor money, and can get but threeshillings !" " The Duke of Cumberland,"says the same writer, in anotherpart of his correspondence, " declaredpublicly, at his levee, that Lord Kilmarnochproposed murdering theEnglish prisoners ; and when DukeHamilton begged his intercession forthe earl, he coldly replied, that theaffair was in the king's hands, and thathe had nothing to do with it."Various applications were made toobtain a remission of his sentence, butthey proved ineffectual, and he wasordered for execution with Lord Bal-merino,on the 18th of August. Hewas attended, in his last moments, bythe Rev. Mr. Hume, and a dissentingclergyman. With the latter he spentan hour in devotion, at the house onTower hill, which had been preparedfor the reception of Balmerino andhimself, on the morning of their execution.After refreshing himself with amorsel of bread and a glass of wine, heexpressed a desire that Balmerino, withwhom he had a short interview, shouldprecede him to the scaffold; but onbeing told that his request could notbe complied with, his own name beingmentioned first in the warrant, he prepared,with more calmness and couragethan he had been expected to display,for his immediate execution.On mounting the scaffold, and beholdingthe immense multitude of spectators,the executioner, the block, andhis own coffin, his spirits failed him foramoment, and he said to one of theministers who attended him, " Hume,this is dreadful !" Having taken offhis coat, and the bag from his hair,which was then tucked up under anapkin-cap, he knelt down, and, aftera short delay, dropped his handkerchiefas a signal to the executioner,who performed the duty assigned to himwith merciful despatch. The earl'sremains were buried at St. Peter'schurch in the Tower.LORD GEORGE MURRAY.THE father of this celebrated noblemanwas rewarded, by William theThird, with the dukedom of Athol, forthe distinguished part which he hadtaken in the revolution of 1668. LordGeorge was the duke's fourth son. Hisbirth took place in 1705. He enteredthe army at an early age, and servedwith the British forces in Flanders. In1727, he married Lady Jane Murray,by whom he had several children, theeldest of whom eventually becamethird Duke of Athol.On the 5th of September, 1745, LordGeorge joined the young Pretender'sarmy, at Perth, with a number of menfrom the estates of his brother, the Dukeof Athol, and was almost immediatelynominated lieutenant-general of the insurgentforces. At the battle of PrestonPans, which was fought on the 21stof September, (1745,) Lord Georgedisplayed considerable military skill andgreat personal intrepidity. The royaltroops, under the command of Cope,occupied so strong a position, that forsome time it was difficult to discoverin what manner they could be attackedwith any probability of success. LordGeorge at length determined, if possible,to lead his troops across a marsh,on the left of the royal camp, which hefound totally unprotected, in consequenceof its being considered impassable.He carried his project into effectwithout much difficulty, during thenight ; and early on the morning of thebattle, to the astonishment and dismayof the royal forces, drew up his armywithin a short distance of their camp.Lord George," says Johnstonee, " atthe head of the first line, did not givethe enemy time to recover from theirpanic. He advanced with such rapidity,THE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.that General Cope had hardly time toform his troops in order of battle, whenthe Highlanders rushed upon themsword in hand. They had frequentlybeen enjoined to aim at the noses of thehorses with their swords, without mindingthe riders ; as the natural movementof a horse, wounded in the face,is to wheel round : and a few horseswounded in that manner, are sufficientto throw a whole squadron into disorder,without the possibility of their beingafterwards rallied. They followed thisadvice most implicitly, and the Englishcavalry was instantly thrown into confusion."The rebel forces achieved acomplete victory over their opponents,in less than five minutes, entirely withoutthe aid of their second line, whichcame up only in time to join in thepursuit.Lord George is said to have distinguishedhimself, so far as circumstanceswould permit, during the march toDerby ; where, in opposition to CharlesEdward, and many of the chiefs, hestrenuously recommended a retrogrademovement. With much difficulty, theprince was brought to adopt his advice :and the insurgents immediately beganto retrace their steps towards the north.On reaching Kendal, Lord George,with a detachment of horse, personallyreconnoitred the position of MarshalWade, who was encamped in the neighbourhood.On his return, he said toCharles Edward, who had often reproachedhim, for avoiding the enemy,As your royal highness is always forbattles, be the circumstances what theymay, I now offer you one, in threehours from this time, with the army ofMarshal Wade, which is only about twomiles distant from us." The princemade no reply: and the rebels continuedtheir retreat; during the wholeof which, Lord George, as it appears,cheerfully undertook the command ofthe rear, a post of extraordinary difficultyand danger. In consequenceof the badness of the roads, and theslow progress made by the artillery, hewas frequently compelled to march forseveral hours after dark, in order tokeep up with the main body of theinsurgents. The Duke of Cumberland'sadvanced parties of horse repeatedlyannoyed him; and, at length,on the 29th of December, the wholeof the royal cavalry, under the immediatecommand of the duke, endeavouredto prevent the artillery frompassing the bridge of Clifton ; but LordGeorge attacked them with such spirit,that they were compelled to abandontheir object, and effect a precipitateretreat. On this occasion, he foughtsword in hand, and on foot, at thehead of the Macpherson.At the battle of Falkirk, which tookplace in January, 1746, Lord George,according to Home, marched at the headof the Macdonaldss of Keppoch, with hisdrawn sword in his hand, and his targeton his arm. He let the English dragoonscome within ten or twelve pacesof him, and then gave orders to fire.The cavalry closing their ranks, whichwere opened by this discharge," saysJohnstonee, " put spurs to their horses,and rushed upon the Highlanders at ahard trot, breaking their ranks, andthrowing down everything before them.A most extraordinary combat followed.The Highlanders, stretched on theground, thrust their dirks into thebellies of the horses : some seized theriders by their clothes, dragged themdown, and stabbed them with theirdirks ; several of them again used pistols ;but few of them had sufficient space tohandle their swords."With the victory of Falkirk terminatedthe successes of the insurgents;who were soon afterwards compelled, bythe near approach of the Duke of Cumberland,to retreat into the Highlands.At Inverness, where the prince eventuallyfixed his head-quarters, LordGeorge was informed that a party ofthe king's troops had, by the commandof their vindictive and blood-thirstygeneral, committed the most wantonbarbarities on the families of his ownimmediate followers. " As all the malevassals of the Duke of Athol were withus," says Johnstonee, " the Duke ofCumberland sent a detachment of histroops into their country, who committedthe most savage cruelties : burningthe houses, turning out the womenand children in the midst of winter, toperish on the mountains with cold andhunger; after subjecting them to everyspecies of brutal and infamous treatment.These proceedings being knownat Inverness, Lord George set off instantly,with the clan of Athol, to takeLORD GEORGE MURRAY.vengeance for these outrages, and heconducted his march so well, passingthrough bye-ways across the mountains,that the enemy had no informationof his approach. Having plannedhis march so as to arrive at Athol inthe beginning of the night, the detachmentseparated, dividing itself intosmall parties, every gentleman takingthe shortest road to his own house, andin this way all the English were surprisedin their sleep. Those who foundtheir wives and daughters violated bythe brutality of these monsters, andtheir families dying from hunger andthe inclemency of the season, madeno prisoners. They received, whilethey slept, the punishment which theirinhumanity merited. All were put tothe sword or made prisoners, excepttwo or three hundred men, who shutthemselves up in the castle of Athol."Meantime, the Duke of Cumberland'sforces had approached Inverness, fromwhich the insurgents set out, on the13th of April, for the purpose of surprisingthe royal troops in their camp.After a fatiguing march, during thenight of the 15th, a considerable portionof the insurgents were within a mileof the English camp ; but. the remainderhaving been dispersed, on accountof the darkness of the night, LordGeorge at first determined to wait fortheir arrival ; but, at length, findingthat it would probably be day-breakbefore his troops could reach the positionoccupied by the royal army, whentheir repulse would be an easy task totheir opponents, Lord George, contraryto the wishes of the prince, gave ordersfor a retreat. For this, Charles Edwardabsurdly accused him of treachery; and taking the sole commandof his forces, halted at Culloden, whereinopposition to Lord George's advice,notwithstanding the fatigues which hismen had undergone, and although theymight have been marched to a securepost, on the high ground beyond theplain, he obstinately insisted on waitinguntil the royal troops (who were rapidlyapproaching) should come up, and onhazarding a battle. Hopeless, as hemust have been, as to its result, LordGeorge displayed the most heroic couragein the contest that ensued : althoughseverely wounded, and thrownfrom his horse, he refused to quit thefield ; and would, in all probability, haveperished, had not some of the insurgentsremoved him by force to a placeof safety.The king's troops achieved a completevictory over the insurgents ; greatnumbers of whom, however, escaped tothe Highlands, and, in two days afterthe battle, Lord George was already atthe head of five thousand men. " Wemight," he observes to a correspondent,"have set the English at nought foryears ; and as to provisions, had I beenallowed to have any direction, we wouldnot have wanted as long as there wascattle in the Highlands, or meal in thelowlands." The prince, however, refusedto join the still formidable remnantof his army, and the insurgentsspeedily dispersed. Lord George withdrewto the continent, and, after havingpassed some years in France and Italy,died in North Holland, on the 8th ofJuly, 1760.His character is thus sketched, apparently,with much truth, by theChevalier Johnstonee : " Lord GeorgeMurray, who had the charge of all thedetails of our army, and who had thesole direction of it, possessed a naturalgenius for military operations ; and wasa man of surprising talents, which, hadthey been cultivated by the study ofmilitary tactics, would unquestionablyhave rendered him one of the greatestgenerals of his age. He was tall androbust, and brave in the highest degree;conducting the Highlanders inthe most heroic manner, and alwaysthe first to rush, sword in hand, intothe midst of the enemy. He usedto say, when we advanced to thecharge, ' I do not ask you, my lads,to go before, but merely to follow me.'He slept little, was continually occupiedwith all manner of details; andwas, altogether, most indefatigable,combining and directing alone all ouroperations : in a word, he was theonly person capable of conducting ourarmy. He was vigilant, active, anddiligent; his plans were always judiciouslyformed, and he carried thempromptly and vigorously into execution.However, with an infinity of goodqualities, he was not without his defects: proud, haughty, blunt, and imperious; he wished to have the exclusiveordering of every thing, and,THE PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.feeling his superiority, he would listento no advice. Still, it must be owned,that he had no coadjutor capable ofadvising him, and his having so completelythe confidence of his soldiersenabled him to perform wonders. Hepossessed the art of employing men toadvantage, without having had time todiscipline them; but taking them merelyas they came from the plough, he madethem defeat some of the best disciplinedtroops in the world. Nature had formedhim for a great warrior, he did not requirethe accidental advantage of birth."JAMES DRUMMOND, EARL OF PERTH.JAMES, the sixth earl, and, nominally,third Duke of Perth, was born inAugust, 1706. His father, the fifthearl, commonly called the Marquess ofDrummond, attended James the Secondto Ireland: he also joined the Jacobitesof 1715, with all the force hecould raise ; and, at the close of theinsurrection, escaped to France, wherehe died. His son, the sixth earl, imbibedthe unfortunate predilections ofhis race in favour of the Stuartss, andwas proud ef nothing so much as thepersonal regard evinced towards him byCharles Edward ; in whose army heacted as first lieutenant-general at thebattle of Preston-Pans. He appearsto have united considerable militaryskill with the most heroic courage.In spite of a very delicate constitution,"says Douglas, " he underwentthe greatest fatigues, and was the firston every occasion of duty, where hishead or hands could be of use ; bold asalion in the field, but ever merciful inthe hour of victory." After the battleof Culloden, he escaped to the coast,and embarked for France ; but hishealth being quite ruined by long continuedfatigue, and his spirit broken bymisfortune, he expired on the passage,on the 13th of May, 1746.GEORGE Mckenzie, EARL OF CROMARTIE.THIS nobleman was born in 1710.When about nineteen years of age,he married his first cousin, Lady Cas-leaven,by whom he had a largefamily. On the arrival of CharlesEdward in Scotland, he joined theinsurgents, with his eldest son, LordMacleod, and four hundred of his clan.He fought on foot, at the battle of Falkirk,among the Highlanders; to whomhe greatly endeared himself, by sharingin all their perils and privations. Onthe final retreat of the rebel army towardsthe north, he took refuge with hisson, at Dunrobin castle, where LordSutherland's militia surprised them, onthe 15th of April, 1746.They were soon afterwards sent toLondon, and, on the 28th of July,pleaded guilty to a charge of hightreason. When brought up to receivesentence, the earl most abjectly imploredthe peers to procure his pardon.His wife also presented a petition formercy to the king. "He was verycivil to her," says Walpole, " butwould not at all give her any hopes.She swooned away as soon as he wasgone. Lord Cornwallis told me, thather lord weeps every time any thing ofhis fate is mentioned to him. " LordCromartie," says the same author, on asubsequent occasion, " is reprieved, for apardon. If wives and children becomean argument for saving rebels, therewill cease to be a reason against theirgoing into rebellion."The earl's estates were sold byorder of government : he was allowed500 per annum out of the proceeds,the residue of which was settledon his children. Lord Macleod enteredthe Swedish service, and subsequentlyserved with the English armyin the East Indies. The earl died in1759.THE CHURCH.THE CHURCH.THOMAS Venison, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.THOMAS, son of the Reverend JohnTenison, was born at Cottenham, inCambridgeshire, on the 29th of September,1636. He acquired the rudimentsof education at the grammar-schoolof Norwich, whence, about theyear 1653, he was removed to CorpusChristii college, Cambridge. He tookthe degree of B. A. in 1657, and thatof M.A. in 1660, during which year heobtained a fellowship. In 1662, he becametutor of his college ; and, in 1665,he was chosen one of the universitypreachers, and presented to the curacy ofSt. Andrew the Great His conduct tothe sick, when the plague broke out atCambridge, was so exemplary and self-devoted,that, as a token of their admirationand gratitude, his parishionerspresented him with a valuable piece ofplate. In 1667, he took his degree ofBed., and became chaplain to the Earlof Manchester : from whom, about thesame time, he obtained the rectory ofHowell, in Huntingdonshire. Shortlyafterwards, he married Anne, the daughterof Dr. Love, master of his college.In 1674, he was appointed upper ministerof St. Peter's Bancroft, Norwich.In 1680, he took the degree of D. D. ;became one of the royal chaplains ; andwas presented, by Charles the Second,to the vicarage of St. Martin's-in-theFields. In 1685, he attended the Dukeof Monmouth to the scaffold ; on whichoccasion he deported himself, accordingto Burnet, with all the honest freedomof a Christian minister, and yet withsuch prudence, as to give no offence.Although a zealous protestant, he issaid to have been much esteemed, onaccount of his integrity and abilities, byJames the Second ; to whose successors,William and Mary, he rendered himselfparticularly acceptable, by his moderationtowards the dissenters. Soon afterthe revolution, he was made Archdeaconof London,; and, having displayedgreat zeal in a project, that wasshortly afterwards brought forward, forreconciling the various protestant sectsto the established church, he was raisedto the see of Lincoln, in 1691. It isrelated, that Lord Jersey, then masterof the horse, had endeavoured to preventhis elevation to the episcopalbench, by reminding Queen Mary thathe had preached a funeral sermon forthe celebrated Nell Glynn. " I haveheard as much," replied her majesty ;and it is a sign that the poor unfortunatewoman died penitent; for, if Ican read a man's heart through hislooks, had she not made a truly piousand Christian end, the doctor couldnever have been induced to speakwell of her."In 1693, he was offered the archbishopricof Dublin ; which, however,he refused, because a measure, suggestedby himself, and to which theking was favourable, of restoring to therespective parish churches, the impropriationsof estates forfeited to thecrown, could not be accomplished. Inthe following year, he was raised to thearchbishopric of Canterbury ; a stationfor which, in the opinion of a majorityof his contemporaries, he was eminentlyqualified. By her own desire, he attendedQueen Mary during her lastmoments, and preached her funeralsermon. Taking advantage of the seriousfeelings, which the death of hisconsort produced in King William,Tenison boldly censured him for hisimmoralities; and, in particular, protestedwith such energy against theTHE CHURCH.monarch's illicit connexion with LadyVilliers, that his majesty promisednever to see her again.He officiated as primate at the coronationof Queen Anne, with whomhe appears to have been by no meansa favourite, although he had strenuouslyexerted himself to procure heraproper settlement in the precedingreign. He, doubtless, rendered himselfobnoxious to her majesty, by hisstrong inclination for a protestant succession;which, in 1705, induced himto enter into a correspondence with theElectress Sophia. In 1706, he waschosen first commissioner for effectingthe union with Scotland; and, on thedeath of Queen Anne, he was one ofthose who were appointed to takecharge of the instrument, which gavethe new monarch power to appoint aregency, until his arrival in this country.He did not long survive the coronationof George the First, at which he officiatedas primate ; his death occurringon the 14th of December, 1715. Hewas buried in Lambeth church, by theside of his wife, who had died withoutissue, in the preceding year.Archbishop Tenison published an abletreatise, in opposition to the opinions ofHobbes ; Sir Thomas Browne s Tracts ;The Remains of Bacon ; A Discourseon Idolatry ; a variety of sermons, anda number of tracts, in defence of theestablished church against popery. Ofpreferment, he appears to have beenby no means ambitious. As a preacher,he was plain, but forcible ; and, as awriter, clear and argumentative, butnever brilliant. The parish of St. is indebted to himfor its library ; he rebuilt the chancel ofTopcroft church, where his parents wereburied; and, after having been eminentlybeneficent throughout life, bequeathed,at his death, very considerablesums to charitable uses. Macky says,that he was a plain, good, heavy man ;very tall ; of a fair complexion ; and agreat opponent of the progress of popery,in the reign of King James. Swift,doubtless under the influence of partyrancour, terms him, the most good-for-nothingprelate, and the dullest manhe ever knew. The witty dean is alsoreported to have originated the saying,that, " Tenison was as hot and heavyas a tailor's goose." On the other hand,Baxter regarded him with warm admiration; Burnet, ignorant of Swift'sanimosity towards him, declared, thathe had many friends, and no enemies ;Kennett speaks of him as having beenexemplary in every station of life ; theanonymous author of his memoirs statesthat he was an exact pattern of thatexemplary piety, charity, stedfastness,andgood conduct, requisite in a governorof the church ; and Garth, alluding tohis elevation to the primacy, says : -Good Tenison ' celestial piety,At last, bu railed him to the sacred ice.GILBERT BURNET, BISHOP OF SALISBURY.THIS celebrated prelate, the son of aScotch civilian, was born at Edinburgh,on the 18th of September, 1643. Afterhaving made some progress in learning,under the instruction of his father, hewas sent to the university of Aberdeen,where he obtained the degree of M. A.before he was fourteen years of age.Feeling some inclination for the bar,he studied civil and feudal law forabout a year, and then abandoned itentirely for theological pursuits. He issaid to have made himself master ofschool divinity by the time he hadreached his eighteenth year, when hewas admitted a probationer, and wentthrough such examinations as qualifiedhim, without ordination, to become apreacher in the church of Scotland.One of his relatives now offered him agood living, but he thought proper todecline it, modestly deeming himselfunequal to the charge. On the deathof his father, then a lord of session, in1661, his friends advised him to resumehis legal pursuits, with a view of practisingat the Scotch bar. Burnet, however,refused to abandon the study ofdivinity, in which he continued to makeextraordinary progress. In 1663, heBISHOP BURNET.visited Oxford and Cambridge, wherehe became acquainted with most of thelearned men of the day, and muchimproved himself in mathematics andphilosophy.On his return to Scotland, Sir RobertFletcher offered him the living ofSaltoun; but Burnet, wishing to visitHolland, begged leave to decline it infavour of a gentleman, from whom hehad received some valuable instructionswith respect to extempore preaching.Fletcher, however, determinedto keep the living vacant, until Burnet'sreturn from Holland ; whither the latterproceeded in 1664, and while residingat Amsterdam, studied Hebrew undera learned Jewish rabbi. He subsequentlyremoved to Paris, and thenceto London, where he was made a fellowof the Royal Society. Returning toScotland, he found the living of Saltounstill vacant, but Sir Robert Fletchercould not prevail upon him to take it,until, by preaching to the parishioners,for some months, he had ascertainedthat his ministry was acceptable. In1665, he was ordained priest ; and, forsome years, performed the duties of hissacred office, at Saltoun, in a mostexemplary manner ; comforting, reproving,instructing, and assisting themembers of his congregation, as occasionrequired. One of his parishioners havingfallen into difficulties, Burnet askedhim how much would be sufficient toset him up again in business. Theman named a certain sum, which Burnetimmediately ordered his servant tofetch. "Sir," said the servant, "it isall we have in the house." " Well,well," replied Burnet, " pay it to thispoor man : you do not know the pleasurethere is in making a man glad."About this time, he drew up a statementof the abuses practised by theScotch bishops, to each of whom hesent a copy of it, signed with his ownhand. This bold proceeding, in soyoung a man, exposed him to the deepresentment of Archbishop Sharpe, who,had he been seconded by his brethren,would, as it appears, have taken immediatemeasures for Burnet's deprivationand excommunication. In 1669, hewas elected professor of divinity at Glasgow; where, it is said, he continued fouryears and a half, hated by the presbyterians,lest his moderation shouldlead to the establishment of episcopacy ;and by the episcopalians, because hewas for exempting the dissenters fromtheir persecutions. While officiating atSaltoun, it was remarked, that he hadused the only copy of the church ofEngland prayer-book which had beenknown to have existed in the churchof Scotland from the beginning of thereign of Charles the Second.Soon after his election to the professorship,he published A Modest andFree Conference between a Conformistand a Non-conformist, which procuredhim an increase of esteem among thefriends of moderation. He next occupiedhimself in compiling his Memoirs ofthe Duke of Hamilton, relative to whichhe visited London, and while there, it issaid, he was offered, but refused, a Scotchbishopric. On his return to Glasgow,he married Lady Margaret Kennedy,daughter of the Earl of Cassius; towhom, on the day of their union, withoutany solicitation on her part, heunexpectedly delivered a deed, bywhich the whole of her fortune wassecured to herself. This he did, it issaid, to silence the imputation of havingmarried a woman whose age exceededhis own, from interested motives.In 1672, he published A Vindicationof the Authority, Constitution, andLaws of the Church and State of Scotland,a work which was strikingly atvariance with his previous opinions.It met with great approbation at court,and procured for Burnet the offer of aScotch archbishopric, which, however,he would not accept In 1673, appearedhis Mystery of Iniquity Unveiled.During the same year, while he was inLondon, whither he had proceeded forthe purpose of obtaining a license toprint his Memoirs of the Duke ofHamilton, he was made chaplain to theking; with whom, and also with theDuke of York, he is said to have hadseveral private interviews. But hiscourt-favour was of brief duration ; hisname being struck out of the list ofroyal chaplains, soon after his return toScotland, for opposing the measures ofLauderdale. He shortly afterwardsfound it necessary, as it is stated, forhis personal security, to resign the professorshipof divinity, at Glasgow, andremove to London.He now printed his Truth of ReligionTHE CHURCH.Examined ; and after having refusedthe living of St. Giles's, Cripplegate,which had previously been intended forhis friend, Dr. Fowler, he was appointed,in 1675, preacher at the Rolls, and, soonafterwards, lecturer of St. Clement's.In 1676, lie published his Memoirs ofthe Duke of Hamilton, and An Accountof a Conference between himself,Coleman, and Dr. Stillingfleet. Therapid progress of popery, at this time,induced him to undertake a Historyof the Reformation; the first volume ofwhich, after having remained a year inmanuscript, to receive the corrections ofhis friends, was produced in 1679. Itnot only met with great approbationfrom the public, but procured for theauthor the high honour of thanks fromboth houses of parliament; with a requestthat he would prosecute hisdesign to a conclusion. In 1681, appeareda second volume of the work jand, during the same year, he printedAn Account of the Life and Death ofthe Earl of Rochester, which containeda most interesting account of his conferenceswith that profligate nobleman,whose death-bed he had attended, atthe expiring libertine's request.He soon afterwards published his Lifeof Sir Matthew Hale; The History ofthe Regale ; The Method of Conversionby the Clergy of France examined ; andAn Abridgment of the History of theReformation. About the same time,after having attended Mrs. Roberts, oneof Charles the Second's mistresses, inher dying moments, he addressed aletter to that monarch, in which heboldly censured his majesty's misgovernmentand licentiousness. " I toldthe king," he says, " I hoped thereflection on what had befallen hisfather, on the 30th of January, mightmove him to consider these things morecarefully. The king read the lettertwice over, and threw it into the fire."In 1683, appeared his Translation ofSir Thomas More's Utopia. He hadnow become so intimately connectedwith the party opposed to government,that, after having attended Lord Russellto the scaffold, he deemed it prudent togo to Paris ; and while there, he wasdeprived of his lectureship, by the king'smandate, and forbidden to preach againat the Rolls. In 1685, he published hisLife of Dr. Befell ; and, about the sameperiod, returned to England: but, onthe accession of James the Second, heagain fled to Paris, in order to avoidbeing inculpated with the conspiratorsin favour of M monmouth. From Paris, heproceeded to Rome, where Pope Innocentthe Eleventh offered to give hima private audience in bed, to avoid theceremony of kissing the slipper of hisholiness ; Burnet, however, declined theproposal. He was treated with greatconsideration by the Cardinals Howardand D'Estrees; but became involved insome religious disputes, on account ofwhich, Prince Borghese recommendedhim to quit Rome. He then made atour through Italy, Switzerland, Germany,and France ; of which, he afterwardspublished an account, in a seriesof letters addressed to Mr. Boyle.At the conclusion of his tour, he repairedto the Hague, on the invitationof the Prince and Princess of Orange,in whose councils, with respect to England,he took so prominent a share, thatJames the Second ordered a prosecutionto be commenced against him for hightreason, and demanded his person fromthe States General, but without effect, ashehad previously acquired the rightsof naturalization, by forming an union(his first wife being dead) with a Dutchlady, of large fortune, named Scott. Hetook a particularly active part in therevolution of 1688, and accompaniedthe new monarch to England, as chaplain.The king, soon afterwards, offeredhim the bishopric of Sarum, which,however, he begged his majesty tobestow on his old friend, Dr. Lloyd.I have another person in view," coldlyreplied the king; who, the next day,nominated Burnet himself to the see,and subsequently conferred on him thechancellorship of the order of the Garter.On taking his seat in the house oflords, he declared himself to be an advocatefor moderate measures towardsnon-juring divines, and for the tolerationof protestant dissenters. He actedas chairman of the committee to whomthe bill, for settling the succession, wasreferred ; and displayed so much sealingfavour of the house of Hanover, thatthe Princess Sophia corresponded withhim until within a very short period of herdeath. In 1692, he published a pastoralletter to the clergy of his diocese, which,on account of its containing a statementBISHOP BURNET.that the title of William and Mary tothe crown, might be grounded on theright of conquest, was, three years afterwards,during the ascendancy of Burnet'spolitical enemies, ordered to be burntby the common hangman.He published Four Discourses tothe Clergy, in 1694; An Essay on theCharacter of Queen Mary, in 1695 ; andA Vindication of Archbishop Tillotson,in 1696. In 1698, he became tutor to theyoung Duke of Gloucester ; and, duringthe same year, (having lost his secondwife,) married Mrs. Berkeley, the authoressof a pious work, entitled A Method ofDevotion. In 1699, he produced his Expositionof the Thirty-nine Articles; in1710, his Church Catechism Explained;and, in 1715, the third volume of hisHistory of the Reformation. He diedof a pleuritic fever, on the 17th of March,in the last-mentioned year, leaving threesons ; one of whom published the deceasedprelate's celebrated History ofhis own Times, with an account of hislife, in 1723-4. In addition to hismore important works already specified,Bishop Burnet was the author of severalminor theological and political pieces;which, however, add but little to hisfame.He is described by Macky, his cotemporary,as " a large, strong-made, bold-lookedman, and one of the greatestorators of his age. His History of theReformation, and his Exposition of theThirty-nine Articles," continues Macky,shew him to be a man of great learning; but several of his other worksshew him to be a man neither ofprudence nor temper; his sometimesopposing, and sometimes favouring thedissenters, hath much exposed him tothe generality of the people of England ;yet he is very useful in the house ofpeers ; and proves a great pillar, bothof the civil and ecclesiastical constitution,against the encroachments of aparty which would destroy both. Onthe queen's succession to the throne, hewas the first who brought the news toher of King William's death, and salutedher queen ; yet was turned out of hislodgings at court, and met with severalaffronts."His character," says a foreigner,quoted in Crowley's observations onEngland, " was an odd mixture of violenceand complaisance, which he madealternately subservient to promoting hisfortune. He was concerned in all thegreat changes, and had a hand in all theintrigues which agitated England, fromthe year 1680 till his death. Evervarying his principles according to circumstances,he was unshaken in nothingbut his hatred to the house of Stuart.This hatred it was, that excited KingWilliam to promote him to the episcopaldignity, and confer on him the place ofchancellor of the order of the Garter,and that of preceptor to the Duke ofGloucester. He was afterwards aswarma partizan of the house of Hanover,as he had been of the Prince ofOrange ; but death did not give himtime to reap the fruits of this new attachment."Some Tory wag, soon after his decease,proposed the following inscriptionfor his monument :Here Sanim lies, of late so wise,Lawn sleeves be wore, but was no moreA Christian than Socinus.Oaths, pro and con, he swallow 'd down ;I.ovM gold like any layman ;Wrote, preach'd, and pray'd ; and yet betray MGod's holy word for Mammon.Of every vice he had a spice,Although a rev'rend prelate ;And liv'd and died, if not belied,A true dissenting zealot.If such a soul to Heav'n should stroll,And 'scape old Satan's clutches ;We then presume there may be room,For Marlborough and his duchess !Many of his friends, blind to his realdefects, which his enemies have greatlymagnified, appear to have thought, asone of them admits, that " his talentsgave him a privilege for straying fromthe strict rules of caution, and exemptedhim from the ordinary censure." Inextenuation of his activity as a politician,which, under different circumstances,would have been degrading tohis character as a divine, it has beensuggested that, in his times, the establishedchurch was in danger, fromthe probability of a popish succession;to defeat which, it became decorous andlaudable for her most dignified supportersto take an influential part inpublic affairs.That he was betrayed, by the ardourof his temperament, into frequent improprieties,it would be rash to deny ;THE CHURCH.but his motives appear to have beenalways conscientious; and the generaltenour of his conduct, was certainlymore worthy of applause than deservingof censure. Repossessed many virtues,some prejudices, several failings, but nopositive vice. He was zealous for the promotionof religion ; extensively tolerant,though conspicuously hostile to papacy ;assiduous in the discharge of his episcopalduties ; a warm advocate for betteringthe condition of the poor clergy ;an enemy to pluralities; a benefactorto the unfortunate ; an excellent husband,a good father, and a constantfriend. His chief failings were self-importance,credulity, officiousness, and agossipping garrulity, which frequentlyrendered him offensive, exposed him torepeated inconveniences, and often ledhim into misrepresentations, althoughhis breaches of veracity never appearto have been intentional.With him originated the measure foraugmenting poor livings out of the firstfruitspayable to the crown ; during theprogress of which, he either institutedto prebendal stalls, or bestowed smallannuities upon, those ministers in hisdiocese, whose incomes were too slenderfor their comfortable maintenance. Heallowed pensions to several clergymen'swidows, who had been left destitute;contributed largely to the repairingand building of churches and parsonage-houses; supported four students at theuniversity, and fifty boys at a schoolat Salisbury, whom, in due time, heapprenticed to tradesmen ; assisted industriouspersons, who were in distress ;and constantly expended so much ofhis episcopal revenue in acts of benevolenceand hospitality, that, at hisdeath, he left no more than was barelysufficient to pay his debts.Equally opposed to political as toreligious persecution, he interfered,effectually, although in opposition tothe wishes of the Whig lords, in behalfof the Earl of Clarendon, when thatnobleman, in 1690, became involved insome of the plots of the day. He alsointerested himself in favour of Sir JohnFenwick ; and procured Queen Anne'spardon for Dr. Beach, a non-juringdivine, who had preached a treasonablesermon. His letter to Charles theSecond affords a strong proof of hisdisinterestedness ; and it is said, thatduring the reign of William and Mary,although he never lost the royal favour,he frequently digested their majesties,by the bold candour with which hedelivered his sentiments. He was carelessof preferment, which, on severaloccasions, he felt anxious to decline, infavour of his friends. To him, pluralists,whom he designated as sacrilegiousrobbers of the revenues of thechurch, were so odious, that his chaplainswere invariably dismissed on theirobtaining promotion. A clergyman inhis diocese, once asked him if, on theauthority of St. Bernard, he might nothold two livings. " How will you beable to serve them both ?" inquiredBurnet " I intend to officiate bydeputy, in one," was the reply. " Willyour deputy," said the bishop, " bedamned for you too ? Believe me, youmay serve your cure by proxy, but youmust be damned in person !" The Rev.Dr. Kelsey, a pluralist, who happenedto be present, was so struck with thesewords, that, it is said, he immediatelyresigned one of his preferments.In the discharge of his duty, as aprelate, he remedied many abuses ; anddisplayed his characteristic fearlessness,in supporting the true interests of thechurch. The lord chancellor havingpresented an ignorant young noblemanto a living in the bishopric of Salisbury,Burnet refused to institute him. Hewas, consequently, threatened with aprosecution by the chancellor, who,however, finding him resolute, consentedto abandon the presentation.Burnet then made an offer, which wasaccepted, to perform the parochialduties of the living, until he should havequalified the young nobleman to dischargethem himself.In conversation, he is described ashaving been often unintentionally disagreeable,through a singular want ofconsideration. One day, during Marlborough'sdisgrace, and voluntary exile,Burnet, while dining with the duchess,who was a reputed termagant, comparedthe duke to Belisarius. " How doyou account," inquired her grace, for sogreat a man as that celebrated Roman,having been so miserable and deserted ?"Oh ! madam," replied the bishop, " hehad, as you know, such a sad brimstoneof a wife !"When Prince Eugene visited England,ARCHBISHOP WAKE.at the latter end of Queen Anne'sreign, Burnet, whose curiosity is saidto have been equal to that of anywoman in the kingdom, contrived to beamong the guests at a dinner party, towhich the prince was invited, at Marlboroughhouse. He had previouslybeen warned to say nothing whichmight disgust the illustrious visitor,whose mother, the Countess of Soissons,it is necessary to remark, had beenimprisoned, at Paris, on suspicion ofhaving been concerned in the administrationof poison to certain individuals,about the year 1680. Burnet preservedan inflexible silence, until the prince,discovering his name, entered into conversationwith him, and, among otherquestions, asked him when he had lastvisited Paris. The bishop answered,precipitately, that " he could not recollectthe year, but it was about the timewhen the Countess of Soissons wasimprisoned."Although hasty and careless in hiscomposition, he has, deservedly, by hisvigour, the variety of his knowledge,and the liberality of his sentiments,acquired considerable reputation as anauthor. Horace Walpole, after statingthat his very credulity is a proof ofhis honesty, declares his style andmanner to be very interesting. "Itseems," he adds, " as if he had justcome from the king's closet, or fromthe apartments of the man whom hedescribes, and was telling his reader, inplain terms, what he had seen andheard." The humorous piece, entitled,Memoirs of P. P. the ParishClerk, was composed in ridicule of theHistory of his own Times ; a work,which, on account of its anecdotes andcharacters, excited considerable clamouramong the Tories, and exposed hismemory to much animadversion andridicule from Swift, Pope, and Arbuthnot.His Exposition of the Thirty-nineArticles, originally undertaken atthe request of Queen Mary and ArchbishopTillotson, although it incurredthe censure of the lower house of convocation,was honoured with the applauseof Tenison, Sharpe, Stillingfleet,Patrick, Lloyd, Hall, and others, and isstill esteemed a standard work on thesubject of which it treats. His Historyof the Reformation, which has beenvisited with much animadversion, ishighly illustrative of the fervour, talent,and honesty of its author ; whose Accountof the Life and Death of theEarl of Rochester, Dr. Johnson says, isa book the critic ought to read for itselegance, the philosopher for its arguments,and the saint for its piety.WILLIAM WAKE, ARCHBISHOP OP CANTERBURY.THIS eminent prelate was born in1657, at Sandford, in Dorsetshire. Hecommenced his university education atChristchurch, Oxford, where he tookthe degree of B. A. in 1676, and thatof M.A. in 1679. It appears that hisfather wished him to enter into business,as a clothier ; but, preferring theministry, he was allowed to obtain ordination; and, in 1682, he visited Paris,as chaplain to the envoy extraordinary,Viscount Preston, who had been hisfellow-collegian.Soon after his return to England, hewas elected preacher to the society ofGray's-inn; contrary, as it appears, tothe express desire of James the Second,to whom he had given offence, by hisspirited Exposition of the Doctrines ofthe Church of England; in which, hehad closely imitated the style, and exposedthe sophisms, of Bossuet, thefamous Bishop of Beaux. After havingpublished some other theological piecesagainst the Roman catholic faith, heproceeded to the degrees of B. D. andD. D. ; became one of the royal chaplains,and deputy clerk of the closetto William and Mary ; and obtained acanonry of Christchurch. In 1693, heproduced An English Version of thegenuine Epistles of the ApostolicalFathers ; which, on its being subsequentlyrepublished, with additions,exposed him to an attack from Dr.Middleton. In 1694, he was presentedto the rectory of St. James's, Westminster;and, three years afterwards,THE CHURCH.appeared his Defence of the Power ofChristian Princes over EcclesiasticalSynods, with particular Respect to theConvocations of the Clergy of theChurch of England. This work wasspeedily followed by his Vindication ofthe King's Supremacy, against bothPopish and Fanatical Opposers; as areward for which, perhaps, he was promoted,by the crown, in 1701, to thedeanery of Exeter. His doctrines hadalready been vehemently attacked byBurnet, Kennett, Gibson, Atterbury, andothers; in opposition to whom, he publisheda work, in 1703, entitled, TheState of the Church and the Clergy ofEngland considered ; which, it is said,decided the contest in his favour.In 1705, he was promoted to thebishopric of Lincoln ; and, being astrenuous opponent to high-churchprinciples, warmly concurred in theprosecution and punishment of Sacheverell.A few months after the accessionof George the First, he was raisedto the primacy , and his views, withregard to ecclesiastical affairs, sufferedan immediate and extraordinary change.He wrote and spoke against the proposedrepeal of the schism act, which,previously, during its progress throughthe house of lords, he had warmly opposed.His first speech from the episcopalbench had been in favour of acompromise with the dissenters; buthe now resist d the repeal of the conformitybill; insisted on the necessityof continuing the test and corporationacts; and, in conjunction with LordNottingham, brought in a bill for imposinga new test against Arian opinions.In 1717, he formed a scheme foruniting the English and Gallicanchurches ; and entered into a secretcorrespondence on the subject withLupin, De Noailles, and others, throughthe medium of Beauvoir, chaplain: to theBritish ambassador, at Paris. The negotiationhad proceeded so far, that a planfor the proposed union, had been readand approved of in the sorbonne; when,the affair being made public, a clamourwas raised against De Noailles and hisfriends, for attempting, as it was said,to bring about a coalition with heretics;and the French government, which,from temporary political motives, hadappeared to encourage the design, sentthe whole of Archbishop Wake's lettersto the pope, who is stated to have muchadmired the catholic spirit and abilitydisplayed by the writer. Soon afterthe failure of this, his favourite project,which exposed him to great vituperation,the primate corresponded, relativelyto a proposed union between theRoman catholics and the Lutherans,with Jablonski, the Pole, whom heearnestly exhorted not to enter intoany arrangement with the church ofRome, except on a footing of perfectequality; and not to sacrifice truth foratemporal advantage, or even to a desireof peace.On account of his infirmities, duringthe latter years of his life, the duties ofthe primacy were, for the most part,performed by Gibson, Bishop of London.He lingered, in a most enfeebledstate, until the 24th of January, 1737 ;when he expired, at Lambeth palace,leaving, by his wife, Ethelred, coheiressof her father, Sir WilliamHavel, knight, six daughters, all ofwhom were married at the time of hisdecease. He was buried within theprecincts of the archiepiscopal palace,at Croydon ; which, together with thatat Lambeth, he is said to have repairedand improved, at an expense of l 1,000.He bequeathed his valuable collectionof books, manuscripts, and ancientcoins, to the society of Christchurch,Oxford.Archbishop Wake is represented tohave been gentle, benevolent, and conciliating;liberal in his disbursements,and munificent in his charities ; powerful,but never acrimonious, as a controversialist; and a most zealous advocatefor concord in the Christian church. Thehistorical fact, however, of his hostilityto toleration, after he had attained theprimacy, throws some doubt upon hisimputed sincerity, in recommendingan extensive reconciliation of theologicaldifferences. He has, indeed, beenbroadly accused, by his opponents, ofthe grossest tergiversation, particularlywith regard to Arian opinions ; againstwhich he introduced a test bill, in1721, although he had spoken of themwith moderation, nearly amounting toapproval, in 1712.Besides the works already mentioned,he was the author of severaltracts against the doctrines of the Romishchurch; of a letter, addressed toBISHOP Kenneth.a young lady in France, entitled, APreparation for Death, which reacheda fourth edition, so early as 1688 ; ofthree volumes of sermons, publishedafter his death ; and of some othertheological productions.WHITE Kenneth, BISHOP OF PETERBOROUGH.this learned prelate was born atDover, on the 10th of August, 1660.After having acquired the rudimentsof education at Eleham and Wye, hewas removed to Westminster school ;where, however, the progress of hisstudies was interrupted by an attackof the small-pox ; on recovering fromwhich, he became tutor to the sonsof a country gentleman ; and, in 1678,was entered of St. Edmund's hall, Oxford,under the celebrated Allan, whosoapproved of his exercises, as to readthem before the college. His first literaryemployment appears to have beenon the Athena Oxoniensis, for which hewas employed, by Matthew Wood, tocollect epitaphs and notices of eminentmen. In 1680, he gave offence to theWhigs, by publishing A Political Letterfrom a Student at Oxford to a Friendin the Country ; and, in the followingyear, aggravated them further, by producingA Tory Ballad on the Dissolutionof Parliament.He took his degree of B. A. in 1682,and soon afterwards published a translationfrom Erasmus, entitled Witagainst Wisdom; or, a Panegyric uponFolly. In 1684, he printed a Life ofChabrias ; and, taking orders, becamecurate of Barrister. In 1685, he proceededM. A., and was presented tothe vicarage of Amersden, by Sir W r williamGlynn ; to whom, in 1686, hededicated a translation of Pliny's panegyricupon Trajan, which was consideredas an indirect eulogium on Jamesthe Second ; although Kennett, at thesame time, rendered himself obnoxiousto the more violent partisans of thatmonarch, by declaiming against popery,and refusing to read the royal declarationof indulgence.While on a shooting excursion, in1689, the front of his skull was sodreadfully fractured, by the bursting ofhis gun, that he was compelled to submitto the operation of trepanning, andever afterwards wore a black patch overthe part that had been thus injured.It is said, that when suffering mostseverely from the consequences of theaccident, he calmly wrote some Latinverses, which, according to one of hisbiographers, were " thought, by goodjudges, to be no reproach to theauthor."In 1691, having previously becometutor and vice-principal of his college,he was chosen lecturer of St. Martin's,Oxford; and, in 1693, he obtained therectory of Shottesbrook, in Berkshire ;but still continued to reside at the university,devoting a great portion of histime to antiquarian researches, and thestudy of Saxon. About this time, hewrote a life of Sooner, and subsequentlypublished Parochial Antiquities,and Sir Henry Seaman's Historyand Fate of Sacrilege, with additionalauthorities. Having been admittedB. D. in 1694, he proceeded to the degreeof D. D. in 1699. In 1700, he wasappointed, without any solicitation onhis part, minister of St. Botolph, Aid-gate; in the following year, he becamearchdeacon of Huntingdon, and acquiredgreat reputation among the low-churchmen,by engaging in a disputewith Atterbury, on the rights of Convocation.In 1703, he created muchclamour by a discourse on clerical privileges; and, two years after, preacheda consecration sermon, which chiefjustice Holt said, "had more in it, tothe purpose, of the legal and Christianconstitution of the church, than anyvolume of discourses." In 1706, appearedhis Continuation of the Historyof England, from Charles the First toQueen Anne. In the following year,he was appointed a royal chaplain, andpreached a funeral sermon on the firstDuke of Devonshire, by which he procuredthe patronage of that nobleman'ssuccessor, and, at the same time, greatlyexasperated his enemies, who said, thatTHE CHURCH.he had built a bridge to heaven formen of wit and parts, but had excludedthe duller part of mankind from anychance of passing it.Through the interest of his patron,he now procured the deanery of Peterborough,as well as the rectory of St.Mary, Aldermanbury, and acquiredgreat favour with the Whigs, who, inthe early part of his career, had beenthe objects of his derision, by his sternopposition to Sacheverell, for which,he was denounced, by the Tories, asan enemy to government, and a traitorto the cause, which, at a former period,he had, upon conviction, espoused.Among other offensive expedientsadopted by the high churchmen, torender him odious, he was depictedas Judas Iscariot, in an altar-piece, representingthe last supper, at Whitechapelchurch, to which vast crowdswere consequently attracted, until theBishop of London properly directedthat the painting should be removed.In 1713, he made a large collectionof books and maps, for the purpose ofpreparing a History of the Propagationof Christianity in English America;and, about the same time, founded anantiquarian and historical library atPeterborough. In 1715, he publisheda discourse On the Witchcraft of theRebellion ; and, although his conductand doctrines were, it is said, in somerespects, offensive to the new government,he was promoted, in 1718, tothe bishopric of Peterborough, whichhe held during the remainder of hislife. He died, at his house in St.James's street, on the 19th of December,1728. Besides his literary laboursalready mentioned, he partly edited acollection of English historians, andpublished A Register and Chronicle,Ecclesiastical and Civil. The Marquessof Lansdowne purchased the whole ofhis valuable manuscripts, which were,eventually, deposited in the BritishMuseum.Bishop Kennett is described as havingbeen courteous, bountiful, andcommunicative. His application wasintense, his judgment solid, his styleeasy, and his elocution impressive. Asaprelate, his conduct appears to havebeen exemplary ; but, before his elevationto the episcopal bench, he certainly,on some occasions, displayed more zealas a partisan, than dignity as a divine.FRANCIS Canterbury, BISHOP OF ROCHESTER.FRANCIS, son of Lewis Atterbury,a time-serving divine, was born atMilton-Keynes, near Newport Panel,in 1662. After having greatly distinguishedhimself at Westminster school,he was elected to a studentship, atChristchurch, Oxford, where he soonbecame conspicuous for classical attainmentsand poetical abilities. In 1684, hetook the degree of H. A.; and, in 1687,that of M. A. During the latter year,he published his first work, entitled,Considerations on the Spirit of MartinLuther, &c. ; and it is suspected that,about the same time, he assisted hispupil, Boyle, in the controversy withBentley, relative to the Epistles ofPalais. Disgusted with a college life,and feeling himself, as he stated, " madefor another scene, and another sort ofconversation," he adopted the advice ofhis worldly-minded lather, (who hadadvised Jim to form a matrimonialalliance, which might better his prospects,)and married a relative of theDuke of Leeds, named Osborne, whopossessed a fortune of 7,000.In 1691, he entered into holy orders ;and, two years afterwards," becamechaplain in ordinary to the king andqueen, preacher at Bridewell, andlecturer at St. Bride's. The spiritand elegance of his discourses soonrendered him popular; while the tendencyof his opinions thigh-churchdoctrines, exposed him to the attacksof Hoadly and others, with whom hewillingly entered into a controversy.In 1700, he commenced a dispute withDr. Wake, on the rights, powers, andprivileges of convocations, in which hesupported the principles of his ecclesiasticalparty, with such zeal and dexterity,although with little ChristianBISHOP Canterbury.charity or candour, that, at its conclusion,four years afterwards, he receivedthe solemn thanks of the lowerhouse of convocation, and the degreeof D. D. ; although he was not then ofsufficient standing in the university tohave obtained it in the regular 'course.On the accession of Queen Anne, hebecame chaplain in ordinary to hermajesty ; and, two years afterwards,Dean of Carlisle. In 1705, appeared apamphlet, entitled, The Christian Religion,as professed by a Daughter ofthe Church of England; of which hewas suspected, and accused by LordStanhope, of being the author. In1707, he was made a canon of Exetercathedral ; and, in 1709, preacher at theRolls chapel. He engaged in anothercontroversy with Hoadly, on the doctrineof passive obedience ; and aidedmaterially in the defence of Sacheverell,for whom he is stated to have becomebail. At this time, he was prolocutorto the lower house of convocation ; and,as it is alleged, wrote, and privatelycirculated, a work, which was deemedtoo grossly violent to be presented tothe queen, entitled, A Representation ofthe present State of Religion. In 1712,he was made Dean of Christchurch ;and, in the following year, by the recommendationof Lord Oxford, Bishopof Rochester, and Dean of Westminster.On the death of Queen Anne, it isasserted that he offered, with a sufficientguard, to proclaim the Pretender in fullcanonicals. George the First, who was,doubtless, aware of his political sentiments,treated him with marked coolness; and Atterbury evinced his disaffectiontowards the new monarch, byrefusing to sign the loyal declaration ofthe bishops, during the rebellion, in1715; and suspended a clergyman inhis diocese, (Gibbon, curate of Gravesend,)for allowing the performance ofdivine service in his church to theDutch troops, who had been broughtover to act against the insurgents. Atlength, he engaged in a correspondencewith the Pretender's friends, for whichhe was committed to the Tower, inAugust, 1722, and, in the followingMarch, a bill of pains and penaltieswas brought forward against him. Hedefended himself with great eloquence,but contemptible hypocrisy ;. meekly,but stedfastly, denying his guilt, whichhas since been established on authenticateddocumentary evidence. The bill,although vehemently opposed by manyof the peers of Atterbury's party, whodeclared it to be grossly unconstitutional,was passed into a law ; and, byits operation, the bishop was strippedof his benefices, exiled for life, and deprivedof the society of British subjectsresiding abroad ; they being forbiddento visit him, without permission underthe king's sign manual, which, however,was not withheld from any of hisrelatives.In June, 1723, he proceeded, withhis favourite daughter, Mrs. Morice, toBrussels ; and, soon afterwards, fixedhis residence at Paris, where he amusedhimself, chiefly, during the remainderof his life, in corresponding with eminentmen of letters. But his love ofpolitical intrigue, appears to have neversubsided. While pretending to bewholly devoted to the enjoyments ofliterature, and affecting, even in hiscorrespondence with Pope, to be afriend to the constitution as it thenexisted, he was secretly contributing,as a collection of letters, published atEdinburgh in 1768, unquestionablyprove, to the advance of the Jacobitecause in the Highlands. His last yearswere much embittered by the death ofhis favourite daughter, Mrs. Morice,the voluntary companion of his exile,who expired in his arms, in 1729. Hehad three other children by his wife,(who died in 1722,) of whom, only one,Osborn, Rector of Oxhill, in Warwickshire,survived him. His own deathoccurred in the month of February,1731, and his remains were permittedto be brought to this country, and privatelyinterred in Westminster abbey.Although remarkably turbulent, aspiring,and contentious, Bishop Canterburysucceeded in obtaining a highcharacter for moderation and humility,from many of his contemporaries, by anaffected suavity of deportment, and ahypocritical mildness of expression.Few prelates have evinced a more intemperatespirit of partisanship, or agreater share of daring ambition. Hewas hostile to civil and religious liberty,from political, rather than conscientiousmotives; passive obedience, and nonresistance,being among the chief tenetsof the party, to which he had deemedTHE CHURCH.it most prudent to attach himself. Earlyin life, according to a statement madeby his friend, Pope, to Lord Chesterfield,he was a sceptic with regard torevealed religion ; from which, however,it is added, he derived his chiefconsolation during his adversity. Itwould be absurd to deny him the possessionof considerable talent : he wasan effective preacher, and an admirableparliamentary orator ; yet, he enjoysmore celebrity as an author than heappears to deserve. This may be attributedto his intimacy with the literaryaristocrats of his day, who, influencedby friendship, or party prejudices,ascribed to his writings a degree ofexcellence, which they do not, inreality, possess. His controversial productionsare brilliant, but shallow ; hiscriticisms evince more taste and fancythan erudition ; and his translationsfrom Horace have, as it is now generallyadmitted, obtained greater praisethan they merit. His sermons, however,it must be confessed, are clear, forcible,and, though never sublime, occasionallyeloquent and pathetic; and his letters,on which his fame, as a writer, mustprincipally depend, are superior evento those of Pope : but the great delightwhich a perusal of them would otherwiseafford, is marred, by a conviction,in the minds of those who are acquaintedwith the circumstances of hiscareer, that no dependence can beplaced on his sincerity. " Atterbury,"says Horace Walpole, " was nothingmore nor less than a Jacobite priest:his writings were extolled by that faction; but his letter on Clarendon'shistory is truly excellent." He appearsto have married from motives of interest,and his elder brother, Lewis, rector ofClipperton and Horsey, in Middlesex,a plain and benevolent divine, is saidto have had reason to complain of hisneglect.WILLIAM WHISTON.THIS extraordinary divine was bornat Norton, in Leicestershire, of whichhis father was rector, in the year 1C67.On account of a hypochondriacal affection,under which he laboured, hestudied at home, until the age of seventeen; when he was sent to Tamworthschool, from which he was removed, twoyears after, to Clare hall, Cambridge,where he distinguished himself by hisardent application to the mathematics.In 1690, he commenced B. A., and, proceedingM. A. in 1693, became a fellowof his college, and an academical tutor.His reputation for learning was rapidlyon the increase, when, in consequenceof his bodily inability to fulfil theduties of his station, he took holyorders, and obtained the appointmentof chaplain to Lor. Moore, bishop ofNorwich, who, in 1698, presented himto the living of Lowestoft, in Suffolk.He had, previously, (in 1696) publisheda highly imaginative work, entitled,A Theory of the Earth, of whichLocke said, " It deserves great commendation; and is the more to be admiredfor its hypotheses, whereby heexplains so many wonderful and beforeinexplicable things, in the great changesof this globe ; and the whole is entirelynew. Such writers, I always fancy,should be most esteemed. I am alwaysfor the builders who bring someaddition to our knowledge, or, at least,some new things to our thoughts."At Lowestoft, he devoted himselfassiduously to the duties of his cure,and, while residing there, it is related,that, on being requested to sign thenecessary document for opening a newalehouse, he said, " Had you broughtme a paper for pulling an alehousedown, I would certainly have signedit, but I will never sign one for settingan alehouse up." In 1700, Newton, whosubsequently resigned in his favour,appointed him his deputy, as professorof mathematics, at Cambridge ; whereWhiston, who now gave up his benefice,for some time held the office ofpathetical lecturer, at St. Clement's. In1706, appeared his Essay on the Revelationsof St. John; and, in 1707, hepreached a course of sermons, as Boy-leanlecturer, on Scripture prophecies,WILLIAM WHISTON.which were printed in the followingyear. About this period, he wroteAn Essay on the Apostolic Constitution,which he avowed, in his opinion,to be the most sacred of the canonicalbooks of the New Testament. In thisproduction, he had thrown out doubtsas to the divinity of our Saviour ; and, inasermon, preached shortly afterwards,he affirmed that the children of Josephand the Virgin Mary were the naturalbrothers and sisters of Christ. He thenopenly avowed Arianism, and his expulsionfrom the university ensued.Proceeding to London, he publishedvarious pieces in support of nis opinions,and gave lectures on astronomy,from the continuance of which hemight, perhaps, have derived a comfortableincome, but he neglected themfor theological controversy ; and, byhis publication of Primitive ChristianityRevived, in 1711, exposed himself to aprosecution for heresy, which, however,four years after, was terminatedby an act of grace. When PrinceEugene, after having achieved somevictories over the Ottoman troops, cameto England, Whiston presented himwith a copy of his Essay on the Revelations,and, in a short dedication, designatedhim " the man foretold in theapocalypse, as the destroyer of theTurkish empire." The prince, in return,gave him fifteen guineas, although,he observed, he was not aware that heenjoyed the honour of having beenknown to St. John.Whiston, subsequently, presumed toapply various Scripture prophecies topassing events : his absurd predictionswere constantly falsified ; but still hewent on, less sane, perhaps, in intellect,than honest in his intentions, affectingto foretell what did not cometo pass; and, at length, avowed anopinion, that the millennium, and restorationof the Jews, were at hand.About this time, having a small estateto sell, he offered it to a gentleman, atthirty years' purchase. " Thirty years'purchase!" exclaimed the gentleman.You appear astonished," said Whiston; " and yet I ask no more, I believe,for my property than other folks do fortheirs." " I don't wonder at otherpeople," replied the gentleman, ironically,"because they know no better;but I certainly am surprised to hearMr. Whiston ask thirty years' purchase,when he feels sure, that in half thattime, property will be in common, andno man's estate worth a groat."In 1717, he was turned out of St.Andrew's Holborn, which was then hisparish church, by the notorious Sacheverell,against whom, Wilson, an attorney,offered to institute proceedings, athis own cost; but Whiston declined theproposal, observing, that if he consentedto it, he should prove himself tobe as passionate and foolish as Sacheverellhimself. In 1719, he publishedhis Letter to Lord Nottingham on theEternity of the Son of God and His HolySpirit, on account of which, principally,it has been asserted, his admission to theRoyal Society was successfully opposedby Sir Isaac Newton, the president;whose favour Whiston had enjoyed fortwenty years, but lost it, at last, as hestates, by contradicting him when hewas old. " Had he lived," continuesWhiston, "when I refuted his Chronology,I should not have publishedthe work, because I knew his temperso well, that I should have expected itwould have killed him."He now made an attempt to discoverthe longitude, which proving abortive,a subscription was commenced to reimbursehim for his labours and lossesin the undertaking; the collection, itis said, amounted to nearly 500,which was the largest sum he everpossessed. During the remainder ofhis life he was indefatigably industrious,and published numerous works,among which were a translation ofJosephus, and memoirs of himself. Heremained, as he states, in communionwith the church of England, untilTrinity Sunday, 1747, when, on accountof the Athanasian creed beingread during public worship, he went toa Baptist meeting, " whither," he adds,I shall continue going, until I canset up a more primitive congregationmyself." He died, after a brief illness,on the 22nd of August, 1752.By his wife, a Miss Antrobus, ofTamworth, whom he married aboutthe year 1699, he had a large family.In domestic life, he is reputed to havebeen amiable, happy, and beloved.Viewing him in his public career, heappears to have displayed much imagination,united to great learning, butTHE Church.unrestrained by judgment In himthere was rather an unusual combinationof feverish ardour and ploddingdiligence. Utterly careless of personalinterest, he hesitated not, for a moment,on any occasion, to do what hedeemed to be his duty to mankind. Hislofty contempt for worldly wisdom, atlength, reduced him to depend, in somemeasure, on donations for his support.His friends vainly endeavoured tomoderate the warmth of his religiouszeal ; and his antagonists in controversy,with a large portion of the public, sofarfrom being convinced by his arguments,eventually became of opinionthat his intellectual faculties were impaired.The wits abused him withoutmercy ; and Swift, in particular, wrotesome satirical lines on him, which, tothe dean's disgrace, are too disgustingto repeat.Towards the close of his career,Whiston was thus spoken of by BishopHare : " He has, all his life, been cultivatingpiety, and virtue, and learning ;he is rigidly constant in all his duties ;and both his philosophical and mathematicalworks are highly useful. Butit is the poor man's misfortune (Torpoor he is, and like to be, not havingany preferment) to have a warm headand to be very zealous in what hethinks the cause of God. He thinksprudence the worldly wisdom condemnedby Christ and his apostles;and that it is gross prevarication andhypocrisy, to conceal the discoverieshe conceives he has made; and thus,though he designs to hurt nobody, heis betrayed into some indiscretions.But he is very hardly dealt by : his performancesare run down by those whonever read them; and his warmth oftemper is denounced as pride, obstinacy,and innate depravity. Some,too, say he is a madman, and, low asheis, will not leave him quiet in hispoverty."Collins, in the Discourse on Christianity,says of him, " His ardent temperfrequently leads him into strangemistakes: for instance, an Arabic manuscriptcoming into his hands, of whichhe understood not one word, he fanciedit was a translation of an ancient bookof Scripture, belonging to the New Testament,styled, The Doctrine of theApostles ; and on this he reasoned andwrote, as if it had been indisputable,till, on its being read by persons skilledin Arabic, it proved quite a differentmatter. He lives in London, and visitspersons of the highest rank, to whomhe discourses freely on doctrinal points,and especially about Athanasianism,which seems his chief concern." Georgethe Second once observed to him, inHampton Court gardens, that howeverright he might be in his opinions, itwould have been better if he had keptthem to himself. " Had Martin Lutherdone so," replied Whiston, " where, letme ask, would your majesty have beenat this moment?"He was much esteemed," says hisson, " by Queen Caroline, who madehim a present of fifty pounds yearly.She usually sent for him once in thesummer, whilst she was out of town,to spend a day or two with her. Lovinghis free conversation, she askedhim, at Richmond, what people, ingeneral, said of her. He replied, thatthey justly esteemed her a lady of greatabilities ; a patron of learned men ; anda kind friend to the poor. ' But,' saysshe, 'no one is without faults; praywhat are mine ?' Whiston begged to beexcused speaking on that subject, butshe insisting, he said, ' Her majesty didnot behave with proper reverence atchurch.' She replied, ' The king wouldtalk with her.' He said, ' A greaterthan kings was there only to be regarded.'She owned it, and confessedher fault. ' Pray,' says she, ' tell mewhat is my next ?' He replied, ' WhenI hear your majesty has amended ofthat fault, I will tell you of your next ;'and so it ended."The following anecdote of Whistonis related by the same writer: " Beingin company with Addison,Steele, SecretaryCraggs, and Sir Robert Walpole,they engaged in a dispute, whether asecretary of state could be an honestman. Whiston being silent, was askedhis opinion, and said, ' he thoughthonesty was the best policy, and if aminister would practise it, he wouldfind it so.' To which Craggs replied,It might do for a fortnight, but wouldnot do for a month.' Whiston demanded,' If he had ever tried it forafortnight.' To which, he makingno answer, the company gave it forWhiston."BISHOP GIBSON.EDMUND GIBSON, BISHOP OF LONDON.THIS eminent prelate was born atBampton, in Westmoreland, in 1669 ;and, after having acquired an intimateknowledge of the classics, at a provincialschool, he was sent to Queen's college,Oxford, in 1686. He proceeded to thedegree of B. A. in 1691 ; and, about thesame time, published new editions ofDrummond's Polemo-Middiana, andths Catiline Rustica of James the Fifth,with notes abounding in humour anderudition. In 1692, he produced aLatin version of the Chronicon Saxonsand a catalogue of Manuscriptsin the Dundalk Library, and that ofBishop Tennison. His More CorrectEdition of Quintilian de Arte Oratorioappeared in 1694; and he subsequentlypublished new editions of Julius Caesar,and Sooner's Treatise. During theyear last mentioned, he took the degreeof M. A., and became librarian atLambeth palace. In 1697, he waselected a fellow of his college, and enteredinto holy orders. He now devotedhimself, with great zeal, to thereproduction of Camden's Britannia ;in editing which he was assisted byLhwyd, Smith, Johnson, and Kennett.After having declined a small livingin the Isle of Thanet, which had beenoffered to him by Lord Somers, he accepted,in 1697, the appointment ofmorning preacher at Lambeth church ;and, in 1698, that of domestic chaplainto Archbishop Tennison. About thesame time, he was made lecturer at St.Martin's-in-the-fields, and publishedthe posthumous works of Sir HenrySeaman. In 1700, he was presentedto the rectory of Stinted, in Essex ;two years afterwards, the Archbishopof Canterbury conferred on him thedegree of D. D.; and, in 1703, he obtainedthe rectory of Lambeth, andwas made precentor and residentiaryof the cathedral of Chichester. Henext obtained the mastership of St.Mary's hospital, with license to holdhis other preferments; and, in 1710,he was promoted to the archdeaconryof Surrey.In 1713, he published his famousCodex Juris Ecclesiastic! Anglican! ; in1715, on the death of his patron, ArchbishopTennison, he was raised to thebishopric of Lincoln; in 1721, he becamedean of the chapel royal ; and,on the death of Bishop Robinson, in1723, he was translated to the vacantsee of London. His death took place atBath, on the 6th of September, 1748.He married early in life, and left severalchildren. His social virtues have beenhighly eulogized ; and it is recorded,to his honour, that, Dr. Crow havingleft him 2,500, he generously abandonedthe bequest to the testator'snecessitous relations.His natural abilities were great, andhis disposition was admirably calculatedto improve and develop them. As astudent, he was zealously laborious ; hispiety was equal to his erudition; and,although occasionally betrayed into intolerance,he appears, on the whole, tohave been an excellent prelate, and astrictly conscientious man. In additionto the works already enumerated, hecomposed a Life of Motley ; Tracts onthe Antiquities of Great Britain ; andseveral pastoral letters, which have beenconsidered masterly attacks on infidelityand enthusiasm.During the long illness of ArchbishopWake, the affairs of the churchwere left almost entirely to the managementof Bishop Gibson ; and, it is said,that, in the exercise of his great ecclesiasticalpower, he advanced those onlywho, by their learning and piety, weredeserving of preferment. He procuredan endowment from the crown for theregular performance of divine serviceat Whitehall, by twenty-four preachers,selected from the two universities. Hezealously promoted the spiritual interestsof the colonies, and laboured assiduouslyfor the advancement of religionwithin his own diocese. Hestood forward, on several occasions, asthe champion of the church ; but sometimesinsisted upon her rights withmore zeal than discretion. Althoughan enemy to persecution on matters offaith, he sternly opposed a repeal of theTHE CHURCH.test and corporation acts ; and counteractedthe attempts of the Quakers toavoid payment of tithes. He exposedhimself to the animadversions of thelord chief justice, and many severewriters, by censuring the practice ofsending prohibitions from the temporalto the spiritual courts; and offendedGeorge the Second, not only by inveighingfrom the pulpit against masquerades,to which that monarch wasmuch attached, but by procuring thesignatures of several bishops to anaddress to the throne, " praying for theentire abolition of such pernicious diversions."Until the boldness withwhich he discharged what he deemedto be his duty had given offence togovernment, "he had been considered,"says Whiston, " as heir-apparent to thesee of Canterbury ;" and so great hadbeen his ecclesiastical power, that Walpolewas reproached with allowing himthe authority of a pope. " And a verygood pope he is, too," replied theminister.HENRY SACHEVERELL.HENRY, the son of the Rev. JoshuaSacheverell, was born in 1672. He obtainedthe rudiments of education froma village schoolmaster, at the cost of hisgodfather, an apothecary, named Hurst,on whose death, his widow sent theyouth to Magdalen college, Oxford.While at the university, Sacheverell waschamber fellow with Addison, who inscribesone of his pieces to him, as "hisdearest friend and colleague." Accountsvary as to Sacheverell's conduct at thisperiod of his life: one set of authoritiesaccusing him of turbulence, and ingratitudeto his former friends; whileanother eulogizes his good manners,morality, and application. He distinguishedhimself by some clever Latinpoems ; was chosen fellow of his college; and became tutor to several pupilswho afterwards attained greateminence. He took his degree of M. A.in 1696 ; that of B. D. in 1707 ; and thatof D. D. in the following year.His first preferment in the churchwas to the living of Cannock, in Staffordshire; whence he removed, in 1705, toSt. Saviour's, Southwark, of which hewas appointed preacher. In the year1709, ne delivered two sermons, one atPercy, and the other at St. Paul's,which raised him to a great but unmeritednotoriety. In these discourses,greatly to the satisfaction of the Toryor high church party, he warmly advocatedthe doctrines of divine right andpassive obedience ; and, particularly inone of them, virulently attacked theleaders of the Whigs, who were thenin office. His popularity rapidly increased: his health was drank in pintbumpers, at numberless festive meetings;while handkerchiefs, and evenfans, were embellished with his portrait.Ministers denounced his doctrines asbeing most pernicious ; and, rather indiscreetly,brought his conduct underthe notice of parliament. After manystormy debates in the house of commons,it was resolved to proceed againsthim by impeachment. His trial, whichcommenced on the 27th of February,1709-10, continued until the 23rd ofMarch, when he was sentenced to asuspension from preaching for threeyears, and his two obnoxious sermonswere ordered to be burnt.The excitement of the public duringhis trial was almost unexampled.Queen Anne attended the court daily ;and as her chair passed through thestreets, she was greeted by the multitudewith such exclamations as the following:"High church and Sacheverellfor ever !" " We hope your majesty isfor Dr. Sacheverell!" The impeachmentwas disastrous to the Whigs, asit not only increased the reputation ofSacheverell, but led to their own overthrow.During his suspension, Sacheverell,who was considered a martyr to hisprinciples, made a sort of triumphaltour through the kingdom ; in most partsof which he was received, both by theclergy and laity, as the victim of adetestable persecution. He was collatedto a living before the term of hisARCHBISHOP POTTER.sentence had expired ; and, within amonth after its termination, (on the13th of April, 1713,) the queen presentedhim to the valuable rectory of St.Andrew's, Holborn. The first sermonwhich he preached in the church ofthat parish, he sold for 100, and fortythousand copies of it were speedily purchased.Ministers, according to Swift,hated, and affected to despise him; buthe had sufficient interest to procurefrom them, in addition to his own preferment,a handsome provision for hisbrother.He seems to have been still in highfavour with the populace, during thefirst year of the reign of George theFirst; at whose coronation, it is related,the proceedings were repeatedly interruptedby vociferations of " Downwith the Whigs !" and " Sacheverell forever!" From this time, however, hegradually dwindled into insignificance;and signalized himself, only, during theremainder of his life, by contemptiblesquabbles with his parishioners ; one ofwhom, the famous Whiston, he actuallyturned out of the church, because hisavowed opinions were heterodox. Someyears before his death, which took placeon the 5th of June, 1724, one of hisrelatives left him a considerable estatein Derbyshire. By his will, Sacheverellbequeathed 500 to Bishop Atterbury,who, it is suspected, wrote the defencewhich he made at his trial.The Duchess of Marlborough describeshim as having been an ignorant,impudent incendiary, who was the scorneven of those who made use of him asatool. " He was," says Bishop Burnet,a bold, insolent man, with a verysmall measure of religion, virtue, learning,or good sense ; but he resolved toforce himself into popularity and preferment,by the most petulant railingsat dissenters and low church men, inseveral sermons and libels, written withouteither chasteness of style, or livelinessof expression."Sacheverell was evidently neitherwise nor good : he disgraced the pulpitby political rancour, with a view to hisown advancement, and to further hisobject, affected a religious zeal, which henever actually felt. Although for sometimedeemed an exalted character, hewas, unquestionably, one of the mostcontemptible public men of his day. Heis described as having been stout andathletic ; but, on some occasions, sotimorous, that Honeymoon, the ventriloquist,one day, nearly frightened himinto a fainting fit, by maliciously imitatingthe voices of several persons inhis room.JOHN POTTER, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.JOHN, the son of Thomas Potter, alinen-draper, in Yorkshire, was born atWakefield, in 1674. Dr. Parr supposesthat he was brought up at aprivate school, " his Latin productionsabounding with those faults which instructionat a higher seminary wouldhave taught him to avoid'' He was,however, at the age of fourteen, whenhe became a battle at University college,Oxford, deemed a great proficientin Greek. After taking the degreeof B. A., he published, in 1693, hisfirst work, entitled, Variance Sectionset Note ad Plutarch Liberum de audiencesPoets ; et ad Bailie MagnaOration ad Juvenis, quomodo cumfructus leger point Graecorum Liberos ;which he compiled at the request ofDr. Bartlett, master of his college, atwhose expense it was printed, for thepurpose only of being presented, as anew-year's-gift, to private friends anddeserving students. In the followingyear, he became fellow of Lincoln college,and proceeded to the degree ofM. A. He soon after took orders, anddistinguished himself as a private tutor.In 1697, he produced his elaborateedition of the Alexandra of Lycophron,and the first volume of his ArchaeologicalGraeca, of which the second and lastappeared in the following year.In 1704, he proceeded to the degreeof B. D., and, becoming domestic chaplainto Archbishop Tennison, took uphis abode with that prelate, at Lambethpalace. In 1706, he proceeded to theTHE CHURCH.degree of D. D., and was made chaplainto Queen Anne. In 1707, he printedA Discourse on Church Government ;in which he maintained ecclesiasticalto be distinct from civil authority, andthat episcopacy was of divine institution.Notwithstanding the supportwhich he thus gave to high-churchprinciples, he seems to have beenregarded as a staunch Whig ; and,during the last-mentioned year, hewas triumphantly elected, by his party,regius professor of divinity, and canonof Christchurch, in opposition to Dr.Smalridge, a conspicuous Tory.In 1715, he was raised, by George theFirst, to the see of Oxford ; and, aboutthe same time, he published an edition ofClemens Alexandrine, with an entirelynew version of the Exhortations. Thecelebrated Bangorian controversy soonafterwards commenced, in which, withSherlock and others, he accusedHoadly, then Bishop of Bangor, ofhaving, in his sermon preached beforethe king, in 1717, on civil and religiousliberty, avowed opinions hostile to allestablishments, and particularly to thatof the church of England. In 1722,he entered into a correspondence withAtterbury, as to the period when thefour gospels were written. He preachedthe sermon at the coronation of Georgethe Second, who raised him to thearchbishopric of Canterbury in 1737.He died in January, 1747, leaving twosons and three daughters.Dr. Potter was possessed of greatlearning and much talent. His workshave deservedly obtained extraordinarycommendation, as well on the continentas in this country. Dr. Harwood enthusiasticallypronounces his Alexandrato be an everlasting monument ofthe learning of its illustrious editor ; andGronovius deemed the ArchaeologicalGraeca (which has passed through manyeditions, and is still deemed a standardwork) worthy of a place in his celebratedThesaurus Antiquitatum GraecaAlthough haughty and morose,he seems to have been highly esteemedby a great portion of his contemporaries ;by many of whom he was admired andeulogized, for his vigilance, zeal, andtalent, as a defender of orthodox opinions.Whiston, on the other hand,accuses him of extreme pride, courtadulation, neglect of Christian discipline,and strenuous hostility to those whoattempted to effect any reformation inthe church. He procured a prefermentof 2,000 a year for the eldest of histwo sons, but disinherited him forhaving formed an unequal alliance ; andleft the bulk of his large property to theother, a man of bad character, whogrossly ill-treated his wife, whom hehad married pursuant to his father'scommands.Shortly after his elevation to theprimacy, he went to the residence ofone of his relations, (a divine), for thepurpose of stating that he intended tobestow on him a very acceptable preferment.The reverend gentleman, however,happened to be at a neighbouringale-house, whither the archbishop proceeded.On entering the skittle-ground,he found his relative busily engagedat a game of nine-pins, and had themortification of hearing him exclaim,while aiming a bowl at the centrepin, " Here goes for the head of thechurch!" The archbishop, it is said,immediately retired in disgust, andbestowed the preferment on anotherdivine.SAMUEL CLARKE.THIS celebrated divine and philosopherwas born on the llth of October,1G/5, in the city of Norwich, of whichhis father was an alderman. Afterpassing some years at the free grammarschool of his native city, he was sentto Caius college, Cambridge ; where hestudied the Scriptures, and the fathersof the church, in their original languages; and, preparatory to taking hisdegree of B. A., distinguished himselfby the performance of a public exerciseon the Newtonian system, then anovelty, which he afterwards materiallycontributed to diffuse, by translatingand publishing the Physics of Romaunt.SAMUEL CLARKE.On entering into holy orders, he wasappointed chaplain to Dr. Moore,Bishop of Norwich. In 1699, appearedhis first original work, under the titleof Three Practical Essays upon Baptism,Confirmation, and Repentance ;and, in 1701, he published his celebratedParaphrase on the Four Gospels.About this time, he obtained the rectoryof Dray ton. Jn 1704, he preachedat Boyle's lecture, On the Being andAttributes of God ; and, in 1705, Onthe Evidences of Natural and RevealedReligion. These admirable sermonswere soon after printed, and have sincegone through many editions. In 1706,he answered, and refuted the argumentsof those who had endeavouredto disprove the immortality of the soul,in a letter addressed to Mr. Dwell ;and, during the same year, publisheda Latin version of the optics of Newton,who presented him with 500, as atoken of his approbation and esteem.About the same time, Bishop Mooreprocured for him the rectory of St.Bennet's, London, and introduced himto Queen Anne, who nominated himone of her chaplains, and bestowedon him, in 1709, the rectory of St.James's, Westminster. On this occasion,he took his degree of D. D. andhighly distinguished himself, by hispublic exercise, at Cambridge ; in whichhe maintained, that no article in theChristian faith is discordant to rightreason ; and that, without the libertyof human actions, there can be no religion.Prior to this period, he had beenaccustomed to preach without notes ;but he now began to bestow such careon the composition of his sermons, thatthey were found, at his death, writtenat full length, and in a fit state for thepress.In 1712, he edited a noble edition ofCaesar's Commentaries ; and soon afterwardsinvolved himself in controversy,by the publication of his celebratedtreatise, entitled The Scripture Doctrineof the Trinity. Whiston states, that,shortly before this work appeared, LordGodolphin, and some other membersof the administration, sent a fruitlessmessage to the author, requesting himto defer the publication of his treatise,until a fitter opportunity ; as it waslikely to make a great noise and disturbance."The Unitarian principles,advocated in the production, exposedDr. Clarke to the censures of bothhouses of convocation, and to somespirited attacks from Waterland, andother champions of orthodoxy. In1715, he engaged in a disputation onthe principles of natural philosophyand religion, with the celebratedLeibnitz ; a full account of which, hepublished, two years afterwards, with adedication to the Princess of Wales,afterwards Queen Caroline. In thesame year appeared his Remarks uponCollins's Inquiry concerning HumanLiberty; and, in 1718, he boldly alteredthe forms of doxology, in A Collectionof select Psalms and Hymns,for the use of St. James's church j somecopies of which having been distributed,by the Society for promotingChristian Knowledge, before any discoveryof the alterations had beenmade, he was accused of having practiseda gross imposition. In reply tothe charge, he stated, that the collectionhad been printed for the use of hisown church only. His conduct was,however, severely censured by hisdiocesan, who, in a pastoral letter, onthe occasion, observed, " that somepersons, seduced by the strong delusionsof pride and self-conceit, hadlately published new forms of doxology,entirely agreeable to those of theancient heretics, who impiously denieda trinity of persons in the unity of theGodhead."A controversy on the subject ensued,in which the character of Dr. Clarke,as a divine, was severely animadvertedupon by several high churchmen, andzealously defended by his friend Whiston.About this time he was presented,by Lord Lechmere, to the mastershipof Winston's hospital, at Leicester :and, on the death of Newton, in 1727,he might, had he thought fit, have succeededto that eminent man's office inthe Mint, which was worth abovejl,200per annum ; but, " as he wanted it not,"and, " being averse to any secular employment,"says Whiston, " he absolutelyrefused it; which I take to beone of the most glorious actions of hislife ; and to afford undeniable convictionthat he was in earnest in his religion."He had, previously, (in 1724) printeda volume containing seventeen sermons;THE CHURCH.and, in 1728, he addressed a letter toHoadly, on the Proportion of Velocityand Force in Bodies in Motion. In thefollowing year appeared his edition ofthe first twelve books of Homer's Iliad,with a Latin version : the remainder ofthe work was published, a few yearsafter his death, by his son.He had, throughout his life, enjoyeda robust state of health, until Sunday,May the llth, 1729, when he was attackedwith a violent pain in his side,while proceeding to Serjeant's inn, forthe purpose of preaching before thejudges; and, on the ensuing Saturday,he expired. By his wife, Catherine, thedaughter of the Rev. Mr. Lockwood,rector of Little Massingham, Norfolk,on whom, after her husband's decease,Queen Caroline settled a pension ofone hundred guineas per annum, Dr.Clarke had seven children, five of whomsurvived him. His brother, John Clarke,originally a weaver, studied at Cambridge,and became chaplain to the king,and dean of Salisbury. He preparedfor the press ten posthumous volumesof Dr. Clarke's Sermons, and also hisExposition of the Catechism.In private life, Dr. Clarke was amiableand unpretending; reserved amongstrangers, but frank and easy with hisfriends. As a writer he possessed theadvantages of a strong memory, considerablepowers of language, a naturalaptitude for methodical arrangement,extraordinary learning, and great acuteness.He was zealous, but not enthusiastic;exceedingly diligent, and yet aninveterate lover of cards, at which, althoughdescribed as being, in general, amiser of moments, he would frequentlyspend entire hours.Whiston highly praises his generalcharacter, but censures him for subscribingto the articles, on taking thedegree of D. D., when he actually didnot believe in the Athanasian creed:the same writer, however, admits thathe subsequently refused any preferment,the acceptance of which, would exposehim to the necessity of another subscriptionagainst his conscience.It is related, that when Sir JohnGermaine, being in great trouble ofmind, and on his death-bed, sent forDr. Clarke, and on his arrival askedhim if he should receive the sacrament,or what he should do in his sad condition,the divine, who was well awareof Sir John's immoral career, told him,in reply, that he did not think the sacramentwould be of any avail to himwith respect to his final welfare, andleft the dying sinner without administeringit.BENJAMIN HOADLY, BISHOP OF WINCHESTER.THIS prelate was born at western,in Kent, on the 14th of November,1676 ; and, after acquiring therudiments of learning under his father,who was for some time master of thegrammar school at Norwich, he wasadmitted, in 1691, a pensioner ofCatherine Hall, Cambridge; where heproceeded to the degree of B. A. in1695, and to that of M. A. in 1699. Hehad, also, in the interim, been electedfellow and tutor of his college. In 1700,he took orders, and obtained the lectureshipof St. Mildred's, in the Poultry ;which he retained until, by his ownavowal, he had preached it down to30 per annum. In 1702, he officiatedat St. Swithin's, and, in 1704, was presentedto the rectory of St. .He had already entered into acontroversy with Calamy, in defence ofconformity ; and, in 1705, he preacheda sermon before the lord mayor, oncivil government, which rendered himso offensive to the Tories, that, as hesays, " a torrent of angry zeal began topour itself out upon him." Soon afterwards,he entered into a dispute withAtterbury, one of whose discourses hehad severely criticised ; and, in 1709,the contest was renewed, with increasedzeal, on the subject of non-resistanceand passive obedience. His exertionsin this controversy were so agreeableto the party in power, that the houseof commons addressed the queen in hisfavour ; and her majesty is said to have,consequently, given him a promise ofpreferment; which, however, she didnot fulfil: but, to console him for hisBISHOP SHERLOCK.disappointment, a wealthy lady, namedRowland, presented him to the livingof Streatham, in Surrey.On the accession of George the First,he became one of the king's chaplains ;and, in 1715, having previously takenhis degree of D. D., he was elevated tothe bishopric of Bangor ; but, instead ofvisiting his see, he continued to preachin London, chiefly against what heconsidered the inveterate errors of theclergy; and, in 1717, so offended thehigh church party, by his celebrateddiscourse, which was delivered beforethe king, on the Nature of the Kingdomor Church of Christ, that it wasresolved to proceed against him in convocation: his enemies were, however,foiled in their intention, by the prorogationof the assembly.Having, about this time, preached asermon on the text, " My kingdom isnot of this world," in the interpretationof which he maintained that theclergy had no right to temporal jurisdiction,he was attacked by Snape, anda controversy, termed the Bangorian,from the see then held by Hoadly, followed; in which the latter defendedhimself with great skill, as well againsthis first assailant on the subject as thecelebrated Sherlock, Law, Potter, andother divines. This contest had scarcelyterminated when he engaged in another,on the nature of prayer, which, as hemaintained, should be calm and dispassionate,while his opponent, Hare,insisted that, without fervour, it mustneeds be unavailing.In 1754. Hoadly was translated tothe see of Hereford ; in 1732, to that ofSalisbury ; and, in 1734, to that ofWinchester. In 1735, he published aplain account of the Nature and Endof the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; and, many years afterwards, preparedfor the press two volumes of hissermons, which were received withmuch commendation. Towards theclose of his life, he drew up a clear,manly, and spirited exposure of a fraudintended to have been committedupon him by a popish convert, namedFournier, by means of a forged note ofhand for 8,800. His death took placeat Chelsea, on the 17th of April, 1761 ;and his remains were interred in Winchestercathedral. He was twice married:first, to Sarah Curtis, by whomhe had two sons; and, secondly, toMary Newly, daughter of the Dean ofChichester, by whom he had no issue.In private life, Dr. Hoadly was facetious,easy, conciliating, and fond ofsociety ; from which, however, he wouldoften abruptly retire to his studies.In his religious principles he differedso materially from the doctrines of thechurch of England, that it has beensaid of him, he was the greatest dissenterthat ever wore a mitre. Hecontended, inter alia, that sincerity inopinions, whatever they might be, wassufficient for acceptance. As a controversialist,he was acute, candid, andmoderate. His style possessed manybeauties ; Pope, however, justly censuresthe immoderate length of hissentences. Akenside complimented himin an ode ; and Burnet, with manyother writers, eulogized his merits as adivine, a scholar, and a man. A completeedition of his multifarious writingswas published by his son, in 1773.It is rather remarkable that he was acollege rival of his future formidableopponent, Sherlock. One day, whenboth freshmen, after being called tolectures in Tully's offices, Sherlock,somewhat nettled at the approbationwhich Hoadly had elicited from thetutor, sneeringly remarked, " Ben, youhave made good use of Estrange'stranslation to-day." " No, Tom, Ihave not," replied Hoadly; "and Iforgot to send the bed-maker for yours,which, I understand, is the only one inthe college."THOMAS SHERLOCK, BISHOP OF LONDON.1 HIS eminent prelate, eldest son ofDr. William Sherlock, Dean of St.Paul's, and author of the well knownDiscourse on Death, was born in 1678.At Eton, where he received the earlypart of his education, he was not onlydistinguished for great application, butfor boldness of personal character;THE CHURCH.being always a leader of his companions,as well in as out of school.Walpole, who was his cotemporary,relates, that on one occasion, whenother lads stood shivering on the bankof the river, Sherlock plunged in withouthesitation, and Wanton supposesthis to be the incident alluded to byPope, in the Dunciad, where he callsSherlock " the plunging prelate."He removed, in 1693, to Catherinehall, Cambridge ; and, after taking hisdegrees of B. A. and M. A., enteredinto holy orders. It appears that hewas severely reprimanded for beinglate in attendance on the bishop at hisordination. A fine turbot, intendedfor the prelate's table, was brought bythe same conveyance as that by whichSherlock had travelled ; and the bishopwas under the necessity of apologizingto his company for the delay that occurredin serving up the dinner, on accountof the late arrival of the fish.Sherlock, on this occasion, is said to haveremarked, that " he and the turbot hadboth reached the palace time enoughto get into hot water."In 1704, he was appointed master ofthe Temple ; and, notwithstanding animpediment in his speech, soon becameone of the most popular preachers inthe metropolis. In 1714, he took thedegree of D. D. : he was then appointedmaster of Catherine hall, and, in histurn, discharged the duties of vice-chancellor.His influence at the universitywas so great, that Bentley nicknamedhim, Cardinal Alberti ; andMiddleton, about the same time, gavehim the more flattering appellation ofprincipal champion and ornament ofboth church and university."His next advancement was to thedeanery of Chichester, which he obtainedin 1716 ; and, soon afterwards, heengaged in the Bangorian controversy.It has been said, however, that in hislatter years, Sherlock did not approveof the part he had taken in this dispute,and refused to have his variouspamphlets on the subject collected intoa volume. In 1726, he printed SixDiscourses on the Use and Intent ofProphecy ; which he had delivered, inthe preceding year, at the Templechurch. In 1728, he was elevated tothe bishopric of Bangor ; and, in 1734,translated to that of Salisbury. Duringthe interim he had published his celebratedTrial of the Witnesses of theResurrection of Jesus.On the death of Archbishop Potter,he was offered the primacy ; which,however, he refused on account of hisill-health ; but, in the following year,1747, having in some degree recovered,he accepted the bishopric of London.In 1753, he resigned the mastership ofthe Temple, on which occasion, he addressedan affectionate letter to thetreasurer and benchers, expressive of hisgratitude for all their kindness to him,and declaring, that he felt his connexionwith them to have been the greatesthappiness of his life, as it had introducedhim to some of the greatest menof the time. Notwithstanding the infirmitiesof age, he performed his episcopalduties, with great ability; and,when under the pressure of severe illness,which he bore with great fortitudeand resignation, revised and publishedfour volumes of his sermons. On theaccession of George the Third, he addresseda dutiful and complimentaryletter to the young monarch, which,perhaps, was the last production of hispen. He died at Fulham, on the 18thof July, 1761. Having had no childrenby his wife, whose maiden name wasJudith Fountain, and whom he marriedin 1707, his nephew inherited thebulk of his property ; which, althoughSherlock had been very charitable,amounted, it is said, to upwards of100,000.He appears to have possessed greatabilities, and very extensive acquirements.His style was correct, pleasing,and animated ; and his sermonsafford many specimens of pulpit eloquence,which have rarely, if ever,been excelled. He was even moreeminent for his piety than his learning.In his Discourses on the Use and Intentof Prophecy, he vindicated Christianityagainst the objections of Anthony Collins,with as much zeal as talent ; andduring the principal part of his career,enjoyed the reputation of being oneof the most efficient pillars of thechurch of England, although he wasof opinion, to use his own language,that our liturgical forms ought to berevised and amended only for our ownsakes, though there were no dissentersin the land."DANIEL Waterman.DANIEL Waterman.DANIEL, son of the Rev. HenryWaterland, was born at Wisely, inLincolnshire, (of which his father wasrector,) on the 4th of February, 1683.After having received some preliminaryinstruction at home, he was sent to thefree school at Lincoln ; which he quittedin 1699, and went to Magdalen college,Cambridge ; where he was elected ascholar, in 1701, and proceeded to thedegree of B. A., in 1703. In the followingyear, he obtained a fellowship ;and, in 1706, proceeded M.A. He nowbecame celebrated as a private tutor,and published a work, entitled, Adviceto a Young Student, with a Method ofStudy for the First Four Years ; whichwent through several editions. In1713, he was presented to the rectoryof Bellingham, in Norfolk ; and, aboutthe same time, was nominated masterof his college. In 1714, he proceededto the degree of B. D. ; and, shortlyafterwards, became chaplain in ordinaryto George the First ; who, visitingCambridge, in 1717, conferred uponhim, by royal mandate, the degree ofD. D., of which rank he was also incorporatedat the university of Oxford.In 1719, he published his orthodoxVindication of Christ's Divinity ; beinga Defence of some Queries, relating toDr. Clarke's Scheme of the Holy Trinity;and, in the following year, Gibson,Bishop of London, appointed him firstpreacher of the lecture founded byLady Moyer. Soon afterwards heentered into a doctrinal dispute withDr. Whitby. In 1721, the Dean andChapter of St. Paul's presented himto the rectory of St. Austin and St.Faith ; in 1723, he obtained the chancellorshipof York ; and having, soonafter, printed his History of the AthanasianCreed, in opposition to the opinionssupported by Dr. Clarke, he wasmade a canon of Windsor. He resignedhis rectory, on being presentedto the vicarage of Twickenham, andthe archdeaconry of Middlesex, in 1 730 ;during which year, he produced someremarks on Dr. Clarke's Expositionof the Church Catechism, and thusinvolved himself in a controversy withDr. Sykes, relative to the eucharist.He next published two works, indefence of revealed religion, againstTindal's Christianity as old as theCreation: the first, entitled ScriptureVindicated ; and the second, ChristianityVindicated against Infidelity;which were supported by Dr. Pearce,and condemned, as being calculated todomore harm than good, by Dr.Conyers Middleton. In 1734, he producedA Discourse on the Argument,& priori, for proving the Existence ofa First Cause ; in which he endeavouredto refute Dr. Clarke's opinionson that subject. During the same year,he declined the office of prolocutor tothe lower house of convocation, andpublished his celebrated treatise Onthe Importance of the Doctrine of theTrinity.In 1736, as archdeacon, he preacheda series of charges on the eucharist,in which he argued, on the one hand,against the opinion of Bishop Hoadly,who considered it a mere commemorativefeast ; and, on the other, againstthat of Johnson and Brett, who heldit to be a proper propitiatory sacrifice.During the latter part of his life, hewas afflicted with an acute malady, towhich, after having undergone manysurgical operations, he fell a victim, inthe month of December, 1740. By hiswife, a lady of good fortune, whom hehad married in 1719, and who survivedhim, he left no children.In a funeral sermon, preached on theSunday after his decease, the characterof Dr. Waterland was thus described :His head was an immense library,where the treasures of learning wereranged in such exact order, that, whateverhimself or his friends wanted, hecould have immediate recourse to, withoutany embarrassment A prodigiousexpanse of reading, without a confusionof ideas, is almost the peculiarcharacteristic of his writings. Hisworks, particularly those on our Saviour'sdivinity, and the importance ofthe doctrine, and the eucharist, intoTHE CHURCH.which he has digested the learning ofall preceding ages, will, we may ventureto say, be transmitted to, and standthe examination of, all succeedingones. He has so thoroughly exhaustedevery subject that he wrote a set treatiseupon, that it is impossible to hitupon anything which is not in hiswritings, or to express that more justlyor clearly which is there."This sturdy polemic appears to havebeen one of the most zealous, disinterested,and temperate, of that host ofcontroversialists, for which his timeswere remarkable. Orthodoxy neverhad a more stedfast defender ; but hisaversion to arianism carried him so far,that he was sometimes charged withevincing an heterodox tendency towardsarmenians. He wrote entirelyfor conscience" sake, and not witha view to attract notice, or to obtainpromotion. He never solicited preferment,and once refused a bishopric.Though firm and unflinching in hispolemical contests, he treated his adversaries,except in a few rare instances,with courtesy, and gave them credit forsincerity in professing those doctrineswhich he most vehemently opposed.Confers MIDDLETON.Confers, the son of William Middleton,rector of Undersell, in Yorkshire,was born on the 27th of December,1683. He passed his boyhood underthe tuition of his father, and, whenabout seventeen years of age, was sentto Trinity college, Cambridge ; where,having, in due course, proceeded H. A.,he obtained a fellowship in 1710 ;which, however, he, some time afterwards,vacated, by marrying a richwidow, named Drake. In 1717, Georgethe First, during a visit to the university,nominated Middleton, amongothers, for a doctor's degree in divinity; but Bentley absolutely refusedto create him, except on payment offour guineas beyond the usual fees.Middleton was naturally of a mostirritable disposition, and had previouslybeen involved in a quarrel withBentley, which, it is said, originatedfrom the latter having termed him, onaccount of his occasionally playing onthe violin, " riddling Middleton ;" andBentley 's illegal demand produced arenewal of their strife. Middletonpaid the additional fee under protest,and, immediately appealing to thevice-chancellor, procured an order forits restitution ; which, however, Bentleyrefused to obey, and he wasconsequently degraded from all hisuniversity honours and offices. Theconflicting parties afterwards broughtthe matter before the judges of thecourt of king's bench ; Middleton alsopublished four pamphlets against hisadversary ; but the dispute, whichappears, for a long time, to have beendeeply interesting to the public, terminated,at length, by Bentley's restorationto his rank.On the death of his wife, in or about1724, Middleton went to Italy for thebenefit of his health ; and, on his return,greatly increased the number ofhis enemies, by publishing a scurrilouspamphlet against the medical profession.Soon afterwards, he exposedhimself to a charge of heterodoxy, in adispute which arose out of the answersof Waterland and Pearce, to Tindal'sChristianity as old as the Creation. In1734, he married a Miss Place, ofDorchester ; and, in the same year,abandoning the Woodwards professorship,which he had previously held,he became librarian to the university.In 1735, appeared his Dissertationconcerning the Origin of Printing inEngland ; and, in 1741, he published aLife of Cicero, which reflects consider .able lustre on his talents. Two yearsafterwards appeared his Epistles ofCicero to Brutus, and of Brutus toCicero; and, in 1747, he involved himselfin a bitter controversy with severalorthodox writers, by his Free Inquiryinto the Miraculous Powers.Having lost his second wife, he wasunited, in his old age, to a Welsh lady,named Powell. During his last illness,he is said to have been laboriouslyBISHOP BERKELEY.engaged in preparing answers to some ofhis numerous antagonists. At the timeof his death, which took place on the28th of July, 1750, he held no prefermentbut a small living which had beengiven to him by Sir John Frederick.In addition to the works alreadymentioned, Middleton published objectionsagainst the proposed edition ofthe New Testament, by Bentley ; andengaged in a disputation with Sherlock.He seems to have purposelycreated antagonists, with a view togratify his inclination for literary warfare; and sacrificed all hopes of preferment,for the pleasure of assailingreceived opinions on doctrinal points.As a writer, he possessed considerablepowers : his productions are, however,debased by the leaven of infidelity.But for his avowed scepticism, and thetendency of his temper to dispute, hewould, in all probability, have adorned,as well as acquired, a mitre.GEORGE BERKELEY, BISHOP OF CLOYNE.GEORGE, the son of Thomas Berkeley,collector of Belfast, was born atKlein, near Thompson, in thecounty of Kilkenny, on the 12th ofMarch, 1 684. After passing some timeat Kilkenny grammar school, he wasremoved to Trinity college, Dublin, ofwhich he became a fellow in 1707; and,in the course of the same year, publishedhis Arithmetic absque Algebraaut Euclid Demonstrate, a work, it wassaid, that would have done honour tothe most experienced mathematician.In 1709, appeared his Theory of Vision,in which a successful and entirely novelattempt was made, to shew that ourideas of sight and touch are connectedonly by habit ; and this opinion appearsto have been soon afterwards confirmed,in the case of a youth who, thoughborn blind, was restored to sight bythe celebrated Cheselden.In 1710, appeared his Principles ofHuman Knowledge ; and, in 1713, hisDialogues between Hylas and Philo-nous; two works, which, althoughavowedly composed in opposition tosceptics and atheists, formed, in theopinion of Hume, " the best lessons ofscepticism, to be found either amongthe ancient or modern philosophers,Bayle not excepted."In 1712, he published three sermonsin favour of passive obedience and nonresistance,which, ultimately, exposedhim to the imputation of Jacobitism,and, consequently, tended to impedehis advance. He had, by this time,become intimate with Pope, Addison,Arbuthnot, Steele, (for whom he wrotesome papers in the Guardian) andDean Swift, who recommended him tothe notice of the Earl of Peterborough,with such warmth, that when the latterwas appointed ambassador to Sicily, hetook Berkeley out with him, as secretaryand chaplain.Soon after his return, he acceptedan offer to accompany the Bishop ofClothier's son on a continental tour.While abroad, he wrote an account ofthe Tarantula, and collected some materialsfor the natural history of Sicily,which, however, he lost at sea. Returningto England, in 1721, he publishedhis tract, De Motu, which hehad also written during his tour; and,in the same year, appeared his Essaytowards preventing the Ruin of GreatBritain. About this time he took thedegrees of B. D. and D. D. ; and procured,through the interest of Pope,the appointment of chaplain to theDuke of Grafton, then lord-lieutenantof Ireland.In 1722, the celebrated Mrs. ,Swift's Vanessa, unexpectedlybequeathed the whole of her fortune,about 8,000, to Berkeley, and a gentlemannamed Marshall, whom she appointedher joint executors ; but, notwithstandingher express wish, that theletters addressed to her by Swift shouldbe published, Berkeley thought properto destroy them. In 1724, he resignedhis fellowship, on being appointed tothe deanery of Derry, worth about1,100 a-year; and, in 1725, he publisheda proposal for converting theAmerican savages to Christianity. HeTHE CHURCH,soon afterwards obtained a charter forthe erection of a college at Bermuda,and a promise of 10,000, from government.Having also obtained somesubscriptions in aid of the design,he embarked, in September, 1728, forRhode Island, with his wife, who wasa daughter of Foster, speaker of theIrish house of commons, and whom hehad married in the preceding month ;another lady ; and two gentlemen offortune. His plan, however, completelyfailed ; principally, as it was alleged,because government did not furnish himwith the promised pecuniary aid ; and,after an absence of two years, he returnedto this country, a great loser bythe undertaking.In 1732, with a view to the refutationof sceptical systems, he publisheda series of dialogues, entitled, TheMinute Philosopher; with which QueenCaroline was so pleased, that she procuredhis promotion to the bishopricof Cloyne. About this period, havingbeen informed that Dr. Garth had, onhis death-bed, asserted to Addison, thathe did not believe in the doctrinesof Christianity, because Dr. Halley haddemonstrated to him, that they wereincomprehensible, Berkeley producedhis Analyst, addressed to an InfidelMathematician; in which he contended,that some mysteries in mathematicswere more difficult of conception thanthe articles of faith. A spirited controversyensued, which gave rise to ColinMaclaurin's Treatise on Fluxions.In 1744, Berkeley published a workentitled, Sirs, in which he zealouslyadvocated the virtues of tar water, amedicine, which, as he said, had curedhim of a distressing nervous complaint :and, some years afterwards, appearedhis Further Thoughts, on the same subject.In 1745 and 1749, he wrote someable letters to the Roman catholics inhis diocese. During the former year,he was offered the bishopric of Clothier,which, however, he declined in theseterms: "I love my neighbours, andthey love me; why, then, should Ibegin, in my old days, to form newconnexions, and tear myself from thosefriends, whose kindness is to me thegreatest happiness I can enjoy?"In 1750, appeared his last work, entitled,Maxims concerning Patriotism.Soon afterwards, for the purpose ofsuperintending the education of his son,he removed to Oxford ; where, on the14th of January, 1753, while his wifewas reading to him a sermon, by Sherlock,he suddenly expired, of what wastermed a palsy in the heart. So imperceptiblydid he breathe his last, thathis body was already cold, and hisjoints stiff, before Mrs. Berkeley, andher daughter, who were present, becameaware of his death. He was buried atChristchurch, Oxford, where a noblemonument was erected to his memory.In the early part of his life, he wasrobust, powerful, and handsome ; butconstant study, by impairing his health,prematurely destroyed his personalgraces and bodily strength; his countenance,however, is said to have retainedto the last its original innocent,kind, and enthusiastic expression.In addition to his more celebratedproductions, Berkeley was the authorof some " fugitive pieces," which wereprinted in a volume of Miscellanies, theyear preceding his death. His attainmentswere very extensive : he wasingenious, acute, and imaginative ; butinthe opinion, perhaps, of the majority,his writings are too much tinged withthat enthusiasm which was so conspicuousin his actions. His letters areexcellent ; and a high degree of poeticalmerit has been attributed to his Stanzason looking towards the Bermudas. Hismotives were always pure, and hisconduct disinterested. Even in thedestruction of Mrs. Vanhomrigh's letters,there is no doubt, that, howeverwrong he may have been, he actedconscientiously. He was invariablyzealous ; though certainly, on some occasions,far from successful, for the advancementof religion. He is describedas having been a pattern of Christianityto his flock; a rare example ofhumility combined with great intellect ;and, in the language of Pope, of havingpossessed " every virtue under heaven !"His application is said to have beenso intense, that although he rarelyquitted his studies until midnight, herose between three and four o'clock inthe morning; when, although, likemany other eminent men, " he had notthe least ear for music," he summonedhis children to take a lesson on the bassviol, from an Italian, whom he kept inthe house for that purpose.ARTHUR ASHLEY SYKES.ARTHUR ASHLEY SYKES.THIS learned divine was born in1684, and received the early part of hiseducation at St. Paul's school ; whencehe was removed, in 1701, to CorpusChristii college, Cambridge. While yeta student, he composed a copy ofHebrew verses, on the death of KingWilliam the Third, which were printedin the Cambridge collection. After proceedingto the degree of B. A., in 1704,and to that of M. A., in 1708, he acted,for a short time, as an assistant tutor, atSt. Paul's school.Having taken deacon's and priest'sorders, in 1712-13, he was preferred, byArchbishop Tennison, to the vicarageof Gormorsham, in Kent ; which he resigned,in 1714, on being presented bythe Duchess Dowager of Bedford, tothe rectory of Dry-Drayton, in Cambridgeshire.About this time he wrotean answer to Brett's Extent of theCommission of Christ to Baptise ; and, in1715, published a curious tract, entitled,The Innocency of Error Asserted andVindicated ; in which he maintainedthat no heresy is so destructive to religionas a wicked life ; and no schismso damnable as a course of sin. Someanonymous attacks being made uponthis production, he replied to them in apreface to the second edition ; and, in1720, vindicated his opinions in a letterto Potter, then Bishop of Oxford, who hadanimadverted upon them in a charge tohis clergy. He had, previously, in 1718,resigned the rectory of Dry-Drayton,on being instituted to that of Rayleigh,in Essex ; and, during the same year, hehad been appointed afternoon preacherat King street chapel, Golden square,by Dr. Clarke, the rector of St. James's ;to whose doctrines, as well as to thoseof Hoadly, he appears to have been astaunch adherentIn 1723, he was made precentor ofWinchester cathedral, in which, Hoadly,at the same time, collated him to a prebend.In 1725, he became assistant-preacherat St. James's; and, duringthe same year, he published his Essayon the Truth of the Christian Religion.In 1726, he proceeded to the degree ofS . T. P., at Cambridge, on which occasion,it is said, " he stood like a sturdyoak, to receive and return back the fierydarts of the orthodox."Soon after the death of his friend, Dr.Clarke, he entered into a controversy,relative to that divine's Exposition ofthe Church Catechism, with Dr. Water-land,by whom it had been severelyattacked ; and subsequently contended,against Whiston and others, that theeclipse recorded by Philemon had noconnexion with the darkness that occurredat the crucifixion of our Saviour.In 1736, he published two tracts, thefirst of which was entitled, Reasonablenessof applying for the Repeal of theCorporation and Test Acts impartiallyconsidered ; and the second, The Corporationand Test Acts shewn to be ofno Importance to the Church of England.Soon afterwards, he became involvedin another controversy arisingout of his Inquiry as to the Meaning ofthe Demoniac ; in which he had maintainedthat the demons, mentioned inthe New Testament, signified the soulsof departed men. In 1739, he was presented,by the crown, to the deaneryof St. Buried, in Cornwall; and in thefollowing year, Hoadly collated him to aprebend in the cathedral of Winchester.About this period appeared his Principlesand Connexion of Natural andRevealed Religion ; which was speedilyfollowed by his Brief Discourse onMiracles, and his Rational Communicant.In 1744, he published an Examinationof Warburton's Account ofthe conduct of the ancient Legislators ;of the Double Doctrine of the OldPhilosophers ; of the Theocracy of theJews ; and of Sir Isaac Newton's Chronology.Warburton soon wrote an angryreply, to which, Sykes powerfully rejoined.Among his subsequent productionswere, An Essay on the Nature,Design, and Origin of Sacrifices ; TwoQuestions previous to Dr. Middleton'sFree Inquiry impartially considered ;and A Paraphrase and Notes upon theEpistle to the Hebrews. He died, leavinga widow, but no children, on theTHE CHURCH.15th of November, 1756, and was buriednear the pulpit in St. James's church,Westminster.Dr. Sykes composed a great numberof publications, besides those alreadymentioned, the most celebrated of whichare, his Case of Subscription to theThirty-nine Articles considered ; and atract, entitled, The Eternal Peace of theChurch only attainable by a Zeal forScripture in its just Latitude, by MutualCharity, not by a Pretence of Uniformityof Opinion. He was a strongsupporter of Whig sentiments, and sozealous an advocate for latitudinariansubscription, that Cramer, chaplain tothe King of Denmark, while engagedon a history of the protestant religion,requested Professor Huber, who wasthen in London, to inquire if Sykes hadever actually subscribed to the articlesof the English church : Huber replied,that he certainly had done so on beingadmitted to each of his preferments.Although Warburton affected to despisehim, it is clear that he possessed considerableability. Bott said, that " inSykes, Warburton had caught a Tartar."As a controversialist, he was shrewd,temperate, and disinterested. " Truth,"said he, " I love ; truth I constantlysearch after ; truth I make the study ofmy life."Bishop Watson had so high an opinionof his productions, as to wish that acomplete edition of them had been published; Priestley declared, that in hisTreatise on Redemption, a great numberof texts were admirably explained ;Harwood says, that all his works manifesta sedulous and successful study ofthe Scriptures ; and Hollis, as he statesin his diary, " employed himself incollecting a complete set of the latelearned Dr. Sykes's works, to bind andsend to Harwood college, in America,for honourable preservation of hismemory."In private life he was mild, obliging,cheerful, and much beloved by hisfriends. " Dr. Clarke," says Mrs. Sykes,would often make him a visit; andwhen he came, his usual way was to sitwith him upon a couch, and, recliningupon his bosom, to discourse in themost free, easy, and familiar manner,upon subjects agreeable to the taste andjudgment of both."ZACHARY PEARCE, BISHOP OF ROCHESTER.THIS learned prelate, the son of adistiller in Holborn, was born in 1690.In 1704, he was sent to Westminsterschool ; where he much distinguishedhimself. He became a king's scholarin 1707; and in 1710, removed toTrinity college, Cambridge ; of which,after having proceeded B. A. in 1713,he was elected a fellow, through theinterest of Parker, subsequently Earlof Macclesfield; to whom, in 1716, hehad dedicated an edition of Cicero deOrator. On taking his degree of M. A.and entering into holy orders, in thefollowing year, he became domesticchaplain to his patron; who, in 1719,being then lord chancellor, institutedhim to the rectory of Stafford Abbots,in Essex; in 1722, to that of St. Bartholomew,London ; and, in 1723, tothat of St. Martin's-in-the-fields ; forwhich, Dr. Claret had already kissedhands; but, such was the interest ofMacclesfield, and the esteem in whichPearce was held, that the king confirmedhim in the living.In the following year, he receivedthe degree of D. D. from ArchbishopWake, and published his edition ofLonginus de Sublimate, with a Latinversion and notes. In 1739, he waspromoted to the deanery of Winchester,which he unwillingly exchanged, in1748, for the bishopric of Bangor. In1756, the Duke of Newcastle prevailedupon him to accept the see of Rochester,and the deanery of Westminster. LordBath afterwards, on two occasions, offeredhim the bishopric of London ;but Pearce positively declined furtherpromotion ; and, in 1763, feeling theinfirmities of age growing fast uponhim, solicited permission to resign hisdignities, in order that he might havesome interval between the fatigues ofbusiness and eternity. His desire notBISHOP PEARCE.being complied with, he renewed it, in1768, when he was permitted to giveup his deanery, but not his bishopric.Though now nearly eighty years ofage, he continued to discharge hisduties as a prelate with great energy.At the latter end of 1773, he exertedhimself so much beyond his strength,at a confirmation of above seven hundredpersons, that, on the followingday, he could scarcely articulate, andnever after recovered the perfect facultyof speech. A paralytic affectionfollowed ; and his death took place, atLittle Baling, on the 29th of June,1774. He was buried at Bromley, inKent, and a monument was erected tohis memory in Westminster abbey.In his thirty-second year, he marriedthe daughter of a distiller in Holborn,named Adams, who brought him alarge fortune, and by whom he hadseveral children, none of whom, however,survived him. In stature he wastall, and in aspect benign. The bust,on his monument, in Westminsterabbey, is said to resemble him strikingly: there is also a good portrait ofhim at Bromley college, in Kent, towhich, during his life, he gave 5,000;and, in addition to this and other munificentacts, he appropriated, by hiswill, the sum of 15,000 to charitablepurposes. He was the author of fourvolumes of sermons ; a Commentaryon the Gospels and Acts ; a Reply toWoolston on the Miracles ; an Accountof Trinity college, Cambridge;a Review of the Text of Milton; twoletters to Conyers Middleton in defenceof Waterland; and some other works.He also contributed, it is said, Nos. 572and 633 to the Spectator, and Nos. 114and 121 to the Guardian. His memoirs,written by himself, at intervals of leisure,and with no view to publicity, were,after his death, printed under the superintendenceof Dr. Johnson, and prefixedto his Commentary.In pulpit eloquence he was deficient,his voice being so feeble, that it could beheard only within a short distance, andhis discourses, though sensible, 'beingfar from effective. He was, however,an accomplished scholar ; a perspicuous,but, perhaps, neither an elegant nor aforcible writer ; an active prelate ; anda pious, benevolent, and upright man.His fortunate dedication of a republishedclassic, to Chief Justice Parker, wasthe foundation of his future eminence ;honours were literally thrust upon himagainst his will ; those who possessedthe greatest power evinced the greatestinclination to elevate him ; and themore coyly he shunned preferment, themore pertinaciously was he solicited toaccept it. Unambitious and rich, he contemplatedhis elevation not only withoutpleasure, but with actual regret ;as necessarily entailing upon himself anincrease of labour, the honours andemoluments attendant upon which, heneither wanted nor desired. His anxietyto abandon his bishopric arose out of awise and noble sentiment. It cannotbe expressed better than in his ownwords: "As," said he, to a friend,I never made a sinecure of my preferments,and being in my seventy-fourthyear, I wished to resign whilemy faculties were entire, lest I mightchance to outlive them, and the churchsuffer by my infirmities."THOMAS HERRING, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.THIS distinguished prelate was bornin 1691, at Walsoken, in Norfolk; ofwhich place his father was rector. Atan early age he entered the grammarschool at Wisbeach; whence, in June,1710, he was sent to Jesus college,Cambridge, where he proceeded B. A.in 1713; but, soon afterwards, removed,with a view to preferment, toCorpus Christii college, of which hewas elected a fellow, in 1716. He wasmade deacon during the same year,and, after proceeding M.A., in 1716,undertook the duties of classical tutor.In 1719, he was ordained priest, and officiated,successively, at Great Belford,Stow-cum-qui, and Trinity, in Cambridge.His talents, as a preacher, soonattracted notice. In 1722, he becamechaplain to Bishop Fleetwood, whoTHE CHURCH.presented him to the rectories of Barleyand Rittenden. In 1724, he took thedegree of B. D., and was offered therectory of All Hallows, which, however,he declined accepting. In 1726,he was chosen preacher to the Societyof Lincoln's inn ; and, after being nominatedchaplain in ordinary to the king,accompanied his majesty to Cambridge,in 1728, when he was complimentedwith the degree of D. D. In 1731, SirW. Clayton presented him to the rectoryof Beseechingly ; and, at the close of thesame year, he was appointed Dean ofRochester. In 1737, he was raised tothe see of Bangor; and translated, in1743, to the archbishopric of York.During the rebellion of 1745, he calleda meeting of the affluent, loyal, andinfluential persons in his diocese, for thepurpose of raising a subscription in supportof government; and, in consequence,it is said, of his enthusiasticaddress, the amount collected on theoccasion was not less than 40,000.On the death of Archbishop Potter,in 1747, he succeeded to the primacy.In 1753, he was attacked by a violentfever, from which he but partially recovered,and passed the remainder ofhis life in retirement at Croydon, wherehe expired, on the 13th of March, 1757.His remains, pursuant to his testamentarydirections, were deposited inavault under Croydon church.On account of the mildness of hisdisposition, his indifference as to doctrinalpoints, and his abhorrence ofcontroversy, Herring had but few enemies.He once, however, drew uponhimself a violent attack from Dean Swift,in Number three of The Intelligencer,for having, while preacher to the Societyof Lincoln's inn, denounced the Beggar sOpera as being pernicious to publicmorals. " I should be very sorry, saidthe dean, " that any of them (the clergy)should be so weak as to imitate a courtchaplain in England, who preachedagainst The Beggar's Opera; which,probably, will do more good than athousand sermons of so stupid, so injudicious,and so prostitute a divine !"Although exceedingly popular as apreacher, none of his' sermons werepublished during his life, and onlyseven of them after his decease. Acollection of his letters, appeared in1777, which exhibit his character in avery amiable light. While Archbishopof York, he greatly improved the propertyof the see ; and, on attaining theprimacy, expended upwards of 6,000in repairing the archiepiscopal palacesat Lambeth and Croydon. He diedunmarried, and bequeathed a large portionof his fortune to public charities.His great kindness and condescensionoccasionally exposed him^o annoyance.Having once told a curate, who hadwaited on him with the presentationcopy of a work, dedicated to the archbishop,that he should always be happyto see the author at his table, the latterbecame his constant visitor. The frequencyof his attentions was by nomeans agreeable to Herring, who,wearied with his " continual coming,"at length, gave him a distant living toget rid of him.JOSEPH BUTLER, BISHOP OF DURHAM.TL HIS eminent prelate was the son ofa shopkeeper, and presbyterian dissenter,at Wantage, in Berkshire, wherehe was born, in the year 1692. Afterreceiving the rudiments of educationat the free grammar school of his nativeplace, he was sent to a presbyterianacademy, at Tewkesbury, with a view tohis becoming a pastor in his own communion.His progress in the studyof divinity was rapid; but his mindbecame tainted with scepticism, and,in November 1713, he commenced aseries of anonymous private letters toDr. Clarke, in which he stated manyacute, but untenable objections, to thearguments of that divine, in his Demonstrationof the Being and Attributes ofa God.He next proceeded to examine thepoints of controversy between the membersof his own communion, and thoseof the established church ; and, at length,he determined to conform. In March,BISHOP Butler R.1714, he was admitted a commoner ofOriel college, Oxford ; and, having beenordained, procured, partly through Dr.Clarke's interest, the office of preacherat the Rolls. In 1721, he took the degreeof B. C. L., and, in 1726, published avolume of sermons, which procured himconsiderable reputation. The Bishopof Durham, to whom he had been introduced,by that prelate's son, Mr.Edward Talbot, his fellow-collegian atOriel, presented him, in 1722, to therectory of Houghton ; and, in 1725, tothe living of Stanhope. At the lattercure he resided a number of yeares,discharging his pastoral duties greatlyto the satisfaction of his parishioners.At length, Seeker, whom he had persuadedto take holy orders, procuredhim the appointment of chaplain tothe lord-chancellor, and recommendedhim to the notice of Queen Caroline,who appointed him her clerk of thecloset. Previously to his obtainingthe latter preferment, he had beenadmitted to the degree of D. C. L., andnominated, by the lord-chancellor, aprebendary of Rochester. In 1736, hepublished his great work, The Analogyof Religion, Natural and Revealed, tothe Constitution and Course of Nature ;which has, with much justice, beendesignated one of the most excellenttheological works extant. Dr. Wood,the Dean of Ely, when some oppositionwas made to the severe examination inThe Analogy, which all students undergo,during the third year of theirresidence at St. John's college, Cambridge,of which he was master, issaid to have observed, that " 'bate theBible, it was the best book he knew !"In 1738, Butler was consecrated Bishopof Bristol; and, in 1740, made Deanof St. Paul's. He now resigned hisliving at Stanhope, and devoted hisattention solely to the duties of hisdeanery and see. In 1746, he wasnominated clerk of the closet to Georgethe Second; by whom, in October, 1750,he was translated to the bishopric ofDurham. His primary charge to theclergy of his new diocese, in which headvocated the efficacy of religious formsand ceremonies, as tending to the advanceof piety, somewhat strengtheneda suspicion, which had previously beenentertained, on account of his havingset up a cross in his chapel at Bristol,that his principles were verging onpopery ; and, after his decease, a reportprevailed, that he had died a Romancatholic; but Porteus and Stinton, intheir Life of Seeker, have satisfactorilyshewn, that such was not the fact.Bishop Butler appears to have beeneminently pious, charitable, eloquent,and learned. While Bishop of Bristol,he expended more than a year's revenueof the see, in repairing the episcopalpalace. He contributed munificentlyto various infirmaries, and lefta large bequest to the Society for propagatingthe Gospel in Foreign Parts. Hewas remarkably hospitable to his clergy,the poorest of whom he frequentlyvisited, without ostentation, and they,in return, were at all times welcometo his palace. He died, unmarried, atBath, on the 16th of June, 1752, andhis remains were interred in Bristolcathedral.THOMAS Seeker, ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY.THOMAS Seeker was born atSibthorpe, Nottinghamshire, in 1693,and received his education at variousprovincial schools. It was the intentionof his father, a protestant dissenter,of small fortune, that he should join theministry in his own communion ; and,with that view, his studies were, froman early period, directed to divinity:but scruples of conscience arising in hismind in the course of his theologicalinquiries, he, at length, positivelydeclined accepting the office of a dissentingpastor, and resolved to qualifyhimself tor the practice of physic. He,accordingly, devoted his attention tothe study of medicine, for about threeyears, and then proceeded to Paris forthe purpose of attending the hospitals,and acquiring instruction from the mosteminent medical practitioners in thatcapital.THE CHURCH.During his residence abroad, a circumstanceoccurred in this country,which induced him again to turn histhoughts towards divinity. Butler,then preacher at the Rolls, who hadbeen ants schoolfellow at Tewkesbury,having warmly recommended him tothe notice of Mr. Edward Talbot, thelatter engaged that his father, theBishop of Durham, should provide forSeeker, if he thought proper to takeorders in the church of England.Seeker, after a mental debate of twomonths' duration, accepted this offer.He, accordingly, quitted France, inAugust, 1720; and, immediately on hisarrival in England, was introduced toMr. Talbot; with whom he cultivateda close acquaintance. Shortly beforeChristmas, he went to Leyden, andthere took the degree of M. 1)., inorder to facilitate his graduating at anEnglish university. While at Leyden,he is broadly accused, by Horace Walpole,of having been president of a freethinkingclub : " Mr. Robins," observesthat writer, "said that he hadknown him an atheist, and had advisedhim against talking so openly in thecoffee-houses; and Mr. Stephens saysSeeker made him an atheist at Leyden,where the club was established."Soon after his return to England,in April, 1721, he entered himself agentleman ' commoner at Exeter college,Oxford. In the ensuing year, hetook the degree of B. A., and was ordaineddeacon by his patron, BishopTalbot ; who appointed him one of hisdomestic chaplains ; and, in the year1724, presented him to the valuablerectory of Houghton-le-spring. On the28th of October, 1725, he marriedBishop Benson's sister, a relation, asWalpole asserts, of the Bishop of Durham; and, two years afterwards, exchangedhis rectory for that of Ryton,near Newcastle, and a prebend atDurham.In 1732, he became chaplain to theking; and, in the following year, obtainedthe rectory of St James's, asWalpole affirms, by the queen's favour.His biographers, Porteus andStinton, however, state that his prefermenttook place under the followingcircumstances: Dr. Trahit, whosucceeded Dr. Clarke, as rector of St.James's, in 1729, finding that preachingin so large a church endangered hishealth, his father-in-law, Bishop Gibson,proposed to the crown, that heshould be made residentiary of St.Paul's, and that Seeker should succeedhim in the rectory ; a propositionwhich proved so acceptable to those inpower, that the arrangement waseffected without difficulty. Shortlyafterwards, Seeker took the degree of1). C. L. ; on which occasion he preachedhis celebrated act sermon, On the Advantagesand Duties of an AcademicalEducation. In December, 1734, he wasraised to the see of Bristol. Walpoleattributes his elevation to the episcopalbench, as well as his subsequent translationto the diocese of Oxford, whichtook place in 1737, to the same augustpatronage which procured for him,according to the same writer, the rectoryof St. James's.Pending the differences betweenGeorge the Second and his son,Frederick, Prince of Wales, the latter,who had removed to Norfolk house,constantly attended divine service inSt James's church. The first time hewent thither, Bonne, the clerk inorders, inadvertently commenced theservice with his usual sentence of Scripture," I will arise and go to my father,&c." and Dr. Seeker, who preachedthe sermon, as it was currently reportedat the time, selected for his text thecommandment, " Honour thy fatherand thy mother, &c." The latter partof the story appears, however, to bealtogether void of foundation. It hasbeen positively contradicted by goodauthorities ; and, if this were not thecase, it can scarcely be supposed that aman of Seeker's character would haveventured to allude so pointedly andoffensively to the heir-apparent's quarrelwith the king in the presence of hisroyal highness, and especially after thesingular inadvertence of the clerk inorders. Nor is it probable that theprince, had he received so severe apublic rebuke from the bishop, wouldhave honoured him, as his royal highnessafterwards did, with many marksof civility and condescension. All theprince's children, with two exceptions,were baptised by Seeker, who, for sometime,acted so adroitly as to secure theesteem of the heir-apparent, withoutgiving cause of offence to the monarch ;ARCHBISHOP Necker.paying all due respect to the rank ofthe prince, but never attending hiscourt, as such a step would have precludedhim from appearing in the presenceof the king.At length, on account of his supposedinfluence over the prince, he was deputedto bear what George the Secondconsidered an amicable offer to his son ;which, however, the prince thoughtproper to reject ; and Seeker, in consequenceof the failure of his mission, fellunder the severe displeasure of theking, who was so convinced that hehad not acted with becoming zeal andloyally on this occasion, that his majestyrefused to speak to him for a veryconsiderable time; and even after severalyears had elapsed, as Walpolestates, one day refused to go to St.James's church, because Seeker wasappointed to preach before him.In 1750, he accepted the deanery ofSt. Paul's, in exchange for the rectoryof St. James's, and his prebend atDurham; and, in 1758, without anysolicitation on his own part, he wasadvanced to the primacy. Duringthe latter part of his life, he sufferedexcruciating pain in one of his thighs,from gout; and, on Sunday, the 31stof July, 1768, while his servants wereraising him in bed, he suddenly exclaimedthat it was broken : this, thesurgeon who attended him soon discoveredto be the fact. A fever ensued,and, three days afterwards, he expired.On a post mortem examination, it appearedthat, previously to the fracture,a great portion of the thigh-bone, withthe exception of the outward integumentonly, had been destroyed bydisease. He was buried in a coveredpassage, leading from a private door inLambeth palace, to the north entranceof the church.His domestic character appears tohave been very amiable. He attendedhis wife, who died in 1748, during a verylong illness, with extraordinary careand tenderness, although her bad healthand depressed spirits, it is said, frequentlyput his affection to the mostsevere trials. To the widow anddaughters of Bishop Talbot's son, whohad laid the foundation of his ecclesiasticalhonours, he displayed greatkindness during his life ; and, at hisdecease, left them the interest of13,000 in the three per cents. Tothe archiepiscopal library, at Lambeth,he bequeathed a valuable collection of| books, and a great number of his ownl manuscripts ; among which were, aniinterleaved English Bible, with verycopious remarks; Michaelis' HebrewBible, filled with comparisons of theancient versions, emendations, and conjectureson the original text ; and twofolio volumes of notes upon Daniel.As an author, he displayed more elegancethan depth ; and excelled ratherin the correction of other men's writings,than in original composition. He improvedthe style of Bishop Butler'sAnalogy ; assisted Archdeacon Sharpein his controversy with the Hutchinsand lent his aid to Dr. Church,both in the Vindication of the MiraculousPowers, and the Analysis of theWorks of Bolingbroke. Among hisoriginal productions are, Lectures onthe Catechism of the Church of England,and A Reply to Mathew on theCharter and Conduct of the Societyfor propagating the Gospel. He alsocommunicated some observations toWarburton on The Divine Legation,in allusion to which, Bishop Kurd says,Dr. Seeker was a wise man, an edifyingpreacher, and an exemplary bishop;but the course of his life and studieshad not qualified him to decide on sucha work as The Divine Legation. Evenin the narrow walk of literature hemost affected, that of criticising theHebrew text, it does not appear thathe attained to any great distinction.His chief merit (and, surely, it was agreat one) lay in explaining, clearlyand properly, the principles deliveredby his friend, Bishop Butler, in hisfamous book of The Analogy, and inshewing the important use of themto religion." Four volumes of hisworks were published about the year1770 ; in which, says a reviewer ofthat period, " though the reader willseldom meet with the strokes of a livelygenius, the graces of oratorical language,the critical accuracy of Dr. Clarke, thereasoning of Hoadly, or the acutenessof Sherlock, yet he will find what isextremely valuable, the strongest marksof a benevolent disposition, unaffectedpiety, and solid sense." His discourses,according to Walpole, were a kind ofmoral essays; but what they wantedTHE CHURCH.in Gospel was made up in fanaticism.A second edition of his works, in twelveoctavo volumes, appeared in 1795.Although intolerant towards the Romancatholics, he cultivated a good understandingwith the dissenters, whosenumbers rapidly increased during hisprimacy. With some of their mosteminent leaders, Watts, Doddridge,and others, he maintained a friendlyintercourse ; considering them, it issaid, as temporary separatists only fromthe church, whom conciliation might,perhaps, induce to return to her bosom.RICHARD GREY.THIS ingenious and learned divinewas born at Newcastle-upon-Tyne, in1693, and, becoming a student of Lincolncollege, Oxford, took the degree ofB. A. in 1715, and that of M. A. in1718. On entering into holy orders, hewas appointed chaplain and secretaryto Lord Crewe, Bishop of Durham,who presented him, first, to the rectoryof Linton, in Northamptonshire ; afterwardsto the living of Kingscote, inLeicestershire ; and procured him astall in St. Paul's cathedral.In 1730, he published his celebratedMemoria Technical, or, A New Methodof Artificial Memory; and, in the followingyear, A System of EcclesiasticalLaw, extracted from the Codex JurisEcclesiastics Anglican of Bishop Gibson,for the use of students in divinity.Of this work, which was subsequentlyreprinted, with marginal references, theuniversity so highly approved, that inthe year after its appearance, he wasrewarded with the degree of D. D. bydiploma. In 1736, he published, anonymously,The Miserable and DistractedState of Religion in England, upon theDownfal of the Church Established ;and, in 1738, A New and Easy Methodof Learning Hebrew with Points. Heproduced several other learned works,to facilitate the study of Hebrew ;and, in 1742, published his Book ofJob, divided into metrical verses, withthe Latin version and notes of ProfessorSchultens, and his own annotations.In the preface to this work, he introducedsome strictures on certain passagesof Bishop Warburton's DivineLegation of Moses ; to which that prelatehaving replied, Grey, in 1744,printed An Answer to Mr. warburton'sRemarks on several occasional Reflections,so far as they concern the Prefaceto a late Edition of the Book of Job, &c.In 1746, he acted as official and commissaryof the archdeaconry of Leicester;in 1749, he published his LastWords of David, divided according tothe metre, with notes critical and explanatory; and, in 1753, an Englishtranslation of Browne's poem, DeAnimae Immortal! tate.He died in 1771, leaving fourdaughters, by his wife, Joyce, youngestdaughter of the Rev. Mr. Thicknessee, ofFarthing, to whom he had been unitedwhile chaplain to Lord Crewe, Bishop ofDurham, in the neighbourhood of whoseresidence the young lady lived. Herbrother, Philip Thicknessee, states, in hismemoirs, that Grey, having been sentwith a message from Lord Crewe tothe elder Thicknessee, on entering thestudy of the latter, instead of disclosinghis business, he inquired, whether ayoung lady he had seen in the courtyardwas his daughter. "My father,"continues the brother, " informed himhe had two daughters, and probablyit might be. ' Bless me !' said Mr.Grey, ' it made my heart leap to seeso fine a girl in such a country village.'This so offended my father,that he had a great mind to make himleap, body and soul, out his study, hadhe not quickly perceived his displeasureat so novel an address, and explainedhis errand. My father, finding him aningenious young man, began to feel asmuch partiality for the young parson,as the parson had conceived for hisyoungest daughter. Mr. Grey repeatedhis visits, and before my sister was wellout of her white frock, she became therector of Linton's wife. Mr. Greypaid her the following singular complimentthe day he obtained her father'sand mother's consent: Entering theRICHARD GREY.garden with my sister and mother, heledher on the grass plot, and walkingseveral times round, admiring her person,' Well,' said he, ' Miss Joyce, Iown you are too good for me ; but, atthe same time, I think myself too goodfor any body else !' "Dr. Grey was learned, amiable, andingenious. His system of mnemonicshas, under various modifications, beenextensively circulated, and considerablypraised. His works on the study ofHebrew, which are still esteemed,prove him to have been a man of muchtalent, as well as deep erudition. Hemight, it is said, but for his Jacobiticalopinions, at one time have attained theepiscopal bench. His early patron, LordCrewe, appears to have been a staunchadherent to the exiled family ; but, accordingto Thicknessee, Grey was quitecured of Jacobitism long before hedied. He observed, that when thePretender was at Rome, his friendshere kept his birth-day, and spoke ofhim with concern ; but when ne wasin Scotland, they seemed to forgethim every day. " Now," continuedhe, " if I had been the king, I wouldhave pardoned all those who showedtheir unshaken loyalty openly, andhanged all cowardly adherents, whodurst not appear to serve him whentheir services were wanted. But, thankGod ! that silly business is at an end ;and the catholics know the sweets ofliving under a protestant prince, anda free government."WILLIAM WARBURTON, BISHOP OF GLOUCESTER.THIS celebrated prelate, the son ofan attorney, was born at ,on the 24th of December, 1698.After receiving the rudiments of learningat a school kept by his brother-in-law,and finishing his education atanother in Rutlandshire, he was articledto an attorney, at Great Markham.On the completion of his clerkship, in1719, he was admitted in one of thecourts at Westminster, and, for a shorttime, practised in his native town ; but,finding his profession neither pleasantnor profitable, he soon abandoned it,and was for some time, it is supposed,an usher in a school. In 1723, he wasordained deacon; and having, in thefollowing year, dedicated his first work,consisting of miscellaneous translations,in prose and verse, from Latin authors,to Sir Robert Sutton, he was presented,by that gentleman, on his taking priest'sorders in 1726-7, to the small vicarageof Greeley, in Nottinghamshire.About the close of the same year hecame to London, and formed an acquaintancewith Theobald ; to whoseedition of Shakspeare, he contributedseveral notes. He now engaged in aconfederacy against Pope, of whom hesaid, that while Milton borrowed byaffectation, and Dryden by idleness,Pope did so from necessity. In 1727,he published his Inquiry into the Causesof Prodigies and Miracles, which he dedicatedto Sir Robert Sutton, who procuredhim a place among the king'smasters of arts, on the occasion of hismajesty's visit to Cambridge, in 1728 ;during which year, Warburton was alsopresented, by his patron, to the rectoryof Brand Boughton, in Lincolnshire,worth about 200 a year.At this time he appears to have possessedbut little ambition ; for he passedmany years in the quiet performanceof his duties as a parish priest ; and thepublic heard but little or nothing ofhim, until 1736, when he produced hiscelebrated Alliance between Churchand State ; on account of the meritsof which, Hare, Bishop of Chichester,recommended him to the notice ofQueen Caroline; who, however, diedbefore he could be introduced. Hehad previously announced, in a foreignperiodical, his intention of preparingfor the press a new edition, with notes,of Villeins Parterculus ; but had abandonedthe idea, by the advice of Dr.Middleton.At the conclusion of the Alliance, hehad announced his great work, entitledThe Divine Legation of Moses, demonstratedon the Principles of a ReligiousDeist, from the Omission of theTHE CHURCH.Doctrine of a Future State of Rewardsand Punishments, in the Jewish Dispensationj the first volume of which,published in 1737-8, excited so muchclamour against him, that, as he said,he could not, with justice, have beenmore bitterly abused had he written abook maintaining the divine legation ofMahomet He defended his work, ofwhich a second volume appeared in1741, with great ability, against theattacks of his numerous clerical adversaries;but, with a view, perhaps, toconciliate the caustic satirist, Pope, hepublished, in a periodical, entitled TheWorks of the Learned, a vindication ofthat author, who had been charged withhaving evinced a tendency to Spinosismand naturalism in his Essay on Man.Pope, proud of his champion, soughtan intimacy with Warburton, whichcontinued, much to the advantage ofthe latter, up to the period of the poet'sdeath. In 1741, during a country excursion,they visited Oxford, where thevice-chancellor proposed conferring adegree on Pope, which, however, hedeclined, on finding that some impedimentoccurred, in carrying into effectan offer which had, at the same time,been made of the degree of D. D. toWarburton. " We shall take our degreetogether in fame," said the poet, onthis occasion, " whatever we do at theuniversity." At this time, the fourthbook of the Dunciad was projected;and it appeared in the following year,with notes, by Warburton, who, it issaid, suggested many alterations and improvementsin the writings of his friend.About this time, Sir Thomas Hammerprocured from Warburton a large collectionof notes and emendations, whichwere, it is asserted, afterwards improperlyused in Hammer's edition ofShakspeare. Warburton's next greatwork was a Dissertation on the Originof Books of Chivalry ; relative to which,Pope, in a letter to the author, usedthe following expressions : " I had notread two clauses before I cried out,Aut Erasmus, aut diabolic !' I knowyou as certainly as the ancients did thegods, by the first pace, and the verygait." He was indebted to the friendshipof Pope, for introductions toMurray, afterwards Lord Mansfield ;to Lord Chesterfield, who, on beingmade viceroy of Ireland, offered himthe appointment of first chaplain,which, however, he declined; and tothe lady who afterwards became hiswife. The poet, it appears, while on avisit to his friend, Mr. Allen, of Priorpark, near Bath, had a letter put intohis hand, on reading which, he exhibitedsome symptoms of perplexity.Allen asked him what was the matter :A Lincolnshire parson," replied Pope,to whom I am much obliged, writesme word that he will be with me in afew days, at Twickenham." Allen thenproposed that the reverend gentlemanshould be invited to Prior park, andoffered to send a carriage to meet him,at Chippenham. Pope acquiesced, and,shortly afterwards, Warburton, whowas the Lincolnshire parson in question,arrived at Allen's residence; wherehe captivated his host's favourite niece,Miss Gertrude Tucker, whom he afterwardsmarried, and in whose right, heeventually obtained possession of Priorpark, and the greater part of Allen'sproperty.A change appears to have taken placein the tone of Warburton's writings,about the year 1744, when, utterlyabandoning his previous comparativediffidence, he adopted, in his defencesagainst those who had presumed toenter the lists of controversy againsthim, the lofty and austere style of onewho condescended to convince antagonistswhom he despised. During therebellion, in 1745, he was a staunchadvocate of government; still, notwithstandinghis loyalty and talents, he hadnot hitherto been honoured with anypublic preferment. In 1746, by theinterest of Murray, he was chosenpreacher of Lincoln's inn ; and, in thefollowing year, he published an editionof Shakspeare ; which, says one of hisco temporaries, raised a considerableoutcry against him, his illustrations ofthe poet's sense being frequently notadmitted, and his corrections of thefaulty text not allowed.He now engaged in a controversywith Dr. Middleton, in which, bothparties disgraced themselves by uncharitableasperity towards each other. In1749, he thus wrote, from his housein Bedford row, to Bishop Hurd, apparentlyin a splenetic mood, at thetotal indifference evinced towards himby government : " I am now got hitherBISHOP WARBURTON.to spend the month of November,the dreadful month of November,when the little wretches hang anddrown themselves, and the great onessell themselves to the court and thedevil!" In 1750, he published a work,entitled Julian; or, A Discourse concerningthe Earthquake and FieryEruption, which defeated that Emperor'sAttempt to rebuild the Templeat Jerusalem ; a production, which, althoughit exposed Warburton to censurein this country, is said to havebeen much admired by many men oflearning on the continent. He next employedhimself in producing an edition,in nine volumes, octavo, of all theworks, except the translation of Homer,of his deceased friend, Pope, who hadbequeathed to him one naif of hislibrary, and the whole of his unsoldcopyrights.At length, though late in life, prefermentwas awarded him. In 1753,through the patronage of Lord Hard-wicked,with whom, prior to his elevationto the peerage, he had been intimatelyacquainted, he became prebendaryof Gloucester; in the followingyear, one of the king's chaplains; in1755, by the interest of Murray, afterwardsLord Mansfield, prebendary ofDurham ; D. D. by archiepiscopal mandate,in the same year ; Dean of Bristol,in 1757 ; and, two years afterwards,Bishop of Gloucester. He had previouslypublished an attack on the philosophicalworks of Lord Bolingbroke, in someanonymous letters ; the two last of whichappeared in 1755, with an apology forthe two first, which Hurd designatesas being at once the most interesting,and the most masterly of all his productions.Soon afterwards, he wroteand published, with the collusion ofHurd, Remarks (addressed to himself)on David Hume's Essay on the Historyof Religion.In 1758, he printed an improvededition of the first volume of his DivineLegation, with copious notes, in whichwere comprised answers to some observationson the work, which had beencommunicated to him by ArchbishopSeeker. He soon afterwards re-printedA Discourse, (which he had previouslypublished in a larger form) on theLord's Supper, which he maintained tobe a feast on a sacrifice ; and that thesacrifice was an atonement to the offendedmajesty of the Creator. In1762, appeared his Doctrine of Grace,in which he indulged in some severeanimadversions on the principles ofMethodism. In 1765, he published thethird, fourth, and fifth volumes of TheDivine Legation ; and, shortly afterwards,became again involved in controversy,on account of some remarks,contained in that work, on the characterof Dr. W. Loath, father of the Bishopof London. In 1763, his name havingbeen appended to certain notes, attachedto the Essay on Woman, publishedby Wilkes, he solemnly disavowedthem in the house of lords, andsaid that the work was worthy of Satanhimself: " but," added he, after a shortpause, " I beg the devil's pardon ; he isincapable of writing it !"In 1766, he produced a new and imeroved edition of his Alliance ; and, a:w years afterwards, founded a courseof lectures, at Lincoln's inn, " to provethe truth of revealed religion in general,and of the Christian in particular,from the completion of the propheciesin the Old and New Testament, whichrelate to the Christian church, especiallyto the apostacy of papal Rome."In a letter to Hurd, written on the20th of February, in the followingyear, he says : " I brought, as usual,a bad cold with me to town ; and, thisbeing the first day I ventured out ofdoors, it was employed, as in dutybound, at court, it being a levee-day. Abuffoon lord in waiting was very busymarshalling the circle ; and he said tome,without ceremony ' Move forward ;you clog up the door way.' I replied,with as little, ' Did nobody clog up theking's door-stead more than I, therewould be room for all honest men.'This brought the man to himself. Whenthe king came up to me, he asked,Why I did not come to town before ?'I said, ' I understood there was nobusiness going forward in the house,in which I could be of service to hismajesty." He replied, ' He supposedthe severe storm of snow would havebrought me up." I answered, ' I wasunder cover of a warm house.' You see,by all this, how unfit I am for courts."His declining years were embitteredby the illness of his only son, whosedeath occurred shortly before his own,THE CHURCH.which took place on the 7th of June,1779. In addition to the productionsalready enumerated, he printed threevolumes of sermons ; and left a quantityof notes " scribbled over themargins" of Clarendon's History ofthe Rebellion, Neal's History of thePuritans, and Tindal's Christianity asold as the Creation. Of the latterauthor, he says, in a letter to Hurd, " Ithink I have him as sure as I had Collins: that is, I overturn the pillars ofthis famous edifice of impiety, whichall the writers against him hithertohave left standing, busying themselvesonly to until its roof." Someyears after his decease, the whole of hisworks, including the ninth and last bookof The Divine Legation, which had notpreviously appeared, were collected andpublished, with a biographical memoir,by Bishop Hurd.In youth, Warburton's person, whichwas tall and athletic, is said to havebeen awkward ; in maturity, dignified ;and in old age, particularly venerable.His countenance, in all the stages oflife, was very expressive ; and his eye,searching and brilliant. Of his character,Johnson, in his life of Pope, hasgiven the following estimate : " He wasa man of vigorous faculties, a mind fervidand vehement, supplied by incessantand unlimited inquiry, with wonderfulextent and variety of knowledge, whichyet had not oppressed his imagination,nor clouded his perspicacity. To everywork he brought a memory full fraught ;together with a fancy fertile of originalcombinations ; and at once exerted thepowers of the scholar, the reasoner, andthe wit. But his knowledge was toomultifarious to be always exact, and hispursuits were too eager to be alwayscautious. His abilities gave him ahaughty confidence, which he disdainedto conceal or mollify ; and his impatienceof opposition, disposed him to treat hisadversaries with such contemptuous superiority,as made his readers commonlyhis enemies, and excited against theadvocate, the wishes of some who favouredthe cause. He seems to haveadopted the Roman emperor's determination,' Ordering dum meant' Heused no allurements of gentle language,but wished to compel rather than to persuade.His style is copious without selection,and forcible without neatness;he took the words that presented themselves; his diction is coarse and impure ;and his sentences are unmeasured."In his own opinion, he was " frank,but honest; and, if plain, yet generous; above all, a lover of truth andgood men ; not the most forbearingwhen he thought himself ill-treated;but ready to be reconciled by the leastshadow of recantation." In anotherpassage he confesses himself to be " alittle fanatical." His laudatory biographer,Hurd, admits that he was notalways guarded, or even just, in hiscensures or commendations; and hisantagonist, Loath, accused him ofsophistry, scurrility, and buffoonery;adding, that he had not only assumedthe office of inquisitor-general, andsupreme judge of the opinions of thelearned, but had exercised it with aferocity and despotism without examplein the republic of letters. A loveof paradox, a daring self-sufficiency,and a vulgar, yet haughty, virulencetowards his polemical antagonists, combinedwith much ingenuity and considerablelearning, are the most strikingcharacteristics of the greater part of hisproductions. The critical reviewers of1795 remark, that, notwithstanding thepresident Montesquieu was said to havebeen enchanted with his Julian, therewere still some, " and even hard heads,who asserted that one part of the workreversed the other." On the appearanceof The Divine Legation, his friend,Bishop Hare, paid Warburton thisequivocal compliment: "I hear nobodyspeak of your book who do notexpress themselves entertained with itsthough they think the principal point,which remains to be proved, a paradox."Wilkes, alluding to the samework, observes, " I have been said tohave my doubts. I really have none.If I had, that orthodox bishop (Warburton)would surely be able to removethem ; only I should fear, that, forevery one of mine he carried away,he would leave ten of his own behindwith me." A similar assertion formsthe point of the following epigram,written by an unknown hand, on thefly leaf of a copy of his works:(great is your wisdom, sir, no doubt,Surpassed by very stew,Who strike not only new light* out,But all the old ones too.ARCHDEACON Fortin.Dr. Sykes, although he admits TheDivine Legation to be the work of aman of learning and abilities, characterizesits reasoning as inconclusive;Bishop Loath maintains, that even ayoung student in divinity might, withoutpresumption, undertake to give amore satisfactory demonstration on thesubject in five pages, than Warburtonhas done in as many volumes ; andRichard Bentley, the great critic, is saidto have observed of its author, after readingthe first part of the work, " Thisman has a monstrous appetite, but avery bad digestion !" It has been remarked,that among his many infelicitiesof expression, he frequently mentionsthe fortunes of the Christian church,and alludes to the descent of the HolyGhost as an important adventure!Cradock states, in his memoirs, thatWarburton was warm, witty, and convivial." Kurd," he adds, " used towonder where Warburton got theanecdotes with which his conversationand writings frequently abounded. ' Icould readily have informed him,' saidMrs. Warburton, tome. ' Whenwepassedour winters in London, he would often,after his long and severe studies, send outfor a whole basket-full of books, fromthe circulating libraries ; and at times Ihave gone into his study, and found himlaughing, though alone ; and now andthen he would double down some entertainingpages for my amusement.' "JOHN Fortin, ARCHDEACON OF LONDON.JOHN, the son of Senatus Jortin, (aFrenchman, who fled to Englandshortly after the revocation of the edictof Nantes, and became gentleman ofthe privy-chamber to King William,and secretary to Sir Cloudesley Shovel,with whom he was wrecked, and losthis life,) was born in the parish of St.Giles's-in-the-fields, on the 23rd ofDecember, 1698. He made a rapidadvance in scholastic acquirements atthe Charter house, whence he was removed,in 1715, to Jesus college, Cambridge; and, two years afterwards,Pope employed him to extract notesfrom Eustathius, for publication withthe translation of Homer's Iliad. Thepoet, it is said, scarcely altered any ofyoung Jortin's language ; and, in a subsequentedition, corrected a passage towhich the latter had raised some objection." I was in some hopes," saysJortin, " in those days, (for I wasyoung,) that Mr. Pope would makesome inquiry about his coadjutor, andtake some civil notice of him ; but hedid not; and I had no notion of intrudingupon him: I never saw hisface."In 1719, he graduated as B.A. ; in1721, he was made a fellow of his college ;and, in 1722, he took the degree of M. A.During the same year he was appointedto the honourable office of moderator;and, subsequently, to that of taxbr.About the same time, he published someelegant Latin poems, under the title ofLusus Poetic : in 1723, he was ordaineddeacon; in 1724, priest; and, in1727, obtained the college living of Swag; which, in the following year, heresigned, and received the appointmentof reader and preacher at a chapel ofease, in New street, Bloomsbury. In1730, he published four sermons on thetruth of the Christian religion ; and, inthe following year, contributed largelyto the Miscellaneous Observations uponAuthors, Ancient and Modern, whichwere published in twenty-four sixpennynumbers. He also officiated,for some time, as occasional assistantto Warburton, while the latter waspreacher at Lincoln's inn. In 1731,appeared his Remarks on Milton,Spenser, . and Seneca ; in 1737, theEarl of Winchelsea presented him tothe vicarage of Eastwell, in Kent,which, however, he soon resigned; and,in 1746, he was appointed preacher toa chapel of ease in Tendon streetIn the following year, he preacheda sermon, at the consecration of Dr.Pearce as Bishop of Bangor, which heafterwards printed. In 1751, while atthe anniversary dinner of the corporationof the sons of the clergy, he wastold that Archbishop Herring, who wasTHE CHURCH.present, wished to speak with himJortin endeavoured to find his hat, butwithout success, and went without itto Herring ; who, after highly complimentinghim for his learning, publiclypresented him to the living of St.Dunstan-in-the-east. On returning tohis seat, Jortin is said to have exclaimed," I have lost my hat ; but Ihave got a living !"During the same year, appeared thefirst volume of his Remarks upon EcclesiasticalHistory; four other volumesof which were subsequently printed inhis life-time, and two more after hisdecease. In 1755, he was made D. D.,by Archbishop Herring, and publishedSix Dissertations upon different Subjects;the last of which, on the stateof the dead, as described by Homerand Virgil, exposed him to an attackfrom Warburton, to which he made nodirect reply ; but, in his Adversaries, heobserved, that he was willing to stakewhatever credit he possessed as a criticand a philosopher, upon his Dissertation; wherein he had asserted, thatHomer was not the inventor of thefabulous history of the gods, but hadderived the doctrine of a future statefrom old traditions.He performed well, it is said, on thebass-viol and harpsichord ; and, in 1753,he addressed a letter to the composer,Alison, on the music of the ancients.In 1758, appeared his Life of Erasmus;and, two years afterwards, his remarkson the works of that eminent man.In 1762, he became chaplain to Dr.Osbaldiston, Bishop of London ; obtaineda prebendal stall in St. Paul'scathedral ; and, shortly afterwards, waspresented to the vicarage of Kensington.In 1764, he was made Archdeaconof London, and received anoffer of the rectory of St. James's ;which, however, he thought proper todecline, being unwilling to leave hisparish of Kensington, the pastoralduties of which he continued to performduring the remainder of his life.In his last hours, he replied to a femaleattendant, who had offered him somerefreshment, " No ; I have had enoughof everything." He died on the 27thof August, 1770, leaving three childrenby his wife, a Miss Ann Chibnall, ofNewport Parnell, to whom he hadbeen united in 1728.Jortin was a sincere and devoutChristian ; a disinterested, upright, andhonest divine ; who would stoop to nosolicitation, nor ever check the ebullitionsof his conscience against the sinsof high rank, in order to obtain preferment.Few clergymen, with suchtalents as he possessed, have advancedso far, and lived so long, withoutfurther exaltation. His style, as awriter, was elegant, imaginative, judicious,masculine, and correct ; his mannersapproached even to rustic simplicity; his benevolence and urbanityendeared him to all who came withinthe limited sphere of his influence ; andhis inoffensive humour, strong sense,and amiable sensibility, rendered hisconversation particularly attractive. Heseems to have been precisely such acharacter, as he himself has sketched ;having all the necessaries, but noneof the superfluities, of life ; and thesenecessaries he had acquired by hisprudence, his studies, and his industry.If he sought to better his income, itwas by such methods as hurled neitherhis conscience, nor his constitution.As he had his occupations, he had hisdiversions also; and partook of thesimple, frugal, obvious, innocent, andcheerful amusements of life."Besides the works which have beenmentioned, he was the author of Remarkson Tillotson's Sermons ; twovolumes of Philological, Critical, andMiscellaneous Tracts ; and seven posthumousvolumes of sermons andcharges.EDMUND LAW, BISHOP OF CARLISLE.THIS prelate, son of a divine atCarmel, in Lancashire, was born therein1703. He received his educationat the grammar school of Kendal, andat St. John's college, Cambridge. Heproceeded B. A., in 1723; and, afterhaving been elected a fellow of Christcollege, in the same university, he tookBISHOP LAW.the degree of M. A., in 1727. In 1732,he published a translation of ArchbishopKing's Origin of Evil; and,subsequently, joined in the controversy,occasioned by Dr. Clarke's Demonstrationof the Being and Attributes ofGod ; ingeniously attacking the opinionsof that divine, in a tract, publishedin 1734-5, as to the ideas of space, time,&c. He assisted Taylor and others inediting Stephens' Thesaurus, which appearedin 1735 : two years afterwards,the university presented him to theliving of Graystock, in Cumberland;but, in consequence of a dispute arisingas to the right of nomination, sometimeelapsed before he was inducted.In 1743, he obtained the archdeaconryof Carlisle, with the annexed rectoryof Walked ; and, soon afterwards, producedhis Considerations of the Theoryof Religion ; Reflections on the Lifeand Character of Christ ; and An Appendixconcerning the use of the wordsSoul and Spirit, in Holy Scripture,and the State of the Dead, as thereindescribed.In 1749, he proceeded to the degreeof D. D. ; on which occasion, he defended,in his public thesis, the naturalmortality, or sleep of the soul. Heappears to have had some difficulty inprocuring his testimonials, which thehead of one college refused to sign,because, as he said, " he neither likedLaw's person nor his doctrine." In1754, he resigned his archdeaconry, onbeing appointed master of Penthousecollege. He was elected librarian to theuniversity, in 1760, and casuistical professor,in 1764. He then became Archdeaconof Staffordshire, and was subsequentlypresented to prebendal stalls inthe cathedrals of Lichfield, Lincoln, andDurham. By the interest of the Dukeof Grafton, but without any solicitationon his own part, he was elevated, in1768, to the bishopric of Carlisle, whichhe held during the remainder of hislife. In 1774, he published Considerationson the Propriety of requiringSubscription to Articles of Faith ; and,in 1777, edited an edition of the worksof Locke, whose character and principleshe is said to have held in thehighest estimation. Before his decease,which took place on the 14th of August,1787, his two principal works wererepublished, with alterations and addenda.He also wrote Observations onthe Contest occasioned about LiteraryProperty ; and printed several sermonsand metaphysical tracts. By his wife,Mary, the daughter of John Christian,Esq., he had eleven children.According to Paley, his person waslow, but well-formed ; his complexionfair ; his countenance always unruffled ;his deportment mild ; his dispositionbenignant, and his temper sprightly.He avowed his own opinions withfreedom ; but treated those of otherswith candour and respect. Warburtonspeaks of him, as a man unshackled inthe ways of the world ; and the Rev.John Jones, of Welwyn, warmly eulogizeshis learning, integrity, and "sweet,benevolent, Christian disposition." Hedevoted the greater part of his time tometaphysical and religious inquiries ;and has rendered his name conspicuousby his advocacy of the much disputeddoctrine, that our Redeemer, at his secondcoming, will, by an act of his power,restore to life and consciousness the deadof the human species ; who, by their ownnature, and without that interposition,would have remained in the state ofinsensibility, to which the death,brought upon mankind by the sin ofAdam, had reduced them.In the structure of his sentences, heused so many parentheses, that, asPaley relates, having, on one occasion,sent a work to press, at Carlisle, a considerabletime elapsed before the printercould proceed with it. After sendingseveral times, he at length called, toascertain what could possibly occasionso great a delay. " Why does not mybook make its appearance ?" said he,to the printer. "My lord, I am extremelysorry," was the reply; " butwe have been obliged to send to theletter-founder, at Glasgow, for a poundof parentheses !"THE CHURCH.THOMAS NEWTON, BISHOP OF BRISTOL.THIS prelate, the son of a brandy andcider merchant, was born on the 1st ofJanuary, 1704, at Lichfield, where hereceived the preliminary part of hiseducation. In 1717, he was removedto Westminster school, at which he becamea king's scholar. He was elected,in 1723, to Trinity college, Cambridge,where he took the degree of B. A., in1726; and that of M. A. in 1730; duringwhich year, having previously enteredinto holy orders, he obtained a fellowship.He afterwards became, successively,curate at St. George's, Hanoversquare ; assistant to Dr. Trebeck ; andreader at Grosvenor chapel, SouthAudley street His talents soon attractedthe notice of Lord Carpenter, (towhose son he was appointed tutor), andof Bishop Pearce, who nominated himmorning preacher at the chapel inSpring Gardens. About the same time,having edited the works of Rowe, hewas presented, by that author's widow,to the Prince of Wales, and also toPulteney, who, on being elevated to thepeerage, made Newton his chaplain.In 1744, he vacated his fellowship,on being presented to the rectory of St.Mary-le-Bow, Cheapside. In the followingyear, he proceeded to the degreeof S. T. P.; and distinguished himselfby preaching some animated sermonsagainst the rebellion, one or woof whichhe published. In 1747, he succeededDr. Savage, as lecturer at St. George's,Hanover square ; and, during the sameyear, married Jane, eldest daughter ofDr. Trebeck, in whose house, he had,for some time before, resided. In 1749,he published an elegant edition of Miltons Paradise Lost, with an elaborateverbal index, by Crude, and copiousnotes, in which he was assisted by Warburton,Jortin, and others. In 1752, heprinted, nearly on the same plan, anedition of Paradise Regained, and Milton'sminor poems. By the two productionshe gained nearly 750 ; andwhat, as he said, was more valuable, thefriendship of Jortin and Warburton.In 1754, appeared the first volumeof his celebrated Dissertations on theProphecies. Two years afterwards, hewas appointed chaplain to the king, andalso to the Princess of Wales; and, in1757, he became prebendary of Westminster,sub-almoner, precentor of thecathedral of York, and, shortly afterwards,preacher of Boyle's lectures.In 1758, he published the second andthird volumes of his Dissertations onthe Prophecies; and, on the 5th ofSeptember, 1761, having lost his firstwife, he married Elizabeth, daughter ofLord Disburse, and widow of the Rev.Mr. Hand. A few days afterwards, hewas made residentiary of St. Paul's, andBishop of Bristol, when he gave up allhis other preferments, except his livingin the city ; which, however, he resigned,some years afterwards, on beingmade Dean of St. Paul's. During thelatter part of his life, he was so afflictedby illness that he could scarcely performhis duties as a diocesan. He rarelyattended the house of lords, exceptduring the agitation of very importantquestions, on which, however, he neverspoke. When the bill for relievingprotestant dissenters was about to bediscussed, he zealously opposed it, in aletter, of which he caused a printedcopy to be sent to every member of theupper house. In 1778, he publishedanother epistle on the same subject ;and, in 1780, appeared his last production,entitled, A Letter to the NewParliament, with Hints, and someRegulations which the Nation hopesand expects from them. On the 14thof February, 1782, he died suddenly,while about to set his watch. His remainswere deposited in the vaultsbeneath St. Paul's cathedral ; and amonument, by Banks, was erected to hismemory, in the chancel of Bow church,Cheapside.Bishop Newton was a pious, learned,and industrious man ; but endowedwith no extraordinary share of intellect.Church and state appear to havebeen, in his opinion, inseparably connected; and, although not strictly orthodoxhimself, he seems to have lookedwith as much horror upon heterodoxyARCHDEACON Blackburn.as rebellion. His Dissertations on theProphecies passed through many editionsin his life-time, and still enjoy muchpopularity. It has been said of them,that " if they have nothing to gratify ametaphysical genius, and little to informthe deep scholar ; if fancy is not muchcharmed by their novelty or elegance ;if no addition is made by them to thevast stores of criticism or erudition, yetthey can boast a higher merit, and arelikely to produce an effect that willoutlive the inventions of genius, andthe accumulations of learning." A completeedition of his works was printed,in three volumes, quarto, in 1782; andsubsequently reprinted, with an autobiographicalmemoir, in six volumes,octavo. They contain nearly one hundreddissertations, besides those onthe prophecies, nine sermons, and fivecharges.FRANCIS Blackburn, ARCHDEACON OF CLEVELAND.THIS learned divine was born atRichmond, in Yorkshire, of which hisfather was an alderman, on the 9th ofJune, 1705. After having received aliberal education at some provincialgrammar schools, he was admitted apensioner of Catherine hall, Cambridge ;where, in 1726, he proceeded to thedegree of B. A. ; and, soon afterwards,obtained a conduct-fellowship, and, wasordained deacon. His liberal principlesprecluding him, it is said, from a collegefellowship, he quitted the universityj and, having taken priest'sorders, was presented to the rectoryof his native town, by Sir ConyersDarcy, and John York, Esq. In 1733,he proceeded to the degree of M. A. ;and, in 1750, Button, Archbishop ofYork, to whom he had, for some time,been titular chaplain, collated him tothe archdeaconry of Cleveland, andthe prebend of Milton. On this occasion,he is said to have entertainedscruples against subscribing to thethirty-nine articles ; which, however,were removed, on his perusing Dr.Clarke's Scripture Doctrine of the Trinity,and half a sheet of arguments, inmanuscript, from the pen of Dr. Law.Previously to this period he had onlypublished an assize sermon, which hadattracted but little notice; but, in theyear of his last-mentioned preferment,he highly distinguished himself by producingAn Apology for the Author of aBook entitled, Free and Candid Disquisitionsrelative to the Church of England.The work, of which he thuscame forward as an apologist, had beenconfidently attributed to Blackburnehimself, although it appears to havebeen written by Jones, the vicar ofAlconbury ; who, by the recommendationof Dr. Law, had submitted greatpart of the manuscript to the perusal ofBlackburne, by whom it is stated tohave been returned without a singlealteration or correction. After havingpublished a few single sermons andcharges, he wrote several pieces, concerningwhat was termed by Dr. Law,the sleep of the soul, the principalof which were, a work, entitled, NoProof in the Scriptures of an IntermediateState of Happiness or Miserybetween Death and Resurrection,printed in 1756 ; and A Short HistoricalView of the Controversy concerningan Intermediate State, which first appearedin 1765, and was republished,with large additions, in 1772.In 1758, he printed Remarks on theRev. Dr. Powell's Sermon in Defenceof Subscription ; and, in 1766, published,anonymously, his celebratedwork, entitled, The'Confessional; thepreparation of which, he appears tohave commenced shortly after his elevationto the archdeaconry ; under animpression that the arguments, by whichhe had been induced to subscribe tothe thirty-nine articles, were invalid.This performance excited great attention,and extraordinary clamour.Grievous offence," he observes, " wastaken against it by that part of theclergy who affected to call themselvesorthodox. The indignation of ArchbishopSeeker was excessive : his maskof moderation fell off at once. He employedall his emissaries to find out theTHE CHURCH.author ; and, by the industry of Ri winston,and the communicative dispositionof Miller, he succeeded." Dr. Keene,his diocesan, now intimated to Blackburnee,that it would be impossible forhim to obtain any further preferment,unless he publicly denied the imputationof having written The Confessional.This, the heterodox archdeacon, ofcourse, could not do ; nor did he feel atall desirous of obtaining any furtherecclesiastical honours; having actuallyrefused the jiving of Middleton Tiers,(which he might have obtained, throughthe influence of his friends, from LordWorthington), notwithstanding the incomeof his archdeaconry and prebendamounted to no more than 200per annum, because he could not, conscientiously,renew his subscription tothe articles. On the death of Dr.Chandler, the dissenting pastor, hiscongregation, supposing that Blackburneewould have no objection to quitthe established church, proposed to receivehim as their minister; but he declinedthe offer, upon reasons which aresaid to have been perfectly satisfactoryto the applicants. He was not, in fact,so much an Unitarian as his relatives,Lindsay and Disney; on whose secession,he wrote a paper, entitled,An Answer to the Question, Whyare you not a Socinian ? which, however,motives of delicacy prevented himfrom publishing ; and, consequently, itdid not appear until after his decease.In 1768, appeared his Considerationson the present State of the Controversybetween the Protestants and Papists ofGreat Britain and Ireland ; a productionin which he evinced much zeal,but little mercy ; maintaining thatpapists, who were persecutors systematically,were entitled to no tolerationfrom protestants. About the sametime, he took upon himself the office ofcommissary to his own archdeaconry ;and acted with such energy and skill,as to abolish a variety of abuseswhich had long been suffered to existin the spiritual court. In 1772, heappears to have been at the head ofa society, established for the purposeof obtaining an enactment to abolishsubscription; but, as Cole states, withorthodox vehemence, in his life ofPowell, Providence blasted its designs.Towards the close of his life, he entertainedan idea of writing the life ofLuther; which, however, he abandoned,in order to devote the whole of suchtime as he could spare from his clericalduties, to the composition of a memoirof the benevolent Hollis, who, withoutsolicitation, bequeathed him a legacy of500 ; and one of whose relatives, subsequently,presented him with doublethat sum. His latter years were embitteredby the death of his son Thomas,a physician, at Durham : but neithersorrow, nor the infirmities of age, preventedhim from sedulously performinghis professional duties; and, it is said,that, for above twenty years, he neverentered the pulpit without carryingwith him a new discourse. His deathtook place, in the eighty-third year ofhis age, at Richmond, in Yorkshire,on the 7th of August, 1787. By hiswife, the widow of a gentleman namedEllsworth, he had six children.Archdeacon Blackburne is describedas having been temperate, athletic,apparently reserved, but, in reality,cheerful and communicative. His acquirementswere extensive, and hisstyle of writing strong and animated.In addition to his numerous theologicaland controversial productions, he wasthe author of several short pieces, whichappeared in the public journals, infavour of political liberty; and contributedlargely to a collection of lettersand essays on the same subject, publishedin 1774.ROBERT LOWTH, BISHOP OF LONDON.ROBERT, the son of William Loath,a divine of considerable learning, wasborn on the 27th of November, 1710.He was educated at Winchester school,and New college, Oxford, where heproceeded to the degree of B. A., andwas elected to a fellowship, in 1734.In 1737, he became M. A.; and, beingBISHOP LOWTH.appointed professor of poetry, in 1741,he gave those celebrated lectures onHebrew verse, which he afterwardspublished. In 1743, he was re-electedto the professorship ; and, in the followingyear, Bishop Hoadly presentedhim to the rectory of Dodington. In1746, appeared his Ode to the Peopleof Great Britain, in imitation of Horace.He visited Berlin, with Mr. Legge, afterwardschancellor of the exchequer,in 1748, and acted as tutor to the Dukeof Devonshire's sons, during their residenceat Turin.In 1750, Bishop Hoadly made himArchdeacon of Winchester; and, in1753, gave him the rectory of EastWoodley. In 1753, Loath printedthe lectures which he had delivered asprofessor of poetry, under the title ofDe Sacra Poesy Hebraeorum Praelec-tones Academical. In the followingyear, he received, by diploma, the degreeof D. D. ; and, in 1755, he wentto Ireland as chaplain to the lord-lieutenant,who raised him to the bishopricof Limerick ; which, however, he exchanged,before consecration, with Dr.Leslie, for a prebend of Durham, andthe rectory of Sedgefield.In 1756, Warburton took offence atsome propositions advanced by Loath,in his Praelectiones, on the book of Job;but their differences on this subjectwere soon, apparently, composed. In1758, he delivered a discourse, whichhas been frequently printed, in supportof free inquiry into matters of religion;and, during the same year, considerablyincreased his literary reputation, by producinga Life of William of Wykeham.In 1762, he published A short Introductionto the English Grammar, whichhe had originally prepared for the useof his own children. His dispute withWarburton, as to certain passages inthe book of Job, was renewed with anacrimony and warmth, equally disgracefulto himself and his antagonist, in1765; during which year, he was admitteda fellow of the Royal Society.In June, 1766, he was promoted to thesee of St. David's; about four monthsafterwards, he was translated to thatof Oxford; and, in 1777, to that ofLondon.His Translation of Isaiah, with notes,appeared in 1778; and, in the nextyear, he published a sermon, which hehad preached at the chapel royal beforethe king. In a note appended to thisproduction, he threw out some invidiousreflections on the opponents ofgovernment, which exposed him to acharge of courtly adulation. In 1781,having refused institution to a gentleman,who, as he knew, had given abond of resignation, he became involvedin a law-suit ; which, after it had beendecided against him in the courts ofWestminster, the bishop removed, bya writ of error, to the house of lords,where it was terminated in his favourby a majority of one.On the death of Archbishop Cornwallis,he was offered the primacy ;which, however, he refused, partly onaccount of his age, but principally inconsequenceof his family afflictions,which had permanently affected hisspirits, and destroyed his energy. Byhis wife, Mary, the daughter of LawrenceJackson, Esq., he had had severalchildren: one of whom, the eldestdaughter, had died in the thirteenthyear of her age ; her surviving sisterhad suddenly expired, while presidingat the tea-table, in 1783 ; and theireldest brother, a youth of great promise,had also prematurely become avictim to disease. The bishop himselfdied on the 3rd of November, 1787,and was buried at Fulham.In person, Loath was tall, and, inthe early part of his life, remarkablythin ; but, as he advanced in years, hebecame rather stout. His manners weregrave, though not austere ; his temperwas mild ; and his disposition, in everyrespect, so amiable, that, in privatelife, no man was more beloved. Hispiety, learning, and benevolence, wereequally conspicuous. He was free fromostentation, a zealous promoter of religiousknowledge, and an avowedfriend to freedom of inquiry. As acontributor to biblical literature, he hasobtained much eulogy : to his Praelec-tones, the most unqualified praise hasbeen accorded by many eminent critics ;and his translation of Isaiah is, withjustice, said to be executed in a manneradequate to his superior qualifications.Skelton, the Irish divine, isreported to have frequently declared,that " Loath on the Prophecies ofIsaiah, was the best book in the worldnext to the Bible."THE CHURCH.As a poet, he was elegant, but byno means original. In his youngerdays, he wrote a piece on The Judgmentof Hercules ; and, in 1740, perceivinga work under the same titleadvertised, he posted up to London,supposing that a surreptitious copy ofhis manuscript had been obtained bythe booksellers; but, on his arrival inPaternoster row, he found, to hismortification, that the forthcoming publicationwas from the pen of Whetstone.WILLIAM ROMAINE.THIS divine, the son of a Frenchprotestant, who had taken refuge inEngland, on the revocation of the edictof Nantes, was born at Hartlepool, Durham,on the 25th of September, 1714.After having passed seven years at thegrammar school of Houghton-le-spring,he was sent to Hertford college, Oxford ;whence he was removed to that ofChristchurch, where he proceeded B. A.in 1734, and M. A. in 1737. He officiatedfor some time as curate of Loe Trench-ard,in Devonshire ; and afterwards ascurate of Banstead and Horton, nearEpsom, where he became acquaintedwith Sir Daniel Lambert, who, onbeing chosen lord mayor of London,in 1741, appointed him his chaplain.Romaine had previously (in 1739) attractedsome public notice, by enteringinto a controversy with Warburton, relativeto the opinions avowed by thelatter in his Divine Legation of Moses.In 1742, he much increased his reputationby publishing a discourse, entitled,Jephtna's Vow Fulfilled and hisDaughter not Sacrificed, which he haddelivered before the university ofOxford; whence, however, he was,some time afterwards, excluded as apreacher, for advocating, in a sermon,called The Lord our Righteousness,those Calvinistic doctrines, by hisstaunch adherence to which, he, atlength, became remarkably popular.In 1748, he obtained the lectureshipof St. Botolph's, Billingsgate, and, subsequently,that of St. Dunstan's-in-the-west. In 1749, he published an editionof Calais' Concordance ; in which, althoughthe work obtained him greatcredit, he was charged with havinggiven some unwarrantable interpretationsof certain passages of Scripture,with a view to support the doctrinesof the Hutchinsonians.He was appointed assistant morningpreacher at St. George's, Hanoversquare, in the following year; but hesoon received notice, as his biographer,Cadogan, states, " that the crowd ofpeople, attending from various parts,(to hear him preach,) caused great inconvenienceto the inhabitants, whocould not safely get to their seats."Romaine admitted the fact, and placidlyconsented to relinquish his office.About the year 1752, he was appointedGresham professor of astronomy; in 1756, he officiated as curateof St. Olave's, South war; and, in 1759,he became morning preacher at St.Bartholomew the Great, Smithfield.In 1764, he was elected to the rectoryof St Andrew, Wardrobe, and St.Anne, Blackfriars ; where he remainedup to the time of his decease, whichtook place on the 26th of July, 1795.In his last illness," observes Simpson,not one fretful o r murmuring wordever escaped his lips. ' I have,' saidhe, ' the peace of God in my conscience,and the love of God in my heart Iknew before, the doctrines I preachedto be the truths, but now I experiencethem to be blessings. Jesus is moreprecious than rubies; and all that canbe desired on earth is not to be comparedto him.' He was in the fullpossession of his mental powers to thelast moment, and near his dissolutioncried out, ' Holy, holy, holy, Lord GodAlmighty ! Glory be to thee on high,for such peace on earth and good will tomen !' " His character in private life,although his temper was hasty, is saidto have been remarkably amiable.He married, in 1755, a young ladynamed Price, by whom he had threechildren.Besides his religious tracts, eightvolumes of his sermons have beenBENJAMIN Endicott.published. His Walk of Faith, andTriumph of Faith, are still held in highestimation. He was, for above thirtyyears, one of the most popular preachersin the metropolis. His grand pointwas the doctrine of imputed righteousness;and he constantly maintainedworks to be subordinate to faith, whichhe declared to be " the sheet-anchor ofthe soul." He occasionally engaged initinerant labours as a preacher ; andthus, it is observed, placed himself in theforemost rank of Calvinistic methodists.The language of his sermons was plainand unadorned ; but his delivery wasenthusiastic ; and he always, by hismanner, impressed a belief on thosewho heard him, that he was sincere. Ithas been said of him, that he appealedrather to the heart than to the head ;still, his discourses, to a reader, appearto be far from deficient in calm ratiocination.He warmly opposed the billfor naturalizing Jews ; his productionsagainst which, were printed at the expenseof the corporation of London.His fame, as a preacher, was at onetime so great, that booksellers offeredhim, but without effect, large sums forpermission to place his name in thetitle-pages of religious compilations. Apublisher, named Pasha, it is said,took a house on Finchley common, forthe purpose of printing a beautifuledition of the Bible, in imitation ofField's, with annotations by Romaine,so managed that they might be cut off:an artifice," as Nichols observes, " toevade the patent enjoyed by the king'sprinter."The following singular circumstanceis recorded of this eminent divine :After he had been for some time inLondon, finding his ministry unsuccessful,he resolved on settling in hisnative county, (where he might, probably,have passed his days, unnoticed,as a curate,) and was actually on hisway to the water side, for the purposeof securing his passage, when a strangeraccosted him, and inquired if his namewas Romaine. The divine answeredin the affirmative. "So I suspected,"said the stranger, " by the strong likenessyou bear to your father, withwhom I was well acquainted." A conversationensued; in the course ofwhich, Romaine admitted that he wasabout to depart for Durham, in consequenceo f his failure of obtaining prefermentin the metropolis. The stranger,however, persuaded him to abandon hisintended voyage, by stating, that hethought he had sufficient interest in theparish of St. Botolph, to procure himthe lectureship of that parish, whichthen happened to be vacant. Successattended his exertions ; and Romaine,who considered the stranger's accost asan interposition of divine providence,thenceforth rapidly increased in estimationas a preacher. The circumstancewas, in fact, the foundation of his subsequenteminence.BENJAMIN Endicott.THIS eminent Hebraist, was born onthe 4th of April, 1718, at Totness, inDevonshire, where he was educated,and for some time officiated as master ofa charity school. While in this humblestation, he composed a short poem onthe illness and recovery of a lady in theneighbourhood, who endeavoured, butinvain, to raise a subscription for thepurpose of sending him to the university.In 1744, he had the goodfortune to attract the notice of a Mr.Allen, of Bath, who afforded him themeans of entering himself of Walthamcollege, Oxford ; where, in 1747, heproduced two dissertations, (one on theTree of Life in Paradise, and the otheron the Oblation of Cain and Abel,) themerit of which procured him the degreeof B. A. a year before the statutabletime, and without payment offees.He soon afterwards obtained a fellowship;in 1750, he took the degreeof M. A. ; and being about the same timeordained, went to officiate in his nativetown. On the first day of his performingdivine service, Kennicott is said to havevehemently protested against havingthe surplice placed on his shoulders byTHE CHURCH.his venerable parent, who was the parishclerk; but the latter, as stoutly insistedon paying his son that respect withwhich he had been accustomed to treatother divines ; and Kennicott was atlength compelled to submit. His mother,who had frequently declared that sheshould never be able to support the joyof hearing her son preach, was so overwhelmedwith delight at seeing himenter the pulpit, that she was carriedout of the church in a state of insensibility.The good woman, shortlyafterwards, on being informed that hisaddresses to a young lady of goodfamily in the neighbourhood had beenrejected as presumptuous, is reported tohave exclaimed : " Truly, then, I thinkit a lucky escape ; for had he marriedMiss, he would have been a countrycurate all his life ; but now I trust tosee him a bishop."At this time, the young divine " wasthought to affect a little too much of thegentleman ;" and his lofty deportmentwas contrasted, greatly to his disadvantage,with his meekness and sociality,while master of the charity school,when, as it appears, " he taught thechoir of Totness," and not only distinguishedhimself as the most expertamong the bell-ringers, but drew upa set of rules for their governmentin the belfry ; wherein he also recommended,that, after they had amusedthemselves during pleasure, at that diversion,which, to use his own language,might emphatically be said, above allothers, to bear away the bell, he andthey should adjourn to some neighbouringpublic-house, for the benefit ofconversation. In thissingulardocument,bell-ringing is described as the art forwhich this kingdom is renowned, andjudicious taste" is attributed to thosewho have, by their performances, contributedthereto."Kennicott gradually became a profoundscholar; in 1753, he impeached,in a dissertation, the supposed integrity,as it was termed, of the Hebrew textof the Old Testament, and insisted onthe necessity of carefully collating itwith ancient manuscripts. His planwas opposed in a pamphlet published byHome, afterwards Bishop of Norwich,and Dr. King absurdly ridiculed him asbeing the son of a mechanic. Of theformer he took no notice, but to thelatter he wrote an indignant reply.Early in 1760, appeared his seconddissertation, which, having procuredhim a liberal subscription, he devotedhimself with great zeal and assiduityto a reformation of the printed text.He was soon afterwards appointedVicar of Fulham, in Oxfordshire, andone of the preachers at Whitehall.On the 6th of December, 1761, hetook the degree of B. D., and that ofD. D. on the 10th of the same month.Early in the next year, he was presentedat court, and obtained a pensionof 200 per annum from the king, to.assist him in the prosecution of hisgrand and laborious undertaking; which,however, was described as being utterlyuseless, in some of the controversialpublications of the day. He had determinedto waste no time in replyingto his adversaries ; but a severe attackfrom the pen of Warburton, appears tohave irritated him beyond endurance ;and, in the notes to a Sermon preachedbefore the university, in 1765, he describedthe reflections of that divine onhis (Kennicott's) intended work, as amere fortuitous concourse of words, ofheterogeneous and incompatible meanings,which were incapable of formingany regular system of opposition, andhad therefore the benevolent faculty ofdestroying one another.In 1766, he visited Paris for the purposeof examining some Hebrew manuscripts,in that capital : he was chosenRadcliffe librarian in the followingyear ; and, soon afterwards, publishedObservations on the First Book ofSamuel, Chap. vi. Verse 19. In 1770,he was made a prebend of Westminster,and, subsequently, a canon of Christchurch.At length, in 1776, by whichtime his subscriptions amounted to upwardsof j9,000, he published a portionof his Hebrew Bible, with readings ofthe various existing manuscripts ; andthe second and concluding volume ofthe work appeared in 1780. He did notlong survive the completion of hisbiblical labours, his death occurring onthe 18th of August, 1783. For sometimebefore his decease, he had possesseda valuable living in Cornwall, towhich he had fondly hoped to haveretired on the publication of his Bible ;but when that event took place, he wastoo much debilitated by past exertions,BISHOP KURD.to gratify his long cherished desire ; and,consequently, about a year before hedied, he resigned the benefice.Kennicott was principally distinguishedfor his profound knowledge ofHebrew, and the persevering industry,with which he applied it to the illustrationof the sacred writings. Formany years he laboured from ten tofourteen hours a day, until, at length,as he states, such severe applicationbecame no longer possible, through theinjuries done to his constitution. Hisdiligence was great, even throughoutthe last year of his life, during which,he was occupied in preparing for thepress his Remarks on Select Passagesin the Old Testament. In private lifehe was liberal, unaffected, cheerful, andfacetious. When young, he is describedas having been particularly fond ofmusic ; and, it is said, added a tenorand counter-tenor to an anthem,which afterwards fell into the handsof Polwhele, author of the history ofDevonshire.RICHARD KURD, BISHOP OF WORCESTER.RICHARD KURD was born atCongreve, in Staffordshire, on the 13thof January, 1720. His parents were,according to his own statement, "plain,honest, and good people, farmers, butof a turn of mind that might havehonoured any rank and any education."After passing some time at two provincialschools, he was admitted, in 1733, ofEmanuel college, Cambridge, where hetook the degree of B.A. in 1738, andproceeded M.A. in 1742; during whichyear, he was elected to a fellowship :shortly after, he took deacon's orders ;and became B. D. in 1744.His first literary production was aLatin poem, printed in the Cambridgecollection, on the peace of Aix-la-Cha-pelle. In 1749, he published his Commentaryon the Ars Poetica of Horace,which he dedicated to Warburton, bywhose recommendation, in 1750, hewas appointed one of the Whitehallpreachers. During the same year, appearedhis Commentary on the Epistleof Horace to Augustus; and, in 1751,he took a conspicuous part in the controversy,as to the right of appeal fromthe vice-chancellor to the senate ofCambridge. Soon afterwards, he publishedan attack on Jortin, (of which heappears to have been subsequentlyashamed) in defence of Warburton ;whose observations on Hume's NaturalHistory of Religion, Hurd, by desire ofthe author, put forth as his own.In 1753, he became minister of LittleSt. Andrew's, in Cambridge, where hecontinued to officiate until 1756, whenassenior fellow of his college, hesucceeded to the living of Thurcaston, inLeicestershire. His next and mostcelebrated work consisted of Dialogues,Moral and Political, with Letters onChivalry and Romance ; which, havingbeen published at intervals, from 1758to 1764, he printed collectively in 1765.During the latter year he procured, bythe influence of Warburton, the officeof preacher at Lincoln's inn ; and, in1767, the archdeaconry of Gloucester.In 1768, he was admitted D. D., anddelivered a series of discourses, at theWarburtonian lecture, which he afterwardspublished, under the title of anIntroduction to the Study of the Prophecies.In 1775, he was raised to the bishopricof Lichfield and Coventry; and, in thenext year, printed a collection of hissermons. On the recommendation ofLord Mansfield, he was now appointedpreceptor to the two eldest sons ofGeorge the Third, who, in 1781, translatedhim to the see of Worcester, andappointed him clerk of the closet. Twoyears afterwards, the king offered toelevate him to the primacy, which,however, he declined, " as a chargenot suited to his temper and talents,and much too heavy for him to sustain,especially in such troubled times.Several much greater men than myself,"added he, " have been contented todie bishops of Worcester; and I wishfor no higher preferment." On thisoccasion, Dr. Johnson, who doubtedHurd's avowed conversion from theTHE CHURCH.liberal principles which he had at onetime professed, particularly in his Dialogues,is said to have observed, " I amglad he did not go to Lambeth ; for, afterall, I fear he is a Whig in his heart !''In 1788, he received a gold medal,as an especial mark of the king's esteem,and, during the same year, publishedan edition of Warburton's works, towhich, in 1795, he added a biographicalpreface. For the deficiencies of thiscollection, he was attacked by Dr. Parr;who, to supply the prelate's omissions,printed a volume entitled, Tracts byWarburton and a Warburtonian. Thelast literary labour undertaken by Hurdwas the arrangement for publicationof Warburton's Correspondence. Hisdeath took place on the 28th of May,1808, at the episcopal palace of Hartley; in repairing which, it is said, hehad expended a very considerable sum.Bishop Kurd's rise in the church isto be attributed, principally, to thefriendship of Warburton ; but for whoseinterest, he would, in all probability,have spent the greater part of his life,seated, as Mason has described him, inlow Thurcaston's sequestered bower,distant from promotion's view." Onattaining a more conspicuous station,through the kindness of his friend, hisvirtues, rather than his talents, procuredhim new patrons, by whose aidhe was elevated to a rank, which, owingto the feebleness of his character, hefelt scarcely able to support. For hisconscientious rejection of the primacy,he is fairly entitled to great praise ; andhis gratitude to Warburton would havebeen equally commendable, but that itoccasionally verged on servility. Crackdescribes him as having been cold,cautious, grave, and unaccustomed tosociety. As a scholar, he was inferiorto few of his contemporaries ; and hisexertions, as preceptor to the youngprinces, obtained for him the approbationof the king, and, in their manhood,the esteem of his pupils. As a prelate,he was mild, liberal, and pious ; but devoteda large portion of his time, whichmight have been better employed in thespiritual improvement of his diocese, toliterary trifling. Although his erudition,taste, and the beauty of his style,have been highly eulogized, he contributednothing that promises to bedurable, either to divinity or generalliterature.WILLIAM DODD.THIS unfortunate divine was born onthe 29th of May, 1729, at Bourne, inLincolnshire, of which his father wasrector. After passing the early part ofhis youth at a private school, he wasadmitted, in 1745, a sizar of Clare hall,Cambridge, where he soon became conspicuousfor his application and accomplishments.He took the degreeof B. A., with great credit, in 1750; and,having previously commenced writingfor the press, soon afterwards proceededto London, where, although solely dependenton his pen for support, hefollowed every species of amusementwith the most dangerous avidity." Inthe spring of 1751, he imprudentlymarried a young lady of considerablebeauty, but no fortune, the daughter ofone of Sir John Dolben's domestics,named Perkins ; and immediately tookand furnished a large house in Ardourstreet ; which, however, in consequenceof the remonstrances of his father, hegave up before the ensuing winter;and, on the 19th of October, wasordained deacon, by the Bishop of Ely.About this time, his Beauties of Shakspearewere published ; towards the closeof his preface to which, he announcedhis intention of abandoning belles lettresfor " better and more importantthings." He now officiated, for sometime,at West Ham, where, to increasehis income, he received a few pupils.In 1752, he obtained the lectureship ofSt. James's, Garlick hill, which lie exchanged,two years afterwards, for thatof St. Olave, Hart street ; and, about thesame period, preached Lady Mover'slectures at St. Paul's. On the establishmentof the Magdalen, in 1758, he contributedmaterially, by his discourses,to its success. In 1759, he took theWILLIAM DODD.degree of M. A. ; and, in 1763, he wasappointed chaplain in ordinary to theking. He was next created prebendaryof Brecon, by Dr. Squires, Bishop of St.David's ; at whose recommendation healso became tutor to the Earl of Chesterfield'sgodson and heir. In 1764, hewas made chaplain to George theThird; and, in 1766, took the degreeof LL. D. Being disappointed in hisexpectations of succeeding to the rectoryof West. Ham, he quitted that place,and resigning, at the same time, hislectureship in the city, took a countryhouse at Ealing, as well as a townhousein Southampton street, and commencedliving in a style of extravagancewhich his income could not support,although he had several pupils, besidesLord Chesterfield's godson, who, it issaid, " were, in general, persons offamily and fortune."About this time, he obtained a prizeof jl,000 in the state lottery; and engagedwith a builder for the erection ofa chapel at Buckingham gate, wherehe seems to have been so confident ofthe attendance of some of the juniorbranches of the royal family, that hehad a pew fitted up expressly for theheir-apparent ; to whom, it is said, heaspired to be preceptor ; but George theThird objected to him, because a sufficientreliance could not be placed uponhis principles. None of the royalchildren joined his congregation; nordoes the success of the chapel, or thatof another in Charlotte street, Bloomsburysquare, with which he had alsobecome connected, appear to haveequalled his sanguine expectations ; theemoluments of both, though for sometimevery beneficial to him, being, withother sources, it is said, " much inferiorto his then expensive habits of living."In 1765, he commenced publishing, inweekly and monthly parts, his Commentaryon the Bible ; in which, it wasannounced, he had permission to availhimself of the manuscripts of Locke,Clarendon, Waterland, Gilbert West,and other eminent authors.In 1772, he obtained the rectory ofWickliffe, and the vicarage of Hargrave,in Bedfordshire: on his return to townfrom which, shortly afterwards, he wasstopped, near Pancras, by a highwayman,who discharged a pistol into hiscarriage, but without doing him anyinjury. The delinquent was afterwardstaken, and, on Dr. Dodd's evidence,convicted and hung.Early in 1773, he was appointedchaplain to his pupil, Mr. Stanhope,who had then succeeded to the earldomof Chesterfield. His popularityas a preacher, had now attained itszenith. Although culpably extravagant,he was not only admired, butrespected and beloved; and he would,probably, have soon obtained furtherpreferment, had he not, with extraordinaryimprudence, early in 1774,sent an anonymous letter to LadyApsley, offering her 3,000 if shewould prevail on her husband, thelord-chancellor, to appoint him to thevaluable rectory of St. George's, Hanoversquare, which was then vacant.Lady Apsley immediately handed theletter to the chancellor, who, aftertracing it to the writer, laid it beforethe king. Dr. Dodd's name was, consequently,struck out of the list of royalchaplains ; and, the whole affair beingmade public, he was not only assailedwith bitter invectives by the press, butFoote severely ridiculed him, in a farce,called The Cozeners ; of which, Mrs.Dodd, under the name of Mrs. Simony,was the heroine.Withdrawing from England, wherehe had now become an object of contempt,Dr. Dodd proceeded to Geneva,for the purpose of seeking an asylumwith his former pupil, Lord Chesterfield,who received him there withgreat kindness, and presented him tothe living of Wine, in Buckinghamshire,which he held, by dispensation,with that of Wickliffe. But this additionto his means failed to relieve himfrom his embarrassments, which stillcontinued to increase. On his returnto this country, he became editor of anewspaper; and attempted, but in vain,to liberate himself from his debts by acollusive commission of bankruptcy.In 1776, he visited France; and, it issaid, " with little regard to decency,appeared in a phaeton at the races onthe plains of Sablons, dressed in all thefoppery of the kingdom in which hethen resided." He was still popular asapreacher, at the Magdalen, where hedelivered his last discourse on the 2ndof February, 1777, from the followingremarkable text : " And among these24GTHE CHURCH.nations shall thou find no ease, neithershall the sole of thy foot have rest ; butthe Lord shall give thee a tremblingheart, and failing of eyes, and sorrowof mind ; and thy life shall hang indoubt before thee ; and thou shall fearday and night, and shall have noneassurance of thy life."Only two days afterwards, he forgedthe name of Lord Chesterfield to abond for 4,200, on the security ofwhich he obtained a considerable loan.Detection of the fraud speedily ensued,and he was taken, tried at the OldBailey, and convicted before the closeof the month ; but sentence upon himwas postponed until the opinion of thetwelve judges could be obtained as tothe admissibility of some parts of theevidence against him; which, however,it was determined had been properlyreceived. Being placed at the baragain, on the 25th of May, and askedthe usual question why sentence ofdeath should not be pronounced uponhim, he read an address to the court,in which, after confessing his offence,committed, as he said, at a moment whentemptation surprised and overwhelmedhim, he alluded to the exertions he hadmade in the cause of charity; protestedthat he did not intend to be finallyfraudulent ; alleged that his sufferingshad almost equalled his guilt ; and,owning that he was not prepared todie, declared that, amidst shame andmisery, he yet wished to live : he,therefore, most humbly entreated, thathe might be recommended to the clemencyof the king.Although condemned to suffer death,he still entertained hopes of obtaininga commutation of punishment. Hisfriends were indefatigable in his behalf;the members of those charitiesto which he had been a benefactor, andthe city of London, in its corporatecapacity, on account of the advantageswhich the public had derived from hisexertions, earnestly solicited that hissentence might nol be carried into effect.Dodd himself, with his unhappy wife,entreated that mercy might be accordedto him ; and Dr. Johnson, who hadassisted him in the composition of hispathetic address to the court, on the25th of May, in order still further toarouse popular feeling in his favour,published, in the public journals, someobservations, in which he insisted, thatas the petitions for clemency had beensigned by above thirty thousand persons,Dr. Dodd had evidently done morebenefit to the community than any previouscriminal; that, as those who wereprotected by the law had prayed, that,in the present case, its rigour might berelaxed, government could not, if theoffender were spared, be charged withconsequences which the people hadbrought upon themselves ; that, asDodd's case was without precedent, itwould, probably, be for many ages withoutexample ; and that justice mightreasonably be satisfied with his imprisonment,infamy, exile, penury, andruin. The privy-council, however,on the principle, that if Dodd weresaved, the two Perseus, who had recentlysuffered for the same offence,were unjustly executed, recommendedthat his sentence should be carried intoeffect on the 26th of June.His behaviour, during his last moments,was truly admirable : he expressedthe greatest contrition for thescandal which he had brought uponhis order, and the offence which hehad committed against his fellow-creatures.When bound, the ordinary offeredto assist him through the yard; but hereplied, " No ! I am as firm as a rock."On approaching the street where hehad formerly dwelt, he was, however,so affected that he shed tears ; which,he said, were not the effect of cowardice,but of a weakness that hecould not help. " I hope," added he,that I am going to a better home."At the place of execution, he prayedfor himself, his wife, and a youthwho suffered with him. " Declaring,"says Villette, the ordinary, " that hedied in the true faith of the gospel ofChrist, in perfect love and charity withallmankind, and with thankfulness tohis friends, he was launched into eternity,imploring mercy for his soul, forthe sake of his blessed Redeemer."His remains were interred at Cowley,in Buckinghamshire.He appears to have been a man ofconsiderable ability ; and, though dissipated,of uncommon industry. Asawriter, his talents were respectable;and, as a preacher, attractive. Howeverderogatory the general tenor ofhis conduct may have been to theBISHOP HORNE.character of a divine, in his ministry heis said to have been sincere. He zealouslylaboured to promote charity: heprojected, but could not carry intoeffect, an establishment for the loan ofmoney-without interest, to industrioustradesmen ; to him has been attributedthe institution of the society for therelief of persons imprisoned for smalldebts ; and he seems to have been oneof the earliest supporters, if not thefounder, of the Magdalen. His prevailingerrors he has admitted with muchcandour. " I was led astray," he says,from religious strictness, by the delusionof show, and the delights of voluptuousness.I never knew, or attendedto the calls of frugality, or the needfulminuteness of painful economy. Vanityand pleasure, into which I plunged, requiredexpense disproportionate to myincome ; expense brought distress uponme ; and distress importunate distressurged me to temporary fraud."Dr. Dodd was rather a voluminouswriter. In 1750, he published hisSynopsis Compendaria ; H. Grotii deJure belli et pads ; S. Clarke de DeiExistent et Attributes ; et J. Lockiide Intellectu humano : in the followingyear, An Elegy on the Death ofthe Prince of Wales ; in the next,Beauties of Shakspeare ; in 1754,Hymns of Callimachus, translated fromthe Greek ; in 1758, Thoughts on theglorious Epiphany of our Lord JesusChrist, a poetical essay ; in 1759, FourVolumes of Sermons on the Parablesand Miracles, and An Account of theRise and Progress of the MagdalenCharity; in 1761, Bishop Hall's Contemplations,with his Life ; in the followingyear, A Familiar Explanationof the Poetical Works of Milton ; in1763, Reflections on Death; in 1764,Comfort for the Afflicted ; in 1766, ANew Edition of Locke's CommonplaceBook to the Bible; in 1767, AVolume of Poems; in 1769, Sermonson the Duties of the Great, translatedfrom the French of Massillon; in 1770,A Commentary on the Bible ; in thefollowing year, Sermons to YoungMen ; in 1772, The frequency of CapitalPunishments inconsistent withJustice, sound Policy, and Religion ;and, in 1776, An Oration at the Dedicationof Freemason's Hall. From1760 to 1767, he contributed largelyto the Christian's Magazine ; from theproprietors of which, during that period,he received 100 per annum.He was also the author of A NewBook of the Dunciad, of which Warburtonwas the hero ; A Day in Vacationat College ; The Visitor, a collectionof Essays, originally printed inthe Public Ledger, and some otherpieces ; besides his celebrated PrisonThoughts, a work which he commenced" without plan, purpose, ormotive, more than the situation andstate of his soul," on the evening ofthe day subsequent to his conviction.GEORGE HORNE, BISHOP OF NORWICH.THIS eminent prelate was born on the1st of November, 1730, at Gotham, inKent. His early education was superintendedby his father, a clergyman, ofan independent, but rather a singularcharacter ; who frequently declared thathe would rather be toad-eater to amountebank, than flatter any managainst his conscience." When aninfant, his father used to awake himby the gentle tones of a flute, witha view to prevent him from crying ;and to this circumstance, the powerfuleffect of music on his mind, in afterlife,has been confidently attributed.In the thirteenth year of his age, hewas placed under the tuition of theRev. Donatus Bye, who was thenmaster of a school at Maidstone;whence, in 1745, he was removed toUniversity college, Oxford.In 1749", he took his bachelor's degree,and obtained a fellowship; and, in 1751,having become a convert to the doctrinesof Hutchinson, he attacked thesystem of Newton, as being inconsistentwith Scripture, in an ironical andanonymous pamphlet, entitled TheTheology and Philosophy in Cicero'sOmnium Scipionis explained. In 1752,THE CHURCH.he proceeded M. A. ; entered into holyorders; and published a second pamphlet,in support of his Hutchinsonian opinions.In 1754, he commented severelyon Shuckford's Account of the Creationand Fall of Man : in the followingyear, he was appointed to preach beforethe university, on the day of the nativityof St. John the Baptist; and, soonafterwards, he courted a controversywith Kennicott, (whom he suspected ofbeing the author of a tract, entitled, AWord to the Hutchinsonians,) by thepublication of a pamphlet, entitled, AView of Mr. Kennicott's Method ofCorrecting the Hebrew Text, withThree Queries founded thereon. In1758, he was chosen proctor to theuniversity; and, in the next year, heproceeded to the degree of B. D. ; in1764, he was admitted D. D., and, fouryears afterwards, was elected presidentof Magdalen college.In 1771, he became chaplain in ordinaryto the king ; in the following yearhe produced his Considerations on theProjected Reformation of the Church ofEngland ; and, in 1776, he was electedvice-chancellor of Oxford. About thesame period, appeared his Commentaryon the Psalms, to which he had devotedmuch of his time during thepreceding twenty years. In 1779, hepublished, anonymously, a letter to Dr.Adam Smith, in which lie endeavouredto prove, that Hume, in his dying moments,had not experienced that tranquillity," which his admirers describedhim as having felt." In 1781, he waspromoted to the deanery of Canterbury; in 1784, he published his Letterson Infidelity ; and, in 1787, his Letterto Dr. Priestley. He resigned thepresidency of Magdalen college, in 1790,on being raised to the bishopric ofNorwich. He was now in the fifty-ninthyear of his age, and so much debilitated,that when set down at theentrance of his episcopal palace, heexclaimed, " Alas ! I am come to thesesteps at a time of life, when I canneither go up them nor down them withsafety !"During the same year he publishedObservations on the Case of ProtestantDissenters, with reference to the Corporationand Test Acts; and a charge,which he had intended to have deliveredto the clergy of his diocese. He wasalso the author of Discourses on severalSubjects and Occasions ; and contributedsome papers to an Oxford periodical,entitled, Olla Podrida. His death tookplace on the 17th of January, 1792.By his wife, a daughter of PhilipBurton, Esq. of Etiam, to whom hewas united in or about the year 1768,he left three children.Home was an erudite, pious, benevolent,and liberal prelate. Wesley, onone occasion, having solicited the useof a church, in the diocese of Norwich,for the purpose of addressing his followers,he was referred to the bishop,who stated, in reply to the application,that " if the clergyman had no objection,he was perfectly content." Hischief work, the Commentary on thePsalms, which has passed throughmany editions, he appears to havedwelt upon with lingering delight.Could the author flatter himself," hesays, in the preface, " that any onewould have half the pleasure in readingthe following exposition, which he hathhad in writing it, he would not fear theloss of his labour. The employmentdetached him from the bustle andhurry of life, the din of politics, andthe noise of folly. Vanity and vexationflew away, for a season, care and disquietudecame not near his dwelling.He arose fresh as the morning to histask; the silence of the night invitedhim to pursue it ; and he can truly say,that food and rest were not preferredbefore it. Every psalm improved infinitelyon his acquaintance with it ;and no one gave him uneasiness butthe last, for then his work was done.Happier hours than those which havebeen spent in these meditations on theSongs of Sion, he never expects to seein this world : very pleasantly did theypass, and move swiftly and smoothlyalong, for when thus engaged, hecounted no time. They are gone,but have left a relish and a fragranceon the mind, and the remembrance ofthem is sweet."BISHOP PORTE US.BEtLBY Porters, BISHOP OF LONDON.THIS learned prelate, the son of a jrespectable tradesman, was born atYork, in 1731. After receiving aclassical education at the grammar-schoolof Ripon, in the West Riding,he was admitted a sizar of Christ college,Cambridge, where he proceededto the degree of B. A. in January, 1752;and, soon afterwards, obtained a fellowship.On the 14th of March, 1754, hewas appointed esquire befell of theuniversity ; which office he resigned onthe 3rd of July, 1755, when he tookthe degree of M. A. In 1759, he obtainedthe university Newtonian prize,for the best English poem on the subjectof Death ; and, in 1761, he preachedand published a sermon, entitled, TheCharacter of David, King of Israel,impartially considered ; in Answer toThe History of the Man after God'sown Heart, written by Peter Anne. Hewas soon afterwards appointed domesticchaplain to Archbishop Seeker ; who,in 1762, gave him the rectory of Wit-terram,in Kent, and, subsequently,that of Bucking. He resigned hisfellowship on obtaining a stall in Peterboroughcathedral ; and, in 1765, exchangedthe rectory of Petersham,for that of Hunton. On the 13th ofMay, in the same year, he marrieda lady named Hodgson. On the 7thof July, 1767, he took the degree ofS. Tap. ; and, in the following month,the primate presented him to the rectoryof Lambeth, Westminster ; which,by dispensation, he was allowed to holdwith that of Hunton. His celebratedpatron, who died in the following year,having confided to Porteus and hisfellow-chaplain, Stinton, the revisionof his Lectures on the Church Catechism,&c. ; they published that workin 1770, with a memoir of the author'slife, written entirely by Porteus, which,on being reprinted separately, with additions,in 1798, is said to have beenhonoured with the approbation of Dr.Samuel Johnson.In 1772, he became a member of asociety of clergymen, avowedly establishedfor the purpose of procuring arevisal of the thirty-nine articles, theliturgy, and the forms of subscription;which, however, was dissolved, on receivingan intimation from the bishops,that it would be neither safe norprudent to do anything in the matter."In 1776, he was chosen master ofSt. Cross ; and, at the request of QueenCharlotte, to whom, during an indisposition,he had officiated as private chaplain,he was soon afterwards raised to thebishopric of Chester. About the sametime, he printed a letter to the inhabitantsof Lambeth, entitled, An earnestExhortation to the religious Observanceof Good Friday ; which, although itwas censured by many, for its allegedpuritanical austerity, the Society forthe Promotion of Christian Knowledgethought proper to republish amongtheir cheap religious tracts. In 1781,he produced A brief Confutation ofthe Errors of the Church of Rome, extractedfrom Archbishop Seeker's FiveLessons against Popery; and, in 1783,appeared a volume of his sermons. Onthe decease of Bishop Loath, in 1787,he was translated to the see of London.In 1792, he actively promoted theformation of a Society for the Conversionof Negro Slaves in the West Indies; and, during the Lent of the sameyear, with a view to check the progressof infidelity, he preached, at St. James'schurch, Westminster, his celebratedLectures on the Truth of the GospelHistory, and the Divinity of Christ'sMission.In 1807, he transferred to Christcollege, Cambridge, 1,200 stock, withdirections, that its interest should beyearly laid out in the purchase ofthree gold medals: of which he requiredthat one should be given forthe best Latin dissertation on someevidence of Christianity; another, forthe best English composition on somemoral precept of the Gospel ; andthat the third should be bestowed onthe most regular attendant, and mostdistinguished reader in the collegechapel. He died on the 14th of May,1809 ; and was buried in a chapel ofTHE CHURCH.ease, which he had built in 1807, atIde Hill, Partridge. In addition tohis avowed productions, he is said tohave had some share in the compositionof Careless in Search of a Wife.The character of Bishop Porteus, inprivate life, appears to have been unexceptionable.As a preacher, he wasactive, eloquent, and popular. Hismanner was impressive, and his languageforcible. He is said to have beenindefatigable in the cause of charity;and to have delivered more discourses,while a prelate, than either of his contemporarieson the episcopal bench.The style of his productions is plain,although frequently elegant. Simpsonsays, of his sermons on redemption, thatThe reader who remains unconvinced,after considering the various argumentsadvanced by this learned and amiableprelate, will, probably, resist everythingthat can be said by any other writer."Although he generally voted with ministers,he did not display any spirit, ofpartisanship ; his conduct, as a senator,having, apparently, on all occasions,been dignified, honourable, and conciliating.He principally distinguishedhimself, in the house of lords, by thefervour with which he contended forthe abolition of the slave trade.SAMUEL Horsey, BISHOP OF SAINT ASAPH.THIS celebrated prelate, whose fatherwas clerk in orders of St. Martin's-in-the-fields, was born in that parish, inthe month of October, 1733. He waseducated at Westminster school, whencehe removed to Trinity hall, Cambridge,where he applied himself so zealouslyto the study of mathematics, that, it isasserted, he became master of everyancient and modern work on the subject.He took his degree of LL. B. in1758, where his father, then rector ofNewington Butts, appointed him curate,and resigned in his favour some time inthe following year.In 1767, ne was chosen a fellow ofthe Royal Society, and published anelaborate pamphlet, entitled, The Powerof God, deduced from the computableinstantaneous Production of it in theSolar System. In 1768, he wentto Oxford, as private tutor to LordGuernsey, eldest son of the Earl ofAylesford. His first mathematicalwork, Apollonii Pergaei Inclination,Libri ii, was printed at the Clarendonpress, in 1770. In 1773, he waschosen secretary of the Royal Society ;and in 1774, the Earl of Aylesford presentedhim to the rectory of Sudbury.In the course of the latter year, Horsleymarried a daughter of his predecessor,the Reverend John Gotham. On the14th of January, he was incorporatedB. C. L. at Oxford; and, on the 18thof the same month, he proceeded to thedegree of LL. D. About this time wereproduced his Remarks on the Observationsmade in a Voyage towards theNorth Pole, for discovering the Accelerationof the Pendulum in latitude79 deg. 50 min. In 1776, he publishedproposals for printing a complete editionof Sir Isaac Newton's works ;which, however, in consequence of adomestic affliction, did not appear until1779. He had previously been appointeddomestic chaplain to BishopLoath, and become prebendary of St.Paul's ; he had also succeeded his fatheras clerk in orders of St. Martin's-in-thefields ; and, resigning Sudbury, had beenpresented to the living of Charley,which he held, by dispensation, withthat of Newington. In 1781, he wasappointed Archdeacon of St. Alban's ;and, in 1782, Bishop Loath gave himthe valuable vicarage of South Weald,in Essex. On this occasion, he resignedCharley and Newington.On Good-friday, 1778, he preacheda sermon, in St. Paul's cathedral, inwhich he powerfully attacked the necessarianhypothesis ; and, in 1783,took occasion, during his charge to theclergy of the archdeaconry of St. Alban's,to give a most decisive contradiction,supported by much powerful argument,to a statement made by Priestley, inhis then recently published History ofthe Corruptions of Christianity, thatthe church, during the first threeBISHOP Horsey.centuries, did not support the doctrine ofthe Trinity. Priestley, in a series ofletters on the subject, confidently repeatedall his former assertions. Hewas so precipitate, however, in thecontest, that he committed variouserrors in quotation and reference, ofwhich Horsley, in his reply, tooktriumphant advantage, by adroitly appealingto the reader, whether socareless an historian were to be reliedon in a question of such moment.Priestley continued the controversy byanother series of letters, to whichHorsley replied with great acutenessand learning; supporting the generalbelief by numerous proofs taken fromthe works of the purest ecclesiasticalhistorians, and primitive fathers of thechurch.He was shortly afterwards presented,by Lord Thurlow, to a prebendal stallin Gloucester cathedral ; where, in hisordination discourse, which attractedmuch notice, and excited some controversy,he maintained that humanlearning had been substituted, by divinewill, for miraculous gifts, on the cessationof the latter, as a qualification forthe ministers of the Christian church.In 1784, the president and councilof the Royal Society having dismissedthe learned Mutton from the post ofsecretary for foreign correspondence, tothe great indignation of the mathematicians,a long dispute ensued, in whichHorsley advocated the cause of thelatter, with great zeal and ability ; andprinted a work, entitled, An AuthenticNarrative of the Dissensions of theRoyal Society. Finding, however, thatit was impossible to weaken the powerof the president, he withdrew from thattemple, to use his own words on theoccasion, where philosophy once reigned,and Newton presided as her officiatingminister.In 1788, he was raised, on the recommendationof Lord Thurlow, to thesee of St. David's. In his primarycharge to the clergy of his diocese,delivered in 1790, he strongly maintainedthe doctrine of justification byfaith alone ; and stigmatized those whopreached mere morality, as enemies tovital religion. In 1793, he was translatedto the see of Rochester, and madeDean of Westminster; on which occasion,he resigned all his other preferments.On the 30th of January, in the sameyear, he preached an impressive sermonbefore the house of lords; and, in 1802,he was promoted to the bishopric ofSt. Asaph, which he held during theremainder of his life. At the latter endof September, 1806, he was seized witha violent bowel complaint, which completelybaffled the skill of his medicalattendants, and he died at Brighton, onthe 4th of the following month .In the early part of his life, on accountof his close intimacy with Dr.May, and others of similar opinions,he was suspected of Socinianism ; andthe patronage bestowed on him byBishop Loath, excited a considerabledegree of surprise; but the suspicionappears to have been unfounded.Throughout the whole course of hispublic life, he was, apparently fromprinciple, a determined enemy to innovation.The excess of his zeal for thedoctrines of the established religion,occasionally led him to the brink of intolerance.He dreaded an attack onthe church through the bosom of thestate ; and denounced political change,with as much bitterness as he did religiousheresy. His apprehensions lestthe opinions of the free-thinkers athome, and the bold propositions ofthe new school of philosophers abroad,should triumph over the orthodoxy andloyalty in this country, rendered him,on some occasions, a somewhat mischievousalarmist : but no doubt existsof the purity of his motives, and theuprightness of his conduct.He possessed a considerable share ofscientific knowledge, biblical learning,eloquence, and acuteness. His reasoningis often powerful, and his style, ingeneral, elegant, although sometimesrather too lofty to please a reader oftaste. In public, his manner was dictatorial; but, in private life, he is describedas having been particularlypleasant and agreeable. Althoughirascible, he was easily appeased. Forhis children he entertained the fondestaffection, and frequently shared intheir most trifling amusements. " Hischarity," according to one of his biographers," was more than prudent ; forhe often wanted himself what he gaveaway."His conduct, as a reformer of theabuses in the Bishopric of St. David's,THE CHURCH.merits unqualified approbation. On hiselevation to that see, he found thatsome of the churches were served forten, and others for five pounds perannum. He immediately compelledthe non-resident beneficed clergy toallow their curates more adequatestipends ; and thus obviated the necessityof one man performing divineservice in several parishes on the sameday, in order to obtain the means ofexistence. He personally examinedcandidates for holy orders ; frequentlypreached in parish churches during hisprogresses ; was always exceedinglyhospitable to his clergy; and exertedall the means in his power to amelioratethe clerical condition of his diocese.RICHARD WATSON, BISHOP OF LLANDAFF.celebrated prelate was born atHaversham, in Westmoreland, in themonth of August, 1737. His fatherhad been master of the free grammarschool, at Kendal ; where, under hisparent's successor, who appears to havebeen but an indifferent classic, youngWatson was educated. Never havingbeen taught to make Greek or Latinverses, it cost him, in after-life, as hestates, more pains to remember whethera syllable was long or short, than itwould have done to comprehend a wholesection of Newton's Principia. On the3rd of November, 1754, he was admitteda sizar of Trinity college, Cambridge ;where he applied himself to study withgreat eagerness, knowing that his futurefortune was to be wholly of hisown fabrication ; his father, who diedduring the same year, having beenenabled to leave him only 300. Atthis time, he was remarkable for hissingular attire, which consisted, partly,of blue yarn stockings, and a coarse,mottled, Westmoreland coat.After he had been six months atCambridge, he was asked, during a collegeexamination, whether Dr. Clarkehad demonstrated the absurdity of aninfinite succession of changeable anddependent beings ? "I answered," hesays, " with blushing hesitation, ' Non.'The head lecturer, Brocket, with greatgood-nature, mingled with no smallsurprise, encouraged me to give myreasons for thinking so ; I stammeredout, in barbarous Latin, that Clarkehad inquired into an origin of a series,which, being from the suppositioneternal, could have no origin ; andinto the first term of a series, which,being from the supposition infinite,could have no first." This incidentcaused him to be cried up, he relates,as a great metaphysician ; and, fouryears after, procured him the friendshipof Dr. Law, from which he subsequentlyderived much advantage.On the 2nd of May, 1757, he obtaineda scholarship. He had, by this time,much improved himself in Latin, andGreek ; acquired some knowledge ofHebrew ; and made considerable proficiencyin the mathematics and naturalphilosophy. His perseverance was remarkable."I never," he says, "gave upa difficulty in a demonstration, till I hadmade it out, proprio marte ; though Ihave been stopped, at a single step, forthree days." Forsake time, however,herelaxed in his application, and becameconvivial, until, excited by the industryof a fellow-student, at whose windowhe invariably saw a light, on returningfrom his festive associates, he gavehimself up wholly to the acquirementof learning. In 1758, having, on oneoccasion, to support the negative ofanima est suA natura immortalise, hisbelief in the affirmative was rathershaken, as he states, by discovering,during his search for authorities, anaccount, in an old French author, ofa man who had come to life afterhaving been six weeks under water !Early in the next year, he proceededto the degree of B.A. ; on the 1st ofOctober, 1760, he obtained a fellowship; and, in the following month, becameassistant college tutor. He soonafterwards entertained an idea of acceptinga proposal to become chaplain to thefactory at Bencoolen ; which, however,the master of his college prevailed onhim to reject ; observing, that he wasBISHOP WATSON.too good to die of drinking punch inthe torrid zone. In 1762, he took hisdegree of M.A. and was elected juniormoderator ; and, in the following year,he officiated in the same capacity foranother person. In February, 1764, heproceeded to Paris, on a friendly visitto Mr. Luther, formerly his pupil, butthen member of parliament for Essex ;who subsequently bequeathed him alegacy of 20,000. At this time, Lutherwas separated from his wife ; andWatson is said to have travelled twelvehundred miles, and crossed the channelfour times, for the purpose of bringingabout a reconciliation between them ;which he, at length, succeeded in effecting.At the latter end of the sameyear, he was elected senior moderator ;and, although he was wholly ignorantof the science, professor of chemistry ;but he was tired, as he states, of mathematicsand natural philosophy ; thevehementissima gloria cupid, stimulatedhim to try his strength in a newpursuit, and the kindness of the universityanimated him to extraordinaryexertions. " I immediately sent toParis," he adds, " for an operator ;buried myself in my laboratory ; andhaving, in October, 1765, been, a fourthtime, elected moderator, in fourteenmonths from my election I read acourse of chemical lectures in the university,to a very full audience."No salary being attached to his professorship,he presented a petition onthe subject, in March, 1766, to theMarquess of Rockingham, then at thehead of public affairs ; which, however,for some time, met with no attention.In July, " waiting on the Duke ofNewcastle," he says, " his grace askedif my business was done ? I answered,No !' much vexed at the delay. Hethen asked, 'Why?' I answered,Because Lord Rockingham says, yourgrace ought to speak to the king, aschancellor of the university ; and yourgrace says, that Lord Rockinghamought to speak to the king, as minister.'" The duke " stared withastonishment," but immediately wroteto Lord rockingham, who, althoughhis dismissal from office had then beendetermined on, procured from theking, an offer to settle on Watson100 per annum, for life; which, however,the latter declined accepting,longer than he should hold the professorship.In 1767, he became one of the headtutors of his college. At this time, soextraordinary was his application, thathe frequently read, as he states, threepublic lectures in Trinity college, beginningat eight o'clock in the morning ;spent four or five hours with privatepupils; five or six more in his laboratory,every day ; besides the incidentalbusiness of presiding in the Sophs'schools. In 1768, he composed andprinted his Institutions Metallurgy ;and, about the same time, was electeda fellow of the Royal Society, to whichhe had previously communicated someobservations respecting the various phenomenaattendant on the solution ofsalts. He appears to have been atParis during the riots occasioned bythe proceedings against Wilkes ; whom,he says, he disliked, although he likedhis cause.In 1771, he obtained the regius professorshipof divinity, which had longbeen the object of his secret ambition,with the valuable rectory attached tothat office. On this occasion, he wascreated D. D., by royal mandate. Being,to use his own language, totally indifferentas to the opinions of councils,fathers, bishops, and other men, as littleinspired as himself, he restricted histheological studies entirely to the Bible.In the course of the same year, (1771,)he printed, for private circulation only,a chemical essay, which he was unjustlycharged by the editors of theJournal Encyclopedia, who, however,subsequently confessed their error, withhaving taken from Le System de laNature.In 1772, he addressed two letterssigned A Christian Whig, to the membersof the house of commons. On the21st of December, in the following year,he married the eldest daughter of EdwardWilson, Esq., of Callum Tower,in Westmoreland ; and, on the followingday, took possession of a sinecure rectory,in North Wales, procured forhim, of the Bishop of St. Asaph, by theDuke of Grafton ; which, on his returnto Cambridge, he exchanged for a prebendof Ely. Having previously declaredthat his opinions were hostile tothe American war, he opposed, in 1775,an university address to the king,THE CHU Arch.urging its continuance ; and, soon afterwards,in a letter addressed to hispatron, the Duke of Grafton, he animadvertedwith some severity on thecourse pursued by Junius.In 1776, he rendered himself particularlyconspicuous by publishing twosermons, which he had preached beforethe university, one of which was entitled,The Principles of the RevolutionVindicated, and the other, On theAnniversary of the King's Accession.Shortly afterwards, appeared his famousApology for Christianity, in answer toGibbon. In January, 1780, he becameArchdeacon of Ely ; and in May, delivereda primary visitation sermon tothe clergy of the diocese, in which, hestrongly recommended the formationof a society at Cambridge, for the purposeof making and publishing translationsof oriental manuscripts. In thefollowing August, Bishop Keene presentedhim to the rectory of Northward,in Norfolk. During the next year, appearedthe first two volumes of hisChemical Essays, of which, he subsequentlypublished three others.In 1782, the Duke of Rutland, whohad been his pupil, presented him tothe rectory of Knapcroft, in Leicestershire,and procured his elevation to thebishopric of LlandafF, with which, hewas permitted to hold his professorship,archdeaconry, and other preferments.Soon afterwards, he addressed a letterto the Archbishop of Canterbury, recommendingan equalization of thevalue of church benefices ; and, in 1785,he published a selection of theologicaltracts from various authors. In the followingyear, he received the legacy of3620,000, which had been bequeathedto him by Mr. Luther. During theking's illness, in 1788, he was a zealousadvocate for conferring an unrestrictedregency on the heir-apparent ; and, ithas been hinted, that his opposition tothe measure proposed by Pitt on thisoccasion, might, perhaps, be attributedto a hope of obtaining from the prince,on his elevation to sovereign authority,the see of St. Asaph, which had recentlybecome vacant by the death ofDr. Shipley. His motives were, however,apparently disinterested ; but theopinions which he supported were fatalto his hopes of further promotion ; andhe seems, during the latter part of hiscareer, to have felt that he was unjustlyneglected.In 1790, appeared his Considerationson the Expediency of Revising theLiturgy and Articles of the Church ofEngland; and, in 1796, he stood forwardagain as the champion of revealedreligion, and published " hismost seasonable, strong, judicious, andbeautiful Apology for the Bible ;" theeffect of which, as it has been aptly observed,was considerably enhanced byhis adopting the popular manner andstyle of his antagonist, Paine. In1798, appeared his able Address to thePeople of Great Britain, in which heanimadverted severely on the principleswhich had led to the French revolution.Wakefield printed a reply to this performance,for which, he was prosecutedand imprisoned for sedition ; but Watson,much to his honour, took no partin the proceedings against his learnedopponent. In 1804, he again denouncedFrench principles ; and, atthe same time, warmly recommendeda liberal attention to the catholic claims,in the printed sketch of a speech, whichhe had intended to have delivered tothe house of lords, on the 22nd of November,in the preceding year.In 1807, he printed two sermons,which he had preached at the chapelroyal, St. James s, in defence of revealedreligion; and, in 1813, appeared hisBrief State of the Principles of ChurchAuthority, in which, he strenuouslyvindicated non-subscription to articlesof faith. His last work, MiscellaneousTracts on Religious, Political, and otherSubjects, appeared in 1815. He amusedhimself during the decline of life, bymaking large plantations of timbertrees, in the neighbourhood of hiscountry residence ; for which, he hadreceived a medal from the Society ofArts, so early as the year 1789. Besidesthe works already mentioned, he publisheda sermon preached in 1804, beforethe Society for the Suppression of Vice;a communication to the board of agricultureon the planting of waste lands ;several papers in the Transactions of theManchester Literary and PhilosophicalSociety, of which he was one of theearliest members; and many chargesand sermons on local or occasional subjects.He died, leaving a large family,on the 4th of July, 1816.ARCHDEACON PALEY.His autobiography, to which thewriter of this sketch is considerably indebted,were, after his decease, editedby his son. In addition to his otherhonours, he was a fellow of the AmericanSociety of Arts and Sciences, a memberof the Massachusetts Historical Society,and a trustee of the Hungarian Museum.In private life, Bishop Watson, althoughrather reserved, was particularlyamiable, on account of the simplicity ofhis manners, and the perfect equanimityof his temper. As a speaker, he excelledmost of his clerical contemporaries; his action was graceful, his voicefull and harmonious, and his languagechaste and correct. As a writer, he waserudite, manly, loyal, pious and tolerant.His political works are remarkablyliberal ; his polemical productions firm,but conciliating ; and his contributionsto science indicative of great research,labour, and extraordinary abilities. Hewas friendly to the repeal of the testand corporation acts ; and, with some restrictions,to catholic emancipation. Althoughhe pined in comparative obscurityin the see of Llandaff, he was decidedlyone of the greatest men of hisday ; and will certainly be remembered,long after many of his more fortunatebut less able contemporaries shall havebeen utterly forgotten. Of his Apologyfor the Bible, which has gone throughmore than fifty editions, and is stilldeservedly popular, and of his Apologyfor Christianity, Simpson remarks thatthey are books small in size but richin value. " They discover," he adds,great liberality of mind, much strengthof argument, a clear elucidation of difficulties,and vast superiority of abilityon this question, to the persons whomhe undertook to answer." Buncombeobserves of his collection of tracts, thatthe benevolent design of the rightreverend editor is fully explained in apreface, which breathes such a liberalityof sentiment, and such a spirit of toleration,as becometh a teacher of the truth,as it is in Jesus. A plan of theologicalstudies is here proposed ; in which theworks of dissenters, as well as churchmen,are recommended." Gibbon neverreplied to his masterly Apology forChristianity ; feeling, as he is stated tohave acknowledged, such a diffidenceof his own powers, to cope with thoseof his antagonist, as he had never beforeexperienced. These eminent menafterwards entered into a correspondence,which induced George theThird, it is said, to suspect BishopWatson of heterodoxy.WILLIAM PALEY, ARCHDEACON OF CARLISLE.THIS eminent divine and philosopher,son of the head master of Giggleswickgrammar-school, and minor canon ofPeterborough, was born in the neighbourhoodof the latter place, in July,1743. After having acquired the rudimentsof learning under the tuition ofhis father, he was admitted, in November,1758, a sizar of Christ college,Cambridge. At this period, to a commonobserver, his talents were farfrom promising ; but the elder Paley,who had penetrated deeply into hischaracter, confidently predicted his futureeminence ; adding, " he has by farthe clearest head I ever met with inmy life." For some time, he attractednotice, only as an uncouth, but agreeableidler. " I spent," he says, " thefirst two years of my under-graduateshiphappily, but unprofitably. I was constantlyin society, where we were notimmoral, but idle, and rather expensive.At the commencement of mythird year, however, after having leftthe usual party at rather a late hourin the evening, I was awakened, atfive in the morning, by one of mycompanions, who stood at my bed-side,and said, ' Paley, I have been thinkingwhat a fool you are. I coulddo nothing, probably, were I to try,and can afford the life I lead : youcould do every thing, and cannot affordit. I have had no sleep during the wholenight, on account of these reflections ;and am now come solemnly to informyou, that if you persist in your indolence,I must renounce your society !'I was so struck with the visit, and theTHE CHURCH.visitor, that I lay in bed great part ofthe day, and formed my plan. I orderedmy bed-maker to prepare myfire every evening, in order that itmight be lighted by myself. I aroseat five, read during the whole of theday, except such hours as chapel andhall required, allotting to each portionof time its peculiar branch of study ;and, just before the closing of the collegegates, (nine o'clock,) I went to aneighbouring coffee-house, where Iconstantly regaled on a mutton chop,and a dose of milk punch ; and thus,on taking my bachelor's degree, I becamesenior wrangler."Paley," says Bishop Watson, " hadbrought me, for one of the questions hemeant for his act, Eternity pcenarumcontradict Divines attributes : TheEternity of Hell torments contradictoryto the Divine Attributes. I had acceptedit," continues the bishop ; " afew days afterwards, he came to me inagreat fright, saying, that the master ofhis college, Dr. Thomas, Dean of Ely,insisted on his not keeping on such aquestion. I readily permitted him tochange it ; and told him that, if it wouldlessen his master's apprehensions, hemight put in 'non' before 'contradict ;'making the question, The Eternity ofHell torments not contradictory to theDivine Attributes : and he did so."In 1765, he gained the members'prize, by an essay, written in Latin,which, being illustrated by Englishnotes, he was suspected of having beenthe author of the Latin only : the reverse,however, as Chalmers suggests,was, probably, nearer the truth, consideringhis known indisposition to theclassics, which was so great, that, accordingto his own admission, he couldread no Latin author with pleasure butVirgil.Soon after he had taken the degreeof B. A., he became second assistant inan academy at Greenwich, where herestricted himself, for some time, to themere necessaries of life, in order thathe might be enabled to discharge a fewdebts, which he had incautiously contracted." My difficulties," he observes,might afford a useful lesson to a youthof good principles; for my privationsproduced a habit of economy whichwas of infinite service to me ever after."At this period of his life, the rank offirst assistant in the school was, it issaid, the height of his ambition.In June, 17C6, he obtained a fellowship,worth about jglOO a year; and,shortly afterwards, proceeded to thedegree of M. A. In 1767, he wasordained deacon and priest ; some timeafterwards, he became a tutor of hiscollege, and delivered lectures on metaphysics,morals, and the Greek Testament.In 1771, he strenuously opposedthe application of John Home Tooke,for the degree of M. A., on the groundthat Tooke, judging from his generalconduct, had, apparently, renouncedall religion. During the same year, aSpanish musician, named Menes, ofwhom Lord Sandwich was a warmpatron, having obtained leave to givea concert in the hall of Christ college,Paley peremptorily insisted that itshould not take place, unless a satisfactoryassurance were given, that alady, then under the protection of hislordship, and who had been openly distributingtickets, would not attend it.The senior tutor, a friend of LordSandwich, at first objected to the exclusion; to which, however, Paleybrought him to consent, by remindinghim of his duty as an instructor ofyouth.About this period, he occasionallypreached at St. Mary's, the universitychurch ; and it has been stated, that heofficiated there, when Pitt visited Cambridge,soon after his elevation to thepremiership, and that he took occasionto rebuke the numerous members ofthe university, who, with a view toobtain preferment, had been guilty ofmean adulation towards the youthfulminister, by selecting the followingtext for his discourse: " There is alad here, which hath five barley loavesand two small fishes ; but what arethey among so many?" (St. John, c.vi., v. 9.) It is, however, asserted, that,many years after, he denied havingpreached on that occasion ; " but thathe should, very probably, have takenthe text mentioned, if he had."By forming a close intimacy withLaw, Jebb, and others, whose opinionswere deemed, in some degree, heterodox,Paley found that his admirersdiminished ; and when the reformingparty, as it was termed, to whoseclaims he is said to have been avowedlyARCHDEACON PALEY.favourable, prepared a petition to parliament,praying for relief from subscriptionto the thirty-nine articles, hecontrived to evade signing it, jocularlyobserving, in his own extenuation,that he could not afford to keep aconscience.In 1775, he was presented to therectory of Mangrove, in Westmoreland ;and, in the following year, he vacatedhis fellowship, by forming a matrimonialconnexion with a lady namedHewitt, by whom he had so large afamily, that, many years afterwards, heobserved, to his diocesan, that althoughit might be said he was a great pluralistin preferments, he was a greater pluralistin children. In 1776, he obtainedthe vicarage of Dalston, in Cumberland; in 1777, he resigned his rectoryof Mangrove for the living of Appleby;in 1780, he became a prebendary, and,in 1782, archdeacon and chancellor, ofCarlisle. For these preferments, hewas indebted to his college friend andepiscopal patron, Dr. Law, to whom, onits publication, in 1785, he dedicatedhis celebrated work, entitled, Principlesof Moral and Political Philosophy ;which met with so favourable a reception,that its publisher, who had refusedeven to print it at his own expense,purchased the copyright, shortly afterits appearance, for 1,000.In 1787, he wrote a short memoir ofhis patron and diocesan, Law, then recentlydeceased ; and, soon afterwards,produced his Horae Pauline. In 1792,the dean and chapter of Carlisle presentedhim to the vicarage of Adding-ham; in the following year, duringwhich he published A View of theEvidences of Christianity, Dr. Vernon,the new Bishop of Carlisle, institutedhim to the vicarage of Stanwix, on hisresigning that of Dalston. Shortly afterwards,Bishop Porteus gave him theprebend of Pancras, in St. Paul's cathedral; and, in 1795, Dr. Tomline conferredon him the sub-deanery of Carlisle.Being now a master of arts ofsufficient standing, he took the degreeof D. D. ; and, while at Cambridge forthat purpose, he had the good fortune tobe presented, without solicitation, by Dr.Harrington, to the rectory of Bishop'sWeymouth, worth about 1,200 ayear. He soon afterwards became soinfirm, as to be incapable of preaching,and he devoted his attention almostexclusively to the preparation of his importanttreatise, entitled, Natural Theology,or Evidences of the Existence andAttributes of a Deity, collected from theAppearances of Nature, which was publishedin 1802. He died on the 25thof May, 1805, leaving a widow, hissecond wife, and eight children by hisfirst.Paley is described, by a writer in theNew Monthly Magazine, for January,1825, as having been a thick, short,square-built man; with a face which,though animated and cheerful, couldnot but, at first sight, appear ugly ; withbushy brows, snub nose, and projectingteeth ; with an awkward gait and movementof the arms; a decent and dignified,but by no means excessive,protuberance of the belly; wearing awhite wig, and a court coat, but withouta cassock ; for to this part of the dressof a dignified ecclesiastic, he had a particulardislike, calling it " a blackapron, such as the master tailors wearin Durham."His action was ungraceful; his utteranceindistinct; and his dialectremarkably provincial. " When thepersons with whom he conversed werenear him," says the periodical writerbefore quoted, " he talked between histeeth : but there was a variety and proprietyin his tones, an emphasis, sopronounced, and so clearly conveyinghis meaning, assisted, too, by an intelligentsmile, or arch leer, that not onlywhat was really witty appeared doublyclever, but his ordinary remarks seemedingenious."The same writer has recorded anumber of Paley's familiar statementsand remarks, of which the followingis an abridged selection: "When residingat Carlisle, if I wanted to writeany thing particularly well, I used toorder a post-chaise, and go to a quiet,comfortable inn, at Langton, whereI was safe from the trouble and bustleof a family, and there I remained untilI had finished what I was about."I make it a rule never to buy anybook that I want to read only onceover." " When I went to town, tobecome assistant in a school, I pleasedmy imagination with the delightful taskI was about to undertake, in ' teachingthe young idea how to shoot.' TheTHE CHURCH.room was very offensive; and a littleboy came up, as soon as I was seated,and began ' b, a, b, bab, 4, /, e, able,babble !' I wanted a waistcoat at thistime, and went into a second-handclothes-shop. It so chanced, that Ibought the very same garment thatLord Clive wore when he made histriumphal entry into Calcutta. I wentto the play; and, on coming out ofthe theatre, felt six hands, all trying topickmy pockets; whether they wererival, or conspiring hands, I cannotsay ; they took from me a handkerchief,not worth twopence. I wassorry for the disappointment of thepoor pickpockets." " We had a club,at Cambridge, of political reformers ;it was called the Hyson Club, as wemet at tea-time ; and various schemeswere discussed among us. Jebb's planwas, that the people should meet, anddeclare their will ; and if the house ofcommons should pay due attention tothe will of the people, why, well andpood ; if not, the people were to carrytheir will into effect. We had no ideathat we were talking treason. 1 wasalways an advocate for bravery andcorruption : they raised an outcryagainst me, and affected to think Iwas not in earnest. ' Why,' said I,'who is so mad as to wish to be governedby force ? Or who is such a foolas to expect to be governed by virtue ?There remains, then, nothing else butbribery and corruptions'" " I knowa great many parishes, to which I couldtake you, and, if the whole populationwere to pass in review before you, youwould not be able to tell which was theparson. I know him by certain signs,that I have learned by long practice: hehas, usually, a black silk handkerchiefunder his neck, and he is more greasythan any man in the parish, except thebutcher." " I have often thought that,if I were to turn swindler, I would tryto swindle in the character of a dignifiedecclesiastic; for example, as theDean of Aghadoe. I would take ahouse at the west end of the town ; thenI would wear a short cassock nothingto be done without a black apron : soI would begin to order in goods everysort of thing that could be easily disposedof; and before I had exhaustedmy credit, I would be off.Although Meadley, his biographer,alleges, after declaring Paley to havebeen " economical upon principle," thathe was beneficent to the poor, and liberalin his dealings with others, he appears,in many instances, to have evinced alove of money unworthy of so greata man. " When I lived at Carlisle,"said he, to the periodical writer beforequoted, " 1 used to send half-a-guineato market on the market-day, and thatsupplied my family with provisions forthe week !" At the time to which healludes, he had several children, keptthree servants, and, judging from thefollowing anecdote, felt a keen relishfor the enjoyments of the table : Beingasked by the mistress of the house, atwhich he was dining, what he wouldbe pleased to eat, he replied, " Eat,madam ? eat every thing, from thetop of the table to the bottom ; fromthe beginning of the first course to theend of the second. But," added he, withan air of deliberation, " there are thosepork stakes, I had intended to haveproceeded, regularly and systematically,through the ham and fowls to the beef,but those pork stakes stagger mysystem!" On being told of a personwho was remarkably dilatory in hispayments, he said, " A man shouldnever pay money till he can't help it:something muaij happen." On anotheroccasion, he observed, " I always desiremy wife and daughters to payready mooney. It is of no use to desirethem to buy only what they want ;they will always imagine they wantwhat they wish to buy : but that paay-iiig ready mooney is such a check upontheir imaagiintaiion !" A very heavyfall of snow having taken place whilehe was spending an evening with hisdaughters at a neighbour's house, heasked several of the company whetherthey thought a necessity inevitablyexisted of sending the young ladieshome in a sedan-chair. " It is onlynext door," said he. " True," repliedthe narrator of this, as well as most ofthe preceding anecdotes, " but it is along round to your door; the length ofboth houses, and through the gardenin front of your house." Anotherwhom he consulted, put the matter inthe right point of view, by exclaiming,Let the girls have a chair, it is butthreepence a piece !" Having made acomposition for his tythes with theDEAN KIRWAN.principal land-owners at Bishop's Wear-mouth,he used to say, on hearing of abad crop, " Ay, ay ; now I am welloff; my tythes are now safe ; I havenothing to do with them, or thinkabout them." He frankly replied, asMeadley relates, to a clerical friend,who had asked him why he had quittedDalston, " Why, sir, I had two or threereasons for taking Stanwix in exchange: first, it saved me doublehousekeeping, as Stanwix was withina twenty minutes' walk of my housein Carlisle ; secondly, it was fiftypounds a year more in value; and,thirdly, I began to find my stock ofsermons coming over again too fast."He was fond of agriculture, and soattached to angling, that, when he satfor his portrait to Romney, he desiredthat artist to depict him with a rod andline in his hand. He frequently rodeon horseback, although, throughout life,he found it a most difficult task to keephis seat. He used to observe, " I wasnever a good horseman ; and when Ifollowed my father, on a poney of myown, on my first journey to Cambridge,I fell off seven times. My father, onhearing a thump, would turn his headhalf aside, and say, ' Take care of thymoney, lad'" When rather advancedin years, he said, " I am so bad ahorseman, that if any man on horsebackwere to come near me when I am riding,I should certainly have a fall ; companywould take off my attention, and 1 haveneed of all I can command to managemy horse, the quietest creature that everlived ; one that, at Carlisle, used to becovered with children from the oars tothe tail."He enjoyed, with a keen relish, thepleasures of society, to which few menof his day could afford more entertainment.By his family and friends, heappears to have been equally belovedand admired. Meadley, his biographer,says, " lie was a good husband, art affectionatefather, an indulgent master,and a faithful friend ; always ready topromote the general interests of society,and to accommodate his neighbourswith any civility or kindness in hispower."As a writer, Paley has obtained greatpopularity : ten editions of his Elementsof Moral and Political Philosophy weresold during his life-time ; his View ofthe Evidences of Christianity was reprintedseventeen times in twenty-sevenyears ; and his Natural Theologyreached a tenth edition in the shortspace of three years from the time ofits first publication. In addition to theworks already mentioned, he was theauthor of The Clergyman's Companionto the Sick; The Young Christian Instructed; and several sermons, whichwere published, in one volume octavo,after his decease.His intellect was vigorous ; his knowledgeextensive ; and his style clear,strong, and fascinating. Among thegreatest supporters of the Christianreligion, he has. perhaps, been excelledby many in zeal, but by few in talent.That his eminent labours in the causeof revealed religion were not rewardedwith a bishopric, has been attributed,by some writers, to the antipathy heentertained towards Pitt, and, by others,to his further promotion having beenperemptorily opposed by the king. Itlias, however, lately been stated, thatPitt, on one occasion, actually recommendedhis being nominated to a vacantsee, but that a high church dignitaryopposed some insuperable objections tohis elevation.WALTER, slake KIRWAN, DEAN OF KILLALA.1 HIS popular preacher, the descendantof a respectable catholic family,was born at Gal way, in 1754, and receivedhis education at the college ofSt. Omer. In his seventeenth year,he was sent to St. Croix, in the WestIndies, where one of his relatives resided,and to whose property somehopes were entertained that he wouldhave succeeded ; but, after having remainedthere for about six years, disgustedwith the society, the climate,and the oppressions he had witnessed,he returned to Europe, and enteredhimself, as a student, at the universityof Lorraine ; where he soon afterwardsTHE CHURCH.took priest's orders, and became professorof natural philosophy.In 1778, he was appointed chaplainto the Neapolitan embassy at the Britishcourt, and soon attained extraordinaryeminence as a pulpit orator. Havinglost his post, through some diplomaticchange, ne passed two years in strictseclusion ; on emerging from which, in1787, he thought proper to abjure thecatholic faith, and conform to the establishedchurch. His admirers assert,that his conversion was sincere and disinterested; while his enemies accusehim of having become an apostate frommere worldly motives. He preached hisfirst sermon, as a protestant minister, atSt. Peter's church, in Dublin ; whither,it is said, an immense congregationwas attracted, on the supposition, thathe would enter fully into his reasonsfor conforming ; to which, however, hedid not make the most distant allusionduring his discourse.He officiated regularly, for severalmonths, at St. Peter's ; and, as a pulpitorator, became the phenomenon of hisday. He was so amazingly successfulas a preacher of charity sermons,that, it is said, he brought benevolenceinto fashion ; and, before the first yearof his ministry had expired, it was determinedthat he should refrain fromdiscoursing on general topics, and devotehis extraordinary powers whollyto the cause of the widow, the orphan,and their co-mates in misery." On the5th of November, 1788, the governorsof various parish schools in Dublin,unanimously resolved, " That, fromthe effects produced by the sermons ofthe Rev. Walter Blake Kirwan, hisofficiating in the Irish metropolis wasa peculiar national advantage ; and thatvestries should be called, to considerthe most effectual method for securingto the city an instrument, under Providence,of so much public benefit."In 1789, he was preferred to theprebend of Howth, and the rectory ofSt. Nicholas Without, which, together,were worth about 400 per annum.He derived no further advantage fromhis almost unexampled popularity asapreacher, until the year 1800, whenthe Marquess Cornwallis, who was, atthat time, lord-lieutenant of Ireland,presented him to the deanery of Killala,the income of which was j400 a year ;but, on obtaining it, he resigned hisprebend ; so that his clerical emolumentswere but slightly increased.His constitution, which had alwaysbeen delicate, now began to declinewith great rapidity, chiefly, it is said,on account of the impassioned mannerwith which he was accustomed topreach. He died, in Dublin, on the27th of October, 1805, leaving fourchildren, by his wife, Wilhelmina, thedaughter of G. Richards, Esq., towhom he was united on the 22nd ofSeptember, 1798. Government granteda pension of j6,300 per annum to hisrelict, with reversion to his twodaughters ; but no provision, as Mrs.Kirwan states, was made for " the sonsof him who had worn himself out inthe service of his country."In 1814, appeared a posthumousvolume of his sermons ; but these displayno evidence of that almost miraculouspower over the human heart,which has, without contradiction, beenattributed to him as a preacher. Hissuccess must, doubtless, be attributedto the energy of his elocution ; to hisconsummate art as a pulpit orator ;and to those awful bursts of eloquencewith which, on the inspiration of themoment, he frequently ennobled hisdiscourses. Mrs. Kirwan describes hisaction as having been various andappropriate, but neither studied noroutrageous ; his voice full and melodious; his utterance, by turns solemn,earnest, melting, and impassioned,without any appearance of affectedmodulation ; his glance piercing ; hiscountenance austere and commanding;and his delivery, in unison withthe evangelical style of his sermons ;which, she states, although evincing aprofound knowledge of human nature,were not polished compositions, but soconstructed, as to admit of such extemporaneouseffusions, as circumstancessuggested, while he was actuallypreaching.Sir Jonah Barrington, who attributesto him a want of philanthropicqualities, a high opinion of himself,which overwhelmed every other consideration,and an intractable turn ofmind, entirely repugnant to the usualmeans of acquiring high preferment,describes his figure and countenance ashaving been unprepossessing ; his airARCHBISHOP SUTTON.discontented ; and his features so sharp,as to be almost repulsive. " His mannerof preaching," continues Sir Jonah,was of the French school: he was vehementfor awhile, and then becoming,or affecting to become, exhausted, heheld his handkerchief to his face : adead silence ensued ; he had skill toperceive the precise moment to recommence.Another blaze of declamationburst upon the congregation, and anotherfit of exhaustion was succeededby another pause. The men beganto wonder at his eloquence ; the womengrew nervous at his denunciations.His tact rivalled his talent; and, atthe conclusion of one of his finest sentences,a ' celestial exhaustion,' as Iheard a lady call it, not unfrequentlyterminated his discourse in general,abruptly." His charity sermons wereso eminently effective, that, at a periodof great national distress, the platesat the church doors, on some occasions,not only contained from one thousandto twelve hundred pounds in money,but the jewels and watches of many ofhis congregation. " I knew a gentlemanmyself," says Barrington, " whothrew both his purse and watch intothe plate." Mrs. Kirwan, in oppositionto the writer last quoted, declares,that he was entirely free from vanity,though justly proud of his efforts;which, she adds, rendered him sopopular as a pulpit orator, that, whenhe preached, it was necessary to keepoff the crowd from the church doorsby guards and palisades.Of this extraordinary man, who receivednumerous complimentary addresses,and the freedom of many corporations,but no preferment beyondhis deanery, Grattan thus spoke, in theIrish parliament, on the 19th of June,1792 : " And what has the church toexpect? What is the case of Dr.Kirwan ? This man preferred ourcountry and our religion, and broughtto both, genius superior to what he foundin either. He called forth the slumberingvirtues of the human heart, andtaught men to discover in themselvesa latent mine of benevolence, of whichthe proprietors had been unconscious.In feeding the lamp of charity, he hasalmost exhausted the lamp of life. Hecame to interrupt the repose of thepulpit, and shakes one world with thethunder of the other. The preacher'sdesk becomes the throne of light.Round him a train attends, not suchas crouch and swagger at the levee ofprinces, not such as form the processionof the viceroy, horse, foot, anddragoons ; but that wherewith a greatgenius peoples his own state : charityin ecstasy, and vice in humiliation ;vanity, arrogance, and saucy, empty,pride, appalled by the rebuke of thepreacher, and cheated, for a moment,of their native improbity and insolence.What reward? St. Nicholas Within,or St. Nicholas Without ! The curseof Swift is upon him : to have beenborn an Irishman, and a man of genius,and to have used it for the good of hiscountry."CHARLES MANNERS SUTTON, ARCHBISHOP OFCANTERBURY.CHARLES MANNERS, grandson ofJohn, Duke of Rutland, and son of LordGeorge Manners, who assumed hismother's surname of Sutton, was bornin 1755, and educated at the Charterhouseand Emanuel college, Cambridge.On taking his degree of B. A., in 1777,he was the fifteenth wrangler of hisyear. In 1780, he proceeded to thedegree of M. A., and in 1785, obtained,through his family connexions, therectory of Evesham, with Pelham, inNottinghamshire, and that of Whit-well,in Derbyshire. In 1791, he waspreferred to the deanery of Peterborough,and raised, on the death of Dr.Home, to the bishopric of Norwich,when he resigned his minor benefices,and proceeded to the degree of D. D.In 1794, the deanery of Windsor wasconferred upon him in commendam, andhe took such signal advantage of theopportunity which this preferment affordedhim, of winning the favour ofTHE CHURCH.George the Third, that on the death ofDr. Moore, in 1805, notwithstanding thestrong opposition of Pitt, who felt desirousof procuring for his tutor, Tom-line,the vacant primacy, his majestyinsisted that it should be conferred onthe subject of our present notice.Being decidedly hostile to the claimsof the catholics, he opposed the motionsbrought forward in their favour in May,1805; July, 1812; June, 1819; andJune, 1828. Although, in 1823, hespoke and voted against the dissenters'marriage bill; yet, on some other occasions,they found in him one of theirwarmest advocates. In 1811, he supportedthe protestant dissenting ministers'bill ; in 1824, the Unitarian marriagerelief bill, and subsequently voted,by proxy, for the repeal of the test andcorporation acts. He officiated at thecoronation of George the Fourth, andat the marriages of the Princess Charlotte,the Dukes of Clarence, Cumberland,Cambridge, Gloucester, and thePrincess Elizabeth. In his hands, therevenue of the primacy was raised fromtwelve to twenty thousand pounds perannum. Previously to his elevation tothe archiepiscopal see, he had becomegreatly embarrassed in his circumstances;but with so large an income, andthe purchase-money of the palace atCroydon, which he was allowed, by actof parliament to sell, he soon becameenabled to discharge the whole of hisliabilities. At Addington park, whichhad been purchased for, and conferredupon him, by the legislature, he built anelegant mansion, and expended a considerablesum in beautifying the adjacentparish church. He made severalimportant additions to the library atLambeth, and printed a catalogue of itscontents, which he had caused to be properlyclassified by the Rev. Mr. Todd.Although at the time of his death,which took place on the 21st of July,1828, his personal property aloneamounted to no less than 180,000, hehad exerted his powerful interest at thevery close of his life, to secure to hisfamily, by act of parliament, the valuablenomination to the registry of the prerogativecourt. He married early in life,and left a son, speaker of the house ofcommons, and eight other children.Disraeli says of him, " He is a prelate,whose amiable demeanour, usefullearning, and conciliatory habits of life,particularly recommend his episcopalcharacter , ' and one of his biographersdescribes him as having been a manof great learning, sound judgment, andmuch eloquence ; tall and dignified inperson, distinct and unaffected in hiselocution ; liberal in his expences, althoughtemperate and abstemious inhis habits ; eminently charitable, diligentin the performance of his dutiesas a prelate, and exemplary in all therelations of private life. This estimateof his character appears, however, tobe, in some respects, too laudatory.Neither his learning nor his eloquencemuch exceeded mediocrity ; and he wascertainly indebted for his rise in thechurch, to the accidental advantage ofhigh birth, and the obstinate predilectionof George the Third in his favour,rather than to his natural abilities ortheological acquirements. His printedproductions apparently consist of twosingle sermons, on public occasions, anda paper, relative to five species of theOrobanche, which appeared in thefourth Volume of the Transactions ofthe Linnaean Society.REGINALD Hebe, BISHOP OF CALCUTTA.THIS amiable prelate was born atMalpas, in Cheshire, on the 21st ofApril, 1783. He acquired the rudimentsof learning at Whitechurchgrammar school ; and, after prosecutinghis studies, for some time, at Dr. bristol'sacademy, in the neighbourhoodof London, he was entered, in 1800,at Brazen-nose college, Oxford. Hisclassical acquirements, at this time,were far from extensive; but naturalabilities, and unremitting application,soon raised him to a par with his collegiatecontemporaries ; and, in 1802,he gained the university prize for acopy of Latin hexameter. In thespring of 1803, he wrote his celebratedpoem of Palestine; for which, in thatBISHOP Hebe.year, he also obtained a prize. It isrelated, that, on ascending the rostrumto recite this beautiful composition,perceiving two ladies, of Jewish extraction,among his auditory, he determinedon altering some lines, inwhich he had reflected severely ontheir race ; but that not having an opportunityto communicate his intentionto the prompter, the latter checkedhim, on his attempting to deliver thepassage in the manner he wished; andhe was, consequently, obliged to pronounceit as it had been originallywritten. The applause with which hewas greeted, on this occasion, is reportedto have produced a serious effecton his venerable father, who, it is stated,may almost be said to have died withjoy, shortly after witnessing his son'striumph. On retiring from the theatre,Heberr escaped from the congratulationsof his friends, to thank the Almightyin solitude ; " not so much forhis talents," says Mrs. Heberr, " as thatthose talents had enabled him to giveunmixed happiness to his parents."He now applied himself to the studyof mathematics, and the higher classics;and his diligence was rewarded withextraordinary success. In 1805, hetook the degree of B. A., and soonafterwards gained a third universityprize, for an Essay on the Sense ofHonour. After having been elected afellow of All Souls, he quitted Oxford,and proceeded on a tour through Germany,Russia, and the Crimea ; duringwhich, he made several excellent notes,which were afterwards appended to theTravels of Dr. Clarke.On his return to England, in 1808,he proceeded M. A. ; and, shortlyafterwards, published a political poem,entitled, Europe : Lines on the presentWar. He now retired, with hiswife, a daughter of Dr. Shipley, Deanof St. Asaph, to the living of Hornet,to which he had recently been presented; and, for some time, wholly devotedhimself to the humble but importantduties of his station. In 1815,he preached, at the Bampton lecture,a series of sermons, which he publishedin the following year, On the Personalityand Office of the Christian Comforter.About the same time, he composedseveral articles for a Dictionaryof the Bible ; and printed a discourse,which he had delivered before theBishop of Chester. In 1820, his lifewas endangered by a malignant feverwith which he had been infected, byfearlessly visiting some of his sick parishioners.In 1822, he was appointedpreacher at Lincoln's inn ; and produceda life of Jeremy Taylor, prefixedto a new edition of that eminent writer'sproductions. Soon afterwards, he wasoffered the bishopric of Calcutta; which,after twice refusing, he, at length, onthe suggestion of his wife, consentedto accept ; and embarked for the EastIndies, in June, 1823. In the precedingApril, he had preached an affectingfarewell sermon to his parishioners; who, on his departure fromHornet, had presented him with apiece of plate, as a memorial of theirgratitude and esteem.During his voyage, he occupied himselfin studying Hmdostanee and Persian; feeling satisfied, as he expressedhimself, that, if he did not know themboth, in a year or two, at least as wellas he knew French and German, thatthe fault would be in his capacity, andnot in his diligence. On the 10th ofOctober, he landed at Calcutta, andimmediately exerted himself, with greatanxiety, to compose some clerical differencesthat had arisen in the diocese.No sooner was this great object effected,than he commenced a series of laboriousprogresses through his extensivebishopric ; during which, he consecratedseveral churches, and signalizedhimself, by his pious endeavours todiffuse Christianity among the Hindoo.His last visitation was to the presidencyof Madras. At Trichinopoly, on the3rd of April, 1826, after having greatlyfatigued himself in the discharge ofhis episcopal duties, he retired to hischamber, and imprudently plungedinto a cold bath ; at the bottom ofwhich, he was found, quite dead, abouthalf an hour afterwards, by one of hisservants. His remains were interredat St. John's church, Trichinopoly ;and a subscription was opened, soonafter his death, for the erection of amonument to his memory, at Madras.In person, he was tall, and ratherthin ; his hair was dark, his countenancepale, the expression of his featuresintellectual, and his deportmentdignified. He appears to have hadTHE CHURCH.no enemies ; whoever mentions hisname, more or less eulogizes his character.He possessed great talents,considerable eloquence, and a mostamiable disposition. Though anxiousto exert himself in the diffusion ofChristian knowledge, he sought not toextend the sphere of his influence,either by adulation or intrigue. Heembarked in no controversy, shared inno dispute, but lived in perfect charitywith all men. Peace and good-willattended him wheresoever he went :he was enthusiastically admired duringhis pious career, and generally lamentedat its close.CHARLES JAMES Bromfield, BISHOP OF LONDON.THIS eminent prelate, the son of aschoolmaster, was born in or aboutthe year 1785, at Bury St. Edmund's,in Suffolk, and acquired the rudimentsof learning under the tuition of hisfather. In 1803, or 1804, he wassent to Trinity college, Cambridge,where, in 1805, he obtained the prizemedal, for the best Latin ode after themanner of Horace. In the followingyear, a second medal was awarded tohim for the best Greek ode, in the styleof Sappho ; and, about the same time,he obtained the high distinction ofbeing elected first Craven universityscholar. On taking his degree of B. A.in 1808, he gained the third honourin the mathematical tripos ; and was,soon after, declared first chancellor'smedallist. In the following year hegained the second member's prize ;and, in a short time, became a fellowof his college. He proceeded to thedegree of M.A. in 1811; to that ofB. D. in 1818; and to that of D.D. in1823. After having greatly distinguishedhimself as an author and adivine, and officiated, for some time,as archdeacon of Colchester, he wasraised, in 1824, to the see of Chester;from which his translation to that ofLondon took place, on the elevation ofDr. Howley to the primacy, in 1828.Dr. Bromfield ranks deservedly highas a classical critic : in 1814, he publishedthe Perse of aeschylus, withemendations, &c. ; in 1815, a valuableedition of Callimachus ; in 1817, theSeptem contra Thebes, and, in 1818,the Agamemnon, of aeschylus, eachwith notes and a glossary. He hasalso printed A Visitation Sermon onthe Kesponsibleness of the SenatorialOffice ; A Discourse on the peculiarClaims the Society for Promoting ChristianKnowledge has upon the Liberalityof Churchmen; An Anniversary Sermonpreached before the Stewards of theSons of the Clergy, on the 23d of May,1822; A Charge to the Clergy of Colchester,delivered on his primary visitationto the archdeaconry ; A Chargeto the Clergy in the diocese of Chester;An Answer to Charles Butler's workin favour of the Catholics ; A Sermonpreached in 1827, for the benefit of theSociety for the Promotion of ChristianKnowledge; Twelve Lectures on theActs of the Apostles, with Five otherson the Gospel of St. John ; A Reply toa Correspondent of the John BullNewspaper, by whom his character hadbeen impeached ; and A Letter on thepresent Neglect of the Lord's Day,addressed to the Inhabitants of Londonand Westminster.As a preacher and a parliamentaryorator, Dr. Bromfield is dignified andimpressive ; his acquirements are extensive,and his abilities solid, but notbrilliant. He has constantly opposedconcession, either to dissenters or catholics.In doctrinal points he is strictlyorthodox, although more evangelical,perhaps, than most of his right reverendcontemporaries. The desire which hehas constantly evinced, since his elevationto the episcopal bench, to enforcea strict observance of their parochialduties by his clergy, has rendered himsomewhat unpopular as a diocesan ;while, in his letter on the neglect ofthe Lord's day, he is accused of havingpassed by the shops which administerto the indulgence of the wealthy, anddirected his indignation against themarkets which supply the necessitiesof the poor.THE SENATE.THE SENATE.ROBERT HARLEY, EARL OF OXFORDAND MORTIMER.ROBERT, the eldest son of SirEdward Harley, who greatly distinguishedhimself as a parliamentarypartisan in the reign of Charles theSecond, was born in Bow-street, Covent-garden,on the 5th of December, 1661.He was educated by the Rev. Mr.Buck, at Shelton, Oxfordshire. At theRevolution, he assisted his father inraising a troop of horse, and was sentby the gentlemen of Worcester, to tendertheir services to the Prince of Orange,and to acquaint him with the postureof affairs in that part of the country.After the accession of William andMary, he was chosen member of parliamentfor Gregory ; and subsequentlyserved for Radnor, from 1690, until hewas called up to the house of lords.Even thus early, he seems to havebeen a busy and industrious politician,taking a part in almost every importantmeasure that came under discussion.Bishop Burnet speaks of him in thefollowing terms : " Harley was a manof a very noble family, and very eminentlylearned, much turned to politics,and of a very restless ambition. Hewas a man of great industry and application; and knew forms, and the recordsof parliament, so well, that he wascapable both of lengthening out, andperplexing debates. Nothing couldanswer his aspiring temper. He wasof a staunch Whig family, yet joinedwith the Tories to create jealousies.Not being considered at the Revolutionas he thought he deserved, he had sethimself to oppose the court in everything,and to find fault with the wholeadministration. The high church partytrusted him ; yet he had so particular adexterity, that he induced the dissentersalso to depend upon him, andbetween them it was agreed that heshould be speaker." He was elevatedto that dignity in the session 1700-1,and retained it during three successiveparliaments.From the moment of her accession,Queen Anne regarded Harley withpeculiar favour. In April, 1704, he wassworn of her privy-council ; and, inMay following, became principal secretaryof state, which post he resigned in.1708. The Duke of Marlborough, andhis friends, having been removed fromoffice, by the exertions of their politicalopponents, Harley, in August, 1710,was constituted a commissioner of thetreasury, and chancellor of the exchequer.On the 8th of March following,he narrowly escaped assassination,the Marquis of Guiscard, aFrench papist, suspected of treasonablepractices, having, while under examinationbefore the privy-council, stabbedhim with a penknife. Guiscard wasinstantly secured and sent to Newgate,where he died about a week after hiscommittal. In consequence of this outrage,an act was passed, whereby anattempt on the life of a privy-counsellorwas declared to be a capital felony ;and a clause was added, indemnifyingthose who, in aiding Harley, " didwound or bruise the Sieur de Guiscardwhereby he received his death." Bothhouses addressed Queen Anne on thisoccasion, and declared their belief,that Mr. Harley, by his fidelity to hermajesty, and zeal for her service, haddrawn on him the hatred of all theabettors of popery and faction."THE SENATE.Having recovered from the effects ofthe wound, which there is some reasonto suspect was intended for Boling-broke,he appeared in the house ofcommons on the 25th of April, whenthe speaker addressed him in a verycomplimentary speech, containing theseremarkable expressions : " Sir, if yourfidelity to the queen could ever havebeen doubted, you have now given themost ample proofs of it, and it wouldbe presumption in me to speak of youreminent abilities. Your very enemiesown your value, by their unweariedefforts against your person. God bethanked, they have hitherto been disappointed;and may the same providence,which has so wonderfully preservedyou, and that has raised youup to be an instrument of good in avery important juncture, continue topreserve your invaluable life." In hisanswer, Harley said, " This honour isan ample reward for the greatest merit.I am sure it so far exceeds my deserts,that all I can dp or suffer for the publicservice, will still leave me in debt toyour goodness. Your favour, this day,is deeply imprinted in my heart ; and,whenever I look upon my breast, itwill put me in mind of the thanks dueto God, my duty to the queen, and thegratitude "l must always owe to thishonourable house."Harley was now the idol of thepeople, and a great favourite with thequeen, by whom, in 1711, he wascreated Earl of Oxford and Mortimer.On the 29th of May, 1711, he was appointedlord high treasurer of GreatBritain, and, on the 1st of June, tookthe oath of office, in the court ofchancery, being attended, on that occasion,by all the chief nobility in thekingdom. Never, in short, was ministerso highly honoured : the whole directionof affairs was at his pleasure ;the people honoured him as thechampion of the protestant faith, andthe queen placed implicit confidence inhim, as the wisest and most attachedof her servants. The intrigues of Boling-broke,however, with whose superiorgenius he was wholly incompetent tostruggle, began to loosen the foundationsof his power, at the moment whenQueen Anne's declining health raisedwarm and dangerous discussions as toher successor. The dying sovereign,it was believed, favoured the interestsof her exiled brother, and Bolingbrokewas suspected of similar views ; whilethe Earl of Oxford, with a vacillating,unsettled policy, which made him contemptibleto all parties, hesitated solong as to his course of action, that hisopinion ceased to be important. Thefriends of the Elector of Hanover, beingvery powerful, at length forced him toretire from office. He resigned on the27th of July, 1714, and the queen diedon the 1st of August ensuing.At the accession of George the First,he was treated at court with such markedcoldness and neglect, that his friendsstrongly urged him to retire to thecontinent, until they could make hispeace ; but the earl, with a lofty courage,which did him infinite credit, andevinced a full consciousness of his politicalintegrity, refused, by his flight, toconfirm the malicious reports circulatedby his enemies. Yet his dangerproved to be extreme : for, on the 10th ofJune, 1715, he was impeached of hightreason, and committed to the tower.On his conveyance thither he was attendedby an immense multitude, loudlyexclaiming, " High church and Oxfordfor ever!" In consequence of the tumultson this occasion, the well-knownact was passed, by which it is madefelony, without benefit of clergy, forany persons, unlawfully assembled, tothe number of twelve, to continuetogether one hour, after being requiredto disperse by a proper officer, andafter having heard the riot act publiclyread.The charges preferred against himwere singularly vague; so far frommaking out a case of treason, his enemiesmerely proved that he had beenguilty of indiscreetly temporising inhis official capacity, from a vain wishto be equally in favour with bothWhigs and Tories. The impeachmentwas far from popular; it reflected nocredit on the government, and probablyoriginated in personal malice. Afterhaving suffered a long confinement, hepetitioned to be brought to trial ; andobtained an honourable acquittal, fromhis peers, on the 1st of July, 1717. Hepassed the remainder of his life inlearned ease; and died on the 21st ofMay, 1724. He was twice married,and had three children by his first wife.EARL OF Stanhope.The following character of the Earlof Oxford appeared soon after his decease: " During the time he was primeminister, notwithstanding such a weightof affairs rested on him, he was easyand disengaged in private conversation.He was endowed with great learning,and was a great favourer and protectorof it. Intrepid by nature, as well as bythe consciousness of his own integrity,he would have chosen rather to fall byan impeachment, than to have beensaved by an act of grace : sagacious toview into the remotest consequencesof things, all difficulties fled beforehim. He was a courteous neighbour ;a firm and affectionate friend; and akind, generous, and placable enemy ;sacrificing his just resentments, notonly to public good, but to commonintercession and acknowledgment. Hewas a despiser of money ; and, what isyet more rare, an uncorrupted ministerof state; which appeared, by his nothaving made the least accession to hisfortune." This character is, doubtless,correct in some points, but too laudatoryin others. The earl appears to haveaccomplished his views by a talent forintrigue, and a fertility of invention asto minor expedients, rather than byany display of exalted intellect. Hiswavering conduct, during the latterpart of the life of Queen Anne, showsthat he was rather a weak man ; and hisfamous project of the South Sea Company,which he fondly imagined wouldhave relieved the nation from her difficulties,proves that he was not, on allimportant occasions, a wise one.An author himself, (having publishedthree polemical pamphlets, anda letter to Swift, for correcting and improvingthe English language.) he appearsto have delighted in the society ofthe literary wits of his day. Pope, Gay,Swift, Prior, and Parnell, evinced theirgratitude for his hospitality, and patronageto men of letters, by embalminghis name in their compositions. Popehas particularly celebrated him : he describeshim as having possessedA soul supreme, in each hard instance tried,Above all pain, all anger, and all pride ;1 be rage of power, the blast of public breath ;The lust of lucre, and the dread of death.He was not only a great encourager ofliterature, but the greatest collector inhis time, of curious books and manuscripts,especially of those concerning thehistory of this country, and formed thenucleus of the celebrated Harleigh library,which was completed by his son,and now constitutes one of the richesttreasures of the British Museum.JAMES STANHOPE, EARL OF STANHOPE.THIS distinguished character, thegrandson of Philip, first Earl of Chesterfield,was born in 1673. Early inthe reign of William the Third, he accompaniedhis father, Alexander Stanhope,to Spain; and afterwards madethe tour of France and Italy. He thenserved a campaign in Flanders as avolunteer, and was rewarded, first, witha company, and soon after with a regiment,for the bravery he displayed atthe siege of Namur.In 1700, he went into parliament asmember for Newport, in the Isle ofWight. In 1704, he served, with hisregiment, in the war undertaken forthe purpose of seating Charles, secondson of the Emperor Leopold, on thethrone of Spain. In this campaign,Colonel Stanhope and the whole of themen under his command were surrounded,and compelled to surrenderthemselves prisoners of war. He was,however, soon exchanged ; and, afterhaving been promoted to the rank ofbrigadier-general, greatly distinguishedhimself under Lord Peterborough,during the siege of Barcelona; at thefall of which he was despatched toEngland, and brought over letters toQueen Anne, from the Spanish king,in one of which the brigadier-generalwas warmly eulogized for " his greatzeal, attention, and most prudent conduct."From this period he remained inTHE SENATE.England, fulfilling his parliamentaryduties in a very creditable manner, until1708, when he was raised to the rankof major-general, and sent out to Spainin the double capacity of ambassador,and commander-in-chief of the Britishforces in that country. In the monthof August in this year, he attackedthe island of Majorca; and made soartful a disposal of his men, as toimpress the enemy with a belief thatthey more than thrice exceeded theiractual amount. An immediate capitulationof the garrison was the consequenceof this stratagem, the subsequentdiscovery of which so deeply mortifiedthe governor, that he committed suicide.In the early part of the followingcampaign, General Stanhope obtainedvictory after victory, and at lengthplanted the standard of England on thebattlements of Madrid; having previously,it is said, killed the Spanishgeneral with his own hand. He soonafterwards fell into the hands of theenemy, and was not exchanged until1712.On the accession of George the First,he was appointed one of the secretariesof state, and in 1716, accompanied theking to his electorate. While on thecontinent, he is accused of having intriguedwith Sunderland, against hiscolleagues, Townshend and Walpole,on whose resignation, in 1717, he becamefirst lord of the treasury andchancellor of the exchequer. Soon after,he was raised to the peerage, by thetitle of Baron Stanhope of Evasion:in 1718, he was created an earl, andexchanged his offices for the secretaryshipheld by Sunderland.Shortly afterwards, he went abroadfor the purpose of attempting to negotiatean alliance between France, England,and the emperor ; but his missionwas unsuccessful. On his return toEngland, he brought in a bill for therepeal of several clauses in the test andcorporation act In 1721, he accompaniedthe king to Hanover, althoughhe had, as usual, been appointed one ofthe lords justices during his majesty'sabsence. Soon after his return, he wasso dreadfully irritated in the house oflords, by an abusive speech from theDuke of Wharton, that he burst a blood-vesselin his head, and expired on thefollowing day, February 5th, 1721.The death of Earl Stanhope wasequally regretted by the king and thenation. As a statesman, if we excepthis duplicity to Walpole and Townshend,his conduct was open, liberal,and praiseworthy. He displayed abilitiesabove mediocrity, both in thecabinet and the field ; but he canscarcely be said to have been a greatminister, or, as it has been asserted, tohave possessed all the talents of Marlboroughwithout his weaknesses. Hewas amiable in private life, very learned,and particularly fond of studyingancient history.CHARLES TOWNSHEND, VISCOUNT TOWNSHEND.THIS eminent man, the eldest sonof Horatio, first Viscount Townshend,was born on the 10th of March, 1674.He took his seat in the house of peerson attaining his majority, and became,successively, lord-lieutenant of thecounty of Norfolk, a commissioner fortreating of an union with Scotland,captain-yeoman of Queen Anne's guard,a privy-counsellor, and one of the plenipotentiariesfor negotiating a peacewith France, in 1709. His colleagueon this occasion, was the Duke ofMarlborough. Their diplomatic effortswere unsuccessful; the French kinghaving refused to ratify the preliminaries.In the following year, Townshend,who had remained at the Hague, againentered into a negociation for peacewith the French government ; but, ason the previous occasion, his laboursproved abortive. Queen Anne havingdismissed her Whig ministers, Townshendresigned his embassy, and on hisreturn to England, was deprived of hispost as captain-yeoman of the guard,and censured by the house of commons,in which Tory influence at that timepredominated, for having signed thepreliminaries of the barrier treaty ; aVISCOUNT TOWNSHEND.measure which materially increased hisconsequence with the Whigs. He remainedin disgrace at court during theremainder of the queen's reign, but ensuredthe favour of her successor, bythe zeal he displayed in supporting theinterests of the house of Hanover.On the accession of George the First,whose entire confidence Townshendhad previously obtained, he was nominatedone of the lords justices to whomthe government was confided until theking's arrival. On the 14th of September,1714, he was made chief secretary ofstate, and took the lead in administrationuntil the latter end of 1716, whenthe king's Hanoverian advisers havingprejudiced the royal mind against him,he resigned his seals of office. In thefollowing month he was appointed tothe lord-lieutenancy of Ireland ; buthaving refused to go over to that kingdom,he was dismissed in the ensuingApril. In June, 1720, he became presidentof the counsel, and was appointedone of the lord's justices during theking's visit to Hanover. Shortly afterwardshe resumed his office of chiefsecretary of state, and in May, 1723,accompanied George the First to hiselectorate.The death of Stanhope, and the disgraceof Sunderland, at length, leftTownshend, and his brother-in-law,Walpole, without any formidable competitors,and their political supremacywas for some time secured by thefavour of the king and the approbationof his people. In July, 1724, Townshendwas made a knight of the Garter.In 1727, he accompanied George theFirst to the continent, and was presentat that monarch's decease.He continued in office, after the accessionof George the Second, until May,1730, when, in consequence of variousdifferences that had occurred betweenhim and his coadjutor, Walpole, hefinally retired from the administration,and devoted himself, during the remainderof his life, entirely to rural pursuitsand dignified hospitality. Henever revisited the capital after hissecession from power ; and died, belovedand lamented, at Ramham, in1738, aged sixty-four.Townshend is described as havingbeen rough in manners, sanguine, impetuous,overbearing, and impatient ofcontradiction : inelegant in language,and often perplexed in argument ; but asensible orator, and a perfect master ofthe subjects on which he spoke : generous,disinterested, of unblemished integrity,and perfect honour; an ableman of business ; and, notwithstandinghis despotic conduct in the cabinet, akind master, an indulgent parent, anaffectionate husband, and a faithfulfriend. Burnet thus describes him atthe period when he was appointed aplenipotentiary to negociate a peacewith France : " Lord Townshend hadgreat parts, had improved them bytravelling, and was by much the mostshining person of all our young nobility,and had, on many occasions, distinguishedhimself very eminently ; so hewas a man of integrity, and of goodprinciples in all respects, free from allvice, and of an engaging conversation."He was twice married, first in 1700,to Elizabeth, only child of ViscountPelham by his first wife, who, afterhaving borne him five children, diedin May, 1711; and secondly, to Dorothy,the sister of Sir Robert Walpole,by whom he had six children,and whom he also survived.Townshend and Walpole were distantlyrelated, educated at the sameschool, partisans in early life under thesame leaders, persecuted for the sameopinions, and elevated by the samemeans. For a long time they cooperatedmost cordially; but at lengthWalpole acquired a pre-eminence in thecabinet, which his aspiring brother-in-lawcould not brook, and an importancein their native county, superior to hisown, which appears to have irritatedTownshend, even more than Walpole'spolitical supremacy. Hence arose thosedifferences, and that jealousy, which,after having been often appeased, atlength produced a positive rupture ; butnotwithstanding Walpole, perhaps, wastoo proud of the triumph he hadachieved over his colleague, and Townshend,on being eclipsed as well in thecabinet as his county, exhibited aweakness, which, although pitiable, wasperfectly consonant to his general chasto their mutual honour it isrecorded, that after their separation,Walpole professed the highest respectfor Townshend, and Townshend neverspoke ill of Walpole.THE SENATE.CHARLES, EARL OF SUNDERLAND.i. HIS nobleman was born some timein the year 1674. He entered intopublic life at an early age; being returnedmember for Tiverton in 1695.He continued to represent that boroughuntil he was called to the house ofpeers, on the death of his father, in1702. In 1705, he accompanied theQueen and Prince George of Denmarkto Cambridge, where he was complimentedwith the degree of Doctor ofLaws. In the course of the same year,he was diplomatically employed at thecourts of Berlin, Vienna, and Hanover.In April, 1706, he was nominatedone or the commissioners to treat foran union with Scotland ; and, at thelatter end of the year, he was not onlymade a privy-counsellor, but, accordingto Archdeacon Coxe, the Whigleaders perceiving that the queen favouredthe Tories, he was forced bythem into the office of secretary of state.In 1709-10, on account of the conductof Sunderland, with regard toSacheverel and his supporters, the wholeinfluence of the high church party wasexercised to procure his dismissal fromoffice. The Duke of Marlborough, onthe other hand, wrote very warmly tothe queen in his favour; and the haughtyduchess " begged on her knees " thatthe queen would not compel him toretire: with this request, although verypowerfully seconded by a number ofinfluential noblemen, her majesty refusedto comply, and Sunderland wasalmost immediately commanded to deliverup his seals. To soften the harshnessof her conduct towards the earl,Queen Anne offered him a pension of3000 per annum for life ; which, however,he indignantly rejected; observing,that " He was glad her majesty wassatisfied he had done his duty ; but ifhe could not have the honour to servehis country, he would not plunder it."On the death of Queen Anne, Sunderland,who was accounted the greatleader of the Whigs, expected, in returnfor the zeal he had displayed in behalfof the house of Hanover, to be placedat the head of the new administration.But, although the king treated him withgreat attention, and several places ofdignity were conferred on him, someyears elapsed before he could attainthe exalted station to which he aspired.Shortly after George the First's arrivalin this country, the earl was sworn aprivy-counsellor, and appointed lordlieutenant of Ireland. In 1715, illhealth having compelled him to resignhis vice-regal office, he was constitutedlord privy seal ; and in July, 1716, hebecame vice treasurer of Ireland, havingpreviously enjoyed that office jointlywith Lord Rochester, from the monthof February in the same year. InSeptember, he went to Hanover withthe king, with whom his influence nowrapidly increased. In April, 1717, heachieved a political victory over Walpoleand Townshend ; on whose resignationhe was appointed, in the firstplace, chief secretary of state ; shortlyafterwards, lord president of the council ;and finally, first lord of the treasury.At this period, Sunderland, in whoseperson the whole power of governmentseemed to be united, brought forwardthe celebrated peerage bill, by the passingof which lie hoped to check theauthority of the Prince of Wales, (whomthe earl had offended beyond the possibilityof forgiveness,) when his royalhighness should become king; and toextend the duration of his own authority,by the elevation of a number of hisadherents to the house of lords. Thisunpopular bill was passed by the peers,but rejected by the commons, principallythrough the exertions of Walpole.In 1718-19, he resigned the presidencyof the council, but was, on thesame day, appointed groom of the stole,and first gentleman of the bed-chamber.In May, 1719, he was nominated oneof the lords justices, to whom the governmentwas entrusted during theking's visit to Hanover. Walpole andTownshend had, by this time, becomeso formidable to the earl, that hedeemed it expedient to divide hispower, and partially coalesce, withthem. About the end of October inEARL OF SUNDERLAND.this year, (1719,) he went to Hanover;in the following month, he was electeda knight of the Garter; in June, 1720,he was again nominated a member ofthe regency during the king's absencein Hanover; and, in September, herepeated his visit to the electorate.The year 1721 was rendered remarkableby the celebrated South Sea bubble,the bursting of which proved fatal tothe political supremacy of Sunderland.Notwithstanding his exalted station,(for he was still first minister of thecrown,) he was strongly suspected ofhaving taken a guilty part in that nefariousscheme ; and a parliamentary inquiry,as to his alleged mal practices,took place ; which, however, owing tothe zeal and talent with which he wasdefended by Walpole, terminated in hisacquittal : but the public were so fullyconvinced of his guilt, that he found itnecessary to resign all his employments.This event was followed by the reestablishmentof Townshend and Walpole: yet it was not without great difficulty,says Coxe, that Sunderland,who maintained the most unboundedinfluence over the sovereign, had beeninduced, or rather, compelled, to consentto the arrangement for a new ministry,and particularly to relinquish the disposalof the secret service money.His conduct at this period was involvedin suspicious mystery. He intriguedwith the Tories, although he didnot dare openly to avow any connexionwith them. He made overtures toBishop Atterbury, and his health wasfrequently drunk by the Jacobites. Hecontinued, on many occasions, successfullyto use his influence over the king :fomented divisions in the cabinet ; andcarried several measures in direct oppositionto its chiefs. " Walpole'smerit," says Coxe, "in screening Sunderlandfrom the rage of the house ofcommons, could not expiate the crimeof superseding him at the head of thetreasury. Sunderland, jealous of hisgrowing power, resolved, if possible,again to obtain his dismission. Underthe semblance of favour, he requestedthe king to create him postmaster-generaltor life; a lucrative office, which,if he had received, would have incapacitatedhim from a seat in parliament ;and if he refused, would subject him tothe resentment of his sovereign. Contrary,however, to his expectations, theking inquired if Walpole had desiredit, or was acquainted with it: Sunderlandreplied in the negative. ' Then,'returned the king, ' do not make himthe offer : I parted with him onceagainst my inclination, and I will neverpart with him again as long as he iswilling to serve me.' " Soon afterwards,on the 19th of April, 1722, death terminatedthe earl's machinations againsthis rival.The Earl of Sunderland was thricemarried : first, on the 12th of January,1694-5, to Lady Arabella, youngestdaughter of the Duke of Newcastle,by whom he had a daughter, and whodied June 4, 1698: next, in January,1700, to Anne, the second daughter ofthe Duke of Marlborough, by whomhe had four sons and two daughters,and who died April 15th, 1716: and,lastly, on the 5th of December, 1717, toMiss Judith Tichborne, a lady of largefortune, and of an ancient Irish family,by whom he had three children, andwho survived him many years.His spirit was daring, and his intellectunquestionably great. Of patriotism orprobity, he appears to have had but avery moderate share. Personal aggrandizementwas the one great object ofhis life. He was at all times willing toabandon the principles he had last professedto be a Whig, a Tory, or downrightJacobite, to sacrifice a friend, orcoalesce with an enemy, for the purposeof advancing or securing his ownpolitical power. He loved money, apparently,only because it assisted himin his ambitious views : his private fortune,his official emoluments, and thelarge gains which he is said to havemade by the part he took in the SouthSea bubble, being all exhausted to supporthis ascendancy in public affairs.His style as an orator was at once socorrect, energetic, and graceful, that hisparliamentary speeches were scarcelyever offensive, except on occasions whenhe gave way to the natural haughtinessof his disposition. He liberally encouragedauthors and artists ; and madelarge additions to the noble library ofhis family. His domestic character wasdecidedly bad : for he is said to havebeen haughty, irritable, and overbearing; a tyrannical master, a stern husband,a harsh parent, and a cold friend.THE SENATE.ROBERT WALPOLE, EARL OF Oxford.THE ancestors of this eminent statesmanderived their surname from thetown of Walpole, in Norfolk, wherethey resided until one of them exchangedthe family seat for Houghton,in the same county. At this place,Robert Walpole was born, on the 26thof August, 1676. He received the rudimentsof education at Massingham,and was afterwards placed on the foundationat Eton, where the emulation ofa public seminary, the alternate menacesand praises of his master, and themaxim frequently inculcated by hisfather, that being a younger brotherhis future fortune depended on hisown exertions, conquered the originalindolence of his disposition ; and hebecame, in the opinion of his contemporaries,an excellent scholar. It issurmised that he gave early proofs ofhigh talent as a speaker ; for sometimeafter he had left Eton, his master,on being told that several of his formerscholars, and particularly St. John, haddistinguished themselves by their eloquencein the house of commons, replied," But I am impatient to hearthat Robert Walpole has spoken; forI feel convinced he will be a goodorator."In April, 1696, he was admitted atKing's College, Cambridge. Duringhis residence at the University, he wasseized with the small-pox; and continuedforsake time in imminent danger.Dr. Brady, a warm Tory, who was hisphysician, said to one of the same partyon this occasion, " We must take careto save this young man, or we shall beaccused of having purposely neglectedhim, because he is so violent a Whig."Notwithstanding Brady's political prejudices,he was so much pleased withthe spirit and disposition of his votingpatient, that he observed, soon" afterWalpole's health was re-established ;This singular escape seems to be asure indication that he is reserved forimportant purposes;" a prediction,which, in after-life, was rememberedby Walpole with great complacency.He was originally intended for thechurch, and in the latter part of hislife, frequently observed, that had hetaken orders he should certainly havebecome Archbishop of Canterbury. In1698, his elder brother died, and hisfather took him from the University toattend to the improvement of the paternalestate. Young Walpole was nowemployed, once a week, to sell cattle atthe neighbouring fairs. His father wasof a jovial disposition, and often pushedto excess the pleasures of the table. Atthe convivial meetings which wereoften held at Houghton, the old gentlemanwould occasionally supply theyouth's glass with a double portion ofwine, saying, " Come, Robert, you shalldrink twice, while I drink once ; for Iwill not permit the son, in his sobersenses, to be witness to the intoxicationof the father." Robert's mornings beingthus engaged in farming, and his eveningsin festive society, he had little orno leisure for study. In July, 1700,he married Catherine, daughter of SirJohn Shorter, Lord Mayor of London ;a woman of exquisite beauty, and accomplishedmanners. His father soonafterwards died, and Walpole succeededto the family estate.He entered the house of commons,at the latter end of the reign of Williamthe Third, as member for Castle Rising,in Norfolk. His maiden speech mostseriously disappointed the expectationsof his friends. On the same day, anotheryoung member delivered a studiedoration, which was very much admired;Arthur Mainwaring, however, observed,that the spruce gentleman, who madethe set speech, would never improve ;but that Walpole would, in time, becomean excellent speaker.In the first parliament of QueenAnne, he was returned for Lynn Regis,for which place he continued to sit,in every succeeding parliament, untilthe close of his political career. He soonrose into high estimation with theWhigs ; and, in 1705, was appointedone of the council to the Lord HighEARL OF Oxford.Admiral, Prince George of Denmark ;in which situation he is said to havelaboured earnestly and successfully, tocorrect abuses in the navy. In 1708,he was appointed secretary at war ;and on the decease of Sir ThomasLittleton, in 1709, held, for a short time,the office of treasurer of the navy. Hisparliamentary talents, and great capacityfor business, rendered him afavourite with Godolphin, who entrustedhim with the task of composingthe speeches from the throne, and committedto him the management of thehouse of commons.In 1710, he was appointed one ofthe managers of the impeachmentagainst Sacheverel; a measure whichproduced the downfal of the Whigs. Hepublished a pamphlet on this subject,entitled, " Four Letters to a Friend ;"in which he endeavoured to prove, thatthe abettors of Sacheverel were friendsto the Pretender ; as those who condemnedsuch resistance as had deposedthe father, could of course haveno other wish than the restoration ofthe son. To the unexpected result ofthe impeachment in question, has beenattributed the horror which Walpoleever afterwards felt, even when in theplenitude of his power, at any interpositionin the affairs ef the church.When Harley ejected the Whigs fromoffice, he made some efforts to securethe support of Walpole ; who, however,rejected them, and stedfastly adheredto his fallen friends. His tenacity inthis respect, and the trouble his oppositiongave the new ministers, are supposedto have induced them to sanctiona charge being brought against him, inthe commons, for corruption in hisoffice of secretary at war, with regardto a certain contract for forage in Scotland.His defence was, that a share inthe contract having been given to hisfriend, Robert Mann, the other contractorspreferred paying that personasum of money in lieu of the probableprofits of such share ; that the contractorwho had negotiated the affairwith Mann having died, the other,who did not know Mann's name, madethe note of hand payable to Walpole ororder, for the use of his friend ; thatthe note was endorsed by Walpole,merely as a matter of form ; and thatthe money was ultimately received byMann, wholly for his own benefit.Walpole was, however, by a majorityof twenty-two, expelled the house ; and,afterwards, committed to the Tower,by a majority of twelve.Refusing to make any concession,which would imply a consciousness ofguilt, he remained a prisoner till parliamentwas prorogued. A new writhaving been issued for Lynn, he wasre-chosen; but a petition being presentedagainst his return, the housedeclared him incapable of sitting, as amember, during the existence of thatparliament While a prisoner, he wasconsidered a martyr to the cause of theWhigs; and was visited by Marlborough,Godolphin, and all the heads of theparty. His committal has been termedthe prelude to his future eminence ;and Lord Lansdowne, who was afterwardsconsigned to the same apartmentwhich he had occupied in the Tower,wrote the following lines under an autographscratched by Walpole on thewindow :Good unexpected, evil unforeseen,Appear by turns, as fortune shifts the scene ;And fall so bard, they bound and rise again.Although incapacitated from servinghis party in parliament, Walpole exertedhimself in maintaining the unionof the Whigs, and promoting the greatobject of their efforts the security ofthe protestant succession. He assistedSteele in several political pamphlets,and served his party with such unflinchingardour and industry, thatGodolphin, during his last illness, saidto the Duchess of Marlborough, in thepresence of Walpole, to whom hepointed as he spoke : " If you ever forsakethat young man, and souls arepermitted to return from the grave tothe earth, I will appear to you, andreproach you for your conduct."Walpole resumed his seat in the newparliament, which met in February,1714. He continued to display greatzeal for the succession of the house ofHanover; and in the new administration,formed on the arrival of Georgethe First in this country, he was appointedto the lucrative posts of paymasterof the forces, and treasurer ofChelsea hospital. He was afterwardselected to the chair of the secret committee,delegated to inquire into theTHE SENATE.conduct of the late ministers ; the elaboratereport of the committee has beenattributed to his pen ; and he was selectedto bring forward the motion forthe impeachment of Bolingbroke.In October, 1715, he was appointedfirst lord of the treasury and chancellorof the exchequer. This year was renderedmemorable by the Jacobite insurrectionin the north ; and Walpole,it is stated, although he had been offered60,000 to save the life of the Earlof Derwentwater, earnestly advisedthe king to act with severity againstall the principal adherents of the Pretenderwho were in his power. Walpole'sexertions, about this period, wereso great, that he was attacked with asevere fit of illness ; and before he couldresume his public duties, the septennialact was passed. It was, however, arrangedwith his concurrence, and heconstantly opposed its repeal.In March, 1717,Townshend, who hadmarried Walpole's sister, was dismissedfrom the administration, through theintrigues of Sunderland ; and Walpole,on this occasion, although the seals ofoffice were repeatedly returned to himby the king, persisted in retiring withhis friend. He now went into strenuousopposition, and contributed essentiallyto the rejection o the peerage bill.Sunderland, at length, made overturesto him and Townshend, and a partialcoalition took place. In June, 1720,he was appointed paymaster of theforces; but did not cordially join theadministration ; and on the prorogationof parliament retired to Houghton,which he quitted only on being generallycalled upon, as the person bestqualified to repair the injury inflictedon public credit by the South Seascheme, which he had opposed fromits commencement.As Lord Sunderland was implicatedin this nefarious project, public opinioncompelled him to retire; and Walpole,in 1721, again became first lord of thetreasury. He now turned his attentionto the promotion of trade andmanufactures. Foreign commerce wasshackled with numerous petty dutiesand impoverishing taxes, which obstructedthe exportation of our manufactures,and lessened the importationof the most necessary commodities ;Walpole conceived and executed thedesign of abolishing at once all theserestrictions, and giving freedom to themost valuable branches of our externaland internal commerce. Dean Tuckerobserves, that shipping, commerce, manufactures,and all kinds of industry,have advanced prodigiously since thepassing of this law ; and he adds, " I ampersuaded, that if ever a statesman deservedwell of the public, Sir RobertWalpole was that man."During the ferment of the generalelection in 1722, the plot was detected,in which Bishop Atterbury was concerned; and Walpole incurred greatdanger by the active part he took in theprosecution of the conspirators. HoraceWalpole relates that Mr. Johnstonee, anold gentleman, who had been secretaryof state for Scotland (of which he wasa native) in the reign of King William,was continually warning Sir Robert tobe on his guard against assassinationplots. Walpole, intrepid and unsuspicious,used to rally his monitor; andwhen serious, told him that his life wastoo constantly exposed to his enemiesto make it of any use to be watchfulon particular occasions : nor, thoughJohnstonee often hurried to him with intelligenceof such designs, did he eversee reason, but on the following occasion,to believe in the correctness of the information.A day or two before thebill of pains .and penalties was to passthe house of commons against Canterbury,Johnstonee advertised Sir Robertto be circumspect, for three or four personsmeditated to assassinate him as heshould leave the house at night. SirRobert laughed, and forgot the notice.The following morning, Johnstonee cameto him in a triumphant manner, tellinghim, that though he had often scoffed athis advice, he had for once followed it,and by so doing preserved his life. SirRobert did not understand him, andprotested he had not given more creditthan usual to his warning. " Yes," saidJohnstonee, "you have; for you did notcome from the house last night in yourown chariot." Walpole affirmed thathe had ; but his friend persisting, SirRobert examined one of his footmen onthe subject, who replied, " I did call upyour honour's carriage ; but ColonelChurchill being with you, and hischariot driving up first, your honourstepped into that, and your own cameEARL OF Oxford.home empty." Johnstonee elated, push-ingleexamination farther, Sir-Robert'scoachman recollected that, as he leftPalace-yard, three men, much muffledup, had looked into the empty chariot.The mystery was never cleared up;and Sir Robert said, it was the onlyinstance in which he had seen any appearanceof a real design against his life ;although during the rebellion of 1715,a Jacobite, who sometimes furnishedhim with intelligence, while sitting alonewith him one night, suddenly put hishand into his bosom, and rising, said,Why do not I kill you now ?" Walpole,starting up, replied, " Because Iam a younger man and a stronger."They then sat down again, and discussedthe person's information ; andSir Robert had afterwards reason tobelieve that the object of the spy, wascertainly not to assassinate, but, by intimidation,to extort money from him.It had been customary, hitherto, forthe prime minister to be placed in thehouse of lords, and that honour wasoffered to Walpole ; conscious, however,that his influence would soon decay ifhe left the commons, he declined thedignity himself, but accepted it for hisson, who was created Baron Walpole.At the revival of the Bath, he waschosen one of the knights ; and fromthat time assumed the title of SirRobert; in 1726, he received the moredistinguished ribbon of the Garter.As George the First could not readilyspeak English, nor Walpole French,the minister was obliged to deliver hissentiments in Latin ; and as neithercould converse in that language withreadiness and propriety, Sir Robertused to say that, during this reign, hegoverned the kingdom by means of badLatin. It is a strong testimony ofWalpole's clearness of statement, thatunder such circumstances, the king tookpleasure in transacting business withhim. Having detected one of theHanoverian ministers in some trick orfalsehood, Sir Robert had the firmnessto say to him, in the king's presence,Mentions, impudentissime !"The apparent imprudence of Walpolein permitting the return of Boling-broke,(which took place in 1725,) issufficiently accounted for from the secrethistory of the transaction. Wehave now his own authority for sayingthat the restoration of Bolingbroke wasthe work of the Duchess of Kendal,(mistress of George the Firsthand thatthe minister, at the express commandof the king, supported the bill inBolingbroke's favour, although contraryto his own wishes. Until thatevent he had only to contend with anheterogeneous opposition, unallied inprinciple, and without mutual confidence; it remained for Bolingbroketo infuse spirit and harmony into thisill-combined mass ; he inspired theirlabours in parliament, and at the latterend of 1726, began, in the Craftsman,a series of essays replete with the mostbitter attacks on the minister ; which,however, failed to drive him fromoffice.On the death of George the Second,Walpole appears to have expected adismissal, but still to have felt confidentthat his exclusion would not beof long continuance : under this impression,he said to his friend, Sir WilliamYonge, " I shall certainly go out ;but let me advise you not to go intoviolent opposition, as we must sooncome in again." He passed the twodays, however, which immediately followedthe accession of George the Second,in great agitation, and held severalconferences with his friends, at Devon-storehouse.Scope, secretary to thetreasury, who was admitted to one ofthese meetings, described the wholecompany as absorbed in gloom andconsternation. But affairs soon took afavourable turn : Sir Spencer Compton,the intended minister, (for whomWalpole had, it appears, as an act ofkindness, drawn up the king's speechto the council) having proposed .'60,000per annum, as the amount of the settlementwhich it would be proper tomake on the queen, Walpole, withwhom she had been previously offended,secured her majesty's powerfulinterest in his behalf, by privatelypledging himself, that if he were continuedin office, the amount of herjointure should be 40,000 per annumabove the sum proposed by Sir Spencer.She laboured assiduously to remove theking's prejudices against Walpole, andat length completely triumphed.Meanwhile, the door of Sir SpencerCompton's house was besieged by personsof all ranks, whocjwne to pay theirTHE SENATE.court to him. As Walpole was passingin his carriage, he said to a friend whowas with him, " Did you observe howmy house is deserted, and how thatdoor is crowded with carriages ? Tomorrowthe scene will be changed :that house will be deserted, and minewill be more frequented than ever."As his continuance in office was thework of the queen, it was through herthat it was first made known to thepublic. Lady Walpole, presented herselfat her majesty's first drawing-room jbut as Sir Robert was supposed to bein disgrace, no one made way for her ;until the queen motioned her to advance,saying, " There, I am sure I seea friend." Instantly the whole companydrew back ; the queen spoke to her inthe most gracious manner, and in returning,Lady Walpole said she mighthave walked upon their heads, so eagerwere they to pay their court to her.Walpole and Townshend continuedto act in conjunction till May, 1730, whenthe latter retired in disgust. Some timebefore, Walpole, in the presence ofPelham, and several other public men,had said, in answer to some remarkof Townshend's, to which he pledgedhis honour, " My lord, for once,there is no man whose sincerity Idoubt so much as your lordship's ;and I never doubt it so much as whenyou are pleased to make such strongprofessions." Townshend, incensed,seized Walpole by the collar; Sir Robertcaught hold of him in return, and theyboth at the same instant quitted theirgrasp, and laid their hands upon theirswords. Pelham, and some ot the otherpersons present, interposed to preventan immediate duel, but the contemptuousexpressions used on the occasion,rendered all attempts at reconciliationineffectual. Townshend, however, indulgedin no peevish expressions withregard to his successful rival ; and Walpole,on the other hand, never depreciatedthe conduct or abilities of Townshend.When pressed, several yearsafterwards, by an intimate friend, to revealthe reason why they had differed ;after several attempts to evade the question,he at length said, " It is difficult totrace the causes of a dispute betweenstatesmen ; but I will give you the historyin a few words : as long as thefirm of the house was Townshend andWalpole, the utmost harmony prevailed ;but it no sooner became Walpole andTownshend, than things went wrong,and a separation ensued."The year 1733 was rendered remarkable,in the ministry of Walpole, by theintroduction of the plan for subjectingthe duties on wine and tobacco to thelaws of excise ; of which, Dean Tucker,who well understood the principles ofcommerce, with much justice, observed,The wisest proposal to relieve thenation was the excise scheme, by meansof which the whole island would havebeen one general free port, and a magazineand common store-house for allnations." The great outline of theplan was to convert the customs intoduties of excise, and to ameliorate thelaws of the excise in such a manner asto obviate their abuses and oppressions.The whole influence of the oppositionwas exerted to excite clamours againstthe measure ; but after a long and animateddebate, the preliminary resolutionswere carried. So exasperated wasthe mob at his success, that as theminister proceeded towards his carriage,some persons roughly caught him bythe cloak, and his son and GeneralChurchill, between whom he walked,had great difficulty in rescuing him.The proposed measure was so odiousand unpopular, that during the progressof the bill, Walpole deemed it advisableto summon a meeting of his adherentson the subject; at which it was powerfullyurged that all taxes were obnoxious,and that there would be an endof supplies, if mobs were to control thelegislature. Walpole, however, said, " Inthe present inflamed temper of the people,the act could not be carried intoexecution without an armed force ; andthere will be an end of the liberty ofEngland, if supplies are to be raisedby the sword. If, therefore, the resolutionof this meeting is to proceed withthe bill, I shall instantly request theking's permission to resign, for I willnot be the minister to enforce taxes atthe expense of blood." The bill was,consequently, abandoned ; and thepeople expressed their joy on the occasionby bonfires, illuminations, andburnings of Walpole in effigy.The death of Queen Caroline, whichtook place in 1737, and the public oppositionof Frederick, Prince of Wales, toEARL OF Oxford.the measures of government, very materiallydiminished the stability of theadministration. The queen, on herdeath-bed, gave a high testimony ofher approbation of Walpole : turningto the minister, who stood with theking at her bedside, she said to him,I hope you will never desert theking, but continue to serve him withyour usual fidelity." Then, pointing tothe king, she added, " I recommendhis majesty to you." The king saidnothing; and the minister was alarmedlest this mode of making him of moreconsequence than the king, mightawaken the monarch's jealousy, and bethecause of his disgrace. But theseapprehensions were unfounded. Abouta fortnight afterwards, the king shewedhim an intercepted letter, in which itwas observed, that as the queen wasdead, the minister would lose his soleprotector. " It is false," said he, good-naturedly; " you remember, that on herdeath-bed, the queen recommended meto you."Up to the year 1739, Walpole maintainedthat pacific policy which he considerednecessary for the preservationof internal tranquillity ; and it may beconfidently asserted, that to his firmnessand address the nation was solelyindebted for a longer period of peacethan had been experienced since thereign of James the First. The advantages.which resulted to the countrywere incalculable ; but the violence ofparty, and popular prejudice, at lengthovercame the pacific disposition of theminister. On reviewing the conduct ofEngland, from the renewal, in 1737, ofthe disputes concerning the Spanishdepredations, it appears to have been inconsistent,unjust, haughty, and violent.The British nation listened only to oneside of the question ; gave implicitcredit to all the exaggerated accounts ofSpanish aggression, without noticingthe violation of express treaties by theBritish traders. The conduct of theminister is also liable to animadversion,though from a different cause. Burkesays, in his Thoughts on a RegicidePeace, " I observed one fault in hisgeneral proceeding. He never manfullyput forward the strength of his cause :he temporized ; he managed ; and adoptingvery nearly the sentiments of hisadversaries, he opposed their inferences.This, for a political commander, is thechoice of a weak post. His adversarieshad the best of the argument, as hehandled it, not as the reason and justiceof his cause enabled him to manageit. I say this, after having seen, andwith some care examined, the originaldocuments, concerning certain importanttransactions of those times : theyperfectly satisfied me of the extremeinjustice of that war, and of the falsehoodof the colours which, to his ownruin, and guided by a mistaken policy,he suffered to be daubed over thatmeasure."In Walpole's behalf, it can only beurged that the national mind was soinflamed, that it would not bear thetruth ; that the king felt as anxious forwar as the nation ; and that a strongparty in the cabinet was similarly disposed.It appears that Walpole, at thisperiod, tendered his resignation, whichthe king refused to accept. " Will youdesert me in my greatest difficulties?"exclaimed his majesty. Walpole observed,in reply, " To me will be attributedevery disaster that occurs duringthe war, my opposition to which willalways be considered a crime." Hethen repeated his wish to retire fromoffice, but the king imposed silenceon him, in a very authoritative manner; and Walpole remained at the helm,exposed to repeated mortifications fromthose with whom he acted ; and to themost galling insults from his politicalantagonists, who, in less than two years,succeeded in forcing him out of office.The war with Spain was by no meansso triumphant as the nation had anticipated.The success of Vernon, atPorto Bello, was much more thancounterbalanced by his subsequentfailure at Cartagena ; and parliamentmet in November, 1740, with its belligerentfrenzy greatly diminished. Theprincipal aim of opposition, in this memorablesession, was to increase theunpopularity of the minister, by imputingto him, every national disasterthat occurred ; and to harass him withrepeated motions and questions, relativeto the production of papers, and to theprosecution of the war. On the llth ofFebruary, 1741, Sandys,who is called, bySmollett, " the motion maker," left hisseat, and crossing the floor to the minister,said he thought it an act of commonTHE SENATE.attention to inform him that he should,on the following Friday, bring an accusationof several articles against him ;Walpole thanked him for the information; and when Sandys stated to thehouse what he intended to do, the ministerrose with great composure, and,after requesting a candid and impartialhearing on the appointed day, said,with some emotion,scire lib, nulli paleculpa.'Pulteney, in reply, observed that theright honourable gentleman's logic andLatin were equally inaccurate, and declaredthat Horace had written " nullapalliser culpa." The minister defendedhis quotation, and offered towager a guinea on its correctness. Pul-tenetaccepted the challenge, and referredthe decision to the minister'sfriend, Nicholas Hardingee, clerk of thehouse, a man distinguished for classicalerudition. Hardingee decided againstWalpole ; the guinea was immediatelythrown to Pulteney, who caught it,and, holding it up, exclaimed, " It isthe only money I have received fromthe treasury for many years, and itshall be the last."Pursuant to his notice, Sandys, onFriday the 13th of February, broughtforward his charges against the minister.No less than four hundred and fiftymembers were present, many of whomhad secured their seats at six o'clock inthe morning. The debate was openedat one o'clock. Sandys strongly attackedthe general course of ministerialpolicy, and drew a dismal picture ofthe situation of the country, " If,"said he, " it should be asked, why Iimpute all these evils to one person,I reply, because that one person hasgrasped in his hands every branch ofgovernment ; that one person has attainedthe sole direction of affairs, andmade a blind submission to his willthe only terms of present favour, futureexpectation, or continuance in office."He concluded with moving that theking might be addressed to dismissSir Robert Walpole from his councilsand presence forever.The motion was supported and opposedwith equal animation. In orderto show that Walpole was not, as hadbeen alleged, the only efficient minister,Sir Charles Wager, the first lordof the admiralty, declared that SirRobert had never interfered in recommendingany one person to the admiraltyboard ; and that, if he had everdone so, he (Sir Charles) would havethrown up his employments. Shipped,the leader of the Jacobites in thehouse, declared that he looked on thismotion as only a scheme for turningout one minister and bringing in another; and that he would give himselfno concern in the question. So saying,he withdrew, and was followed bythirty-four of his friends. Walpolemade a long and vigorous defence, inthe course of which he thus sarcasticallyspoke of those who were called thepatriotic party : " A patriot, sir ! why,patriots spring up like mushrooms ! Icould raise fifty of them within the four-and-twentyhours : I have raised manyof them in one night. It is but refusingto gratify an unreasonable or an insolentdemand, and up starts a patriot.I have never been "afraid of makingpatriots, but I disdain and despise alltheir efforts. All this pretended virtueproceeds from personal malice and disappointedambition. There is not aman among them whose particular aimI am not able to ascertain, and fromwhat motive he has entered into thelists of opposition."The motion was negatived by 290against 106; a great and unusual majority,which proceeded from the schismbetween the Tories and the Whigs, andthe secession of the party headed byShippen, whose conduct occasioned thegreatest surprise ; the real cause of ithas since become known. Walpole,having discovered a correspondencebetween one of Shippen's friends andthe Pretender, Shippen waited on SirRobert, and besought him to save thedelinquent. Walpole consented to doso, and then said to Shippen, " I cannotdesire you to vote with the administration; for, with your principles, I haveno right to expect it: but I require,whenever any question is brought forwardin the house personally affectingme, you will recollect the favour I amnow granting you."Shippen and Sir Robert had alwaysa personal regard for each other. Ship-penused to say, " Robin and I are twohonest men. He is for King George,and I for King James ; but those menEARL OF Oxford.with long cravats (meaning Sandys,Shout, Gibbon, &c.) only desireplaces, under either King James orKing George." Dr. King, in his Politicaland Literary Anecdotes, affirmsthat Walpole had cajoled ColonelCecil, who was agent for the Pretenderin England, into a belief that he (SirRobert) had formed a design to restorethe Stuartss ; and that, consequently,there was not a scheme of the Jacobitesof which he was not early informed,and, therefore, able to defeat withoutnoise or expense. The Duchess ofBuckingham (who was supposed to be anatural daughter of James the Second)is said by Dr. King to have been alsoduped; and that Walpole was, at last,so much in her good graces, that sheoffered to marry him, (he being awidower,) a favour which he civilly declined.But Horace Walpole says that,knowing his father's fondness for hisdaughter, she asked him if he recollectedwhat had not been thought toogreat a reward to Lord Clarendon forrestoring the royal family ? He affectednot to understand her. " Wasnot he allowed," said the lady, " tomatch his daughter to the Duke ofYork?" Sir Robert smiled, and lefther. Horace also remembered that,more than once, his father had receivedletters from the Pretender himself,(probably through the hands of theduchess) which Sir Robert always carriedto George the Second, who endorsedand returned them.The parliament was dissolved inApril, 1741, and; a new one met in thefollowing December. It soon appearedthat the influence of the minister wason the decline, as he even permitted analteration to be made in the answer tothe speech from the throne. On the24th of December, the house adjournedto the 18th of January, 1742 ; and theinterval was employed by the ministerin attempts to increase his strength ; butall his efforts were ineffectual. Thestate of his health, by which his powersof mind as well as body were muchweakened, tended to accelerate hisdownfal. His memory was now less retentive,and his method of transactingbusiness less admirable than formerly.He seemed to have lost, in many instances,that contempt of abuse, and thatcommand of temper, for which he hadbeen so remarkable : he was eithersilent, or irritable and fretful. But hestill appeared anxious to retain hispower, and made an ill-judged attemptto detach the Prince of Wales from theopposition, by offering to procure anaddition of ,50,000 per annum to hisincome. The prince, however, refusedto listen to any proposition while SirRobert continued in office.On the 21st of January, Pulteneymade a motion for referring to a secretcommittee the papers relating to thewar, which had been laid before thehouse. As this motion involved numerouscharges against him, Walpoletook a considerable share in the debate,and was roused to the most animatedexertions. He was also ably defendedby his partisans, and the motion wasnegatived, but by a majority of threeonly, in the fullest house that had beenknown for many years. The efforts toobtain voters on this occasion were sogreat, that members were brought fromthe chamber of sickness into the house.A small party, who intended to supportthe minister, having been placed in anapartment belonging to the auditor ofthe exchequer, (Lord Walpole,) some oftheir adversaries filled up the key-holewith dirt and sand, so that they couldnot get out in time for the division.On the 28th of January, a questionon the Chippenham election was carriedby a majority of one against the minister; and, on the 2nd of February,he found himself, on a division relativeto the same subject, in a minorityof sixteen. On the following day, thehouse adjourned to the 18th; on the9th, Sir Robert was created Earl ofOrford, with a pension of 4,000 perannum; and on the llth, he resignedthe seals of office.The king remained the warm friendof Walpole to the last ; and, notwithstandingthe clamours of the public,the minister would scarcely have relinquishedhis post, had he not beendeserted by his partisans. " I mustinform you," he says, in a letter to theDuke of Devonshire, " that the panicwas so great among what shall I callthem ? my own friends, that they alldeclared that my retiring was becomeabsolutely necessary, as the only meansto carry on the public business withhonour and success."THE SENATE.On his retirement to Houghton, theold clergyman of Massingham, in whoseschool he had received the rudimentsof education, paid him a visit, andstated that he had predicted the futuregreatness of his pupil. " Why did younot call on me while I was in power 1"said Walpole. " Because," replied theclergyman, " I knew that you weresurrounded by so many petitioners,and that you had done so much forNorfolk people, that I did not wish tointrude. But I always inquired howRobin went on, and was satisfied withyour proceedings."Although Walpole still retained considerableinfluence, his friends couldnot prevent the appointment of a secretcommittee, (the members of whichwere all, except two, his acknowledgedopponents) to inquire into his conductduring the last ten years of his administration.The discoveries made tohis disadvantage were much moretrivial than his enemies had expected.A bill was, therefore, carried throughthe commons to indemnify the witnessesfor any disclosures they might maketo their own prejudice ; it was, however,thrown out by' the lords ; and, in the followingsession, a motion to appoint asecond committee of inquiry was rejectedby a majority of sixty-seven.The king still privately correspondedwith him, on matters of emergency, bymeans of the Duke of Devonshire ;and his majesty's confidential page,Livre, would occasionally meet the ex-minister,at the residence of a Mr.Fowls, in Golden-square, as late asmidnight, and in the most secret andcautious manner imaginable.In his retirement, Walpole felt at aloss for recreation. He said to a friend,one day, in his library, at Houghton, " 1wish I took as much delight in readingas you do; it would be the means ofalleviating many tedious hours ; but, tomy misfortune, I derive no pleasurefrom such pursuits." On another occasion,his son, Horace, having proposedto amuse him with some historical work,he exclaimed, " Oh, do not read history,for that I know must be false." Hisprincipal amusement was planting ; andhe appears to have taken some interestin witnessing the arrangement of hisfine collection of pictures, by his son.He had a good taste for painting, andhis observations on the styles of therespective masters were usually judicious.In November, 1744, although he hadlong laboured under a calculous complaint,in obedience to a summons fromthe king, who wished to consult him, hetravelled from Houghton to London.He occupied four days in performingthe journey, which dreadfully aggravatedhis disease. Not finding muchbenefit from regular medical assistance,he had recourse to an empiric, whoseprescriptions made him worse ; and, toprocure relief, he took such large dosesof opium, that, for six weeks, he wasalmost constantly in a state of stupefaction,except for two or three hours inthe afternoon, during which he conversedwith his usual vivacity. Aftera dreadful course of suffering, whichhe bore with great fortitude, he expiredon the 18th of March, 1745, inthe sixty-ninth year of his age. He wasburied in the parish church at Houghton,without monument or inscription.In person, he was tall, well-proportioned,and decidedly handsome in hisyouth ; but, as he advanced in years, hebecame extremely corpulent and unwieldy.His features were regular, andhis eyes full of spirit. His moral conductwas fashionably lax ; his gaietyrough and boisterous, and his humourtoo often coarse, and licentious. Hiscompanionable qualities have, nevertheless,been highly eulogised : Popesays of him,Seen bird I hare, but in his happier hoarOf facial pleasure, ill exchanged for power ;Seen him, encumbered with the venal tribe,Smile without art, and win without a bribe.As an orator, he was nervous andanimated, but not profound ; persuasiveand plausible, but not elegant. Hisvoice was melodious ; and his pronunciationdistinct, though he never entirelylost the provincial accent. Mr.Pitt, afterwards Earl of Chatham, onceobserved in the house of common*,that Sir Robert Walpole was a very ableminister ; and perceiving several memberslaugh, he added, " The more 1reflect on my conduct, the more Iblame myself for opposing the excisebill. Let those who are ashamed to confesstheir errors, laugh out. Can it bedeemed adulation to praise a ministerVISCOUNT BOLINGBROKE.who is no more?" "The hurry andconfusion of the Duke of Newcastle,"says Chesterfield, in a letter to his son,do not proceed from his business, butfrom his want of method in it; SirRobert Walpole, who had ten times thebusiness to do, was never seen in ahurry, because he always did it withmethod."Without being a genius of the firstclass," says Burke, " speaking of Walpole,he was an intelligent, prudent, andsafe minister. He loved peace ; and hehelped to communicate the same dispositionto nations at least as restless andwarlike as that in which he had the chiefdirection of affairs. Though he served amaster who was fond of military fame,he kept all the establishments very low.The land-tax continued at two shillingsin the pound during the greater part ofhis administration ; the other impositionswere moderate. The profoundrepose, the equal liberty, the firm protectionof just laws, during the longperiod of his power, were the principalcauses of that prosperity which tooksuch rapid strides towards perfection,and which furnished to this nationability to acquire the military glorywhich it has since obtained, as well asto bear the burthen, the cause and consequenceof that warlike reputation.With many virtues, public and private,he had his faults; but his faults weresuperficial. A careless, coarse, and over-familiarstyle of discourse, without sufficientregard to persons or occasions,and an almost total want of politicaldecorum, were the errors by which hewas most hurt in the public opinion,and those through which his enemiesobtained the greatest advantage overhim. But justice must be done. Theprudence, steadiness and vigilance ofthat man, joined to the greatest possiblelenity in his character and his politics,preserved the crown to this royalfamily; and with it, their laws andliberties to this country."To Walpole, the saying that "allmen have their price" has been attributed;but according to ArchdeaconCoxe, his words were, " all those menhave their price ;" and he spoke themin allusion to certain pretended patriots,who were in the ranks of oppositionto his ministry. During a longperiod, he enjoyed extraordinary politicalpower ; but, as he said to a friend,it was affected by " two cursed drawbacksHanover, and the king's avarice."He appears to have gloried inhis exalted station, to which, at thelast, he clung with a pertinacity by nomeans dignified.HENRY ST. JOHN, VISCOUNT BOLINGBROKE.THIS distinguished ornament of thesenate and literature of England, wasborn at Battersea, in the year 1678.He was the son of Sir Henry St.John, of Lydia Tregoze, in Wiltshire,and of Mary, daughter of RobertRich, Earl of Warwick. His motherhaving died during his infancy, hepassed his earliest years under thesuperintendence of his grandmother,a rigid Presbyterian, whose religiousdirector was the famous fanaticalpreacher, Daniel Burgess. The severecourse of spiritual exercise and dryreading, to which the ardent mind ofyoung St. John was subjected by hisvenerable relative, had an oppositetendency to that which had been anticipated,and he imbibed a disgust forreceived opinions on theological subjects,particularly for those entertainedby persons of his grandmother's persuasion,which never appears to have desertedhim.At a proper age he was sent to Eton,where one of his most distinguishedcontemporaries was W r walpole, afterwardsthe celebrated Sir Robert, betweenwhom and Bolingbroke a bitterrivalry subsisted from their earliest entranceinto public life. From Eton,St. John was removed to Christchurchcollege, Oxford, where his brilliantendowments procured him notice andapplause ; but the love of pleasure,partially, although perhaps not veryTHE SENATE.materially, retarded his academical progress,and delayed the full developmentof his mental faculties.On leaving the university, he wasregarded as a young man of the highestpromise, who could, whenever he shouldthink proper to exert himself, obtaindistinction either in literature or politics.For some time, however, hisconduct was so dissipated as to gainhim the frivolous distinction, whetherdesired or not, of being one of thegreatest rakes of his day. Yet evenat this period he is said to have dedicateddaily some portion of time to theacquisition of knowledge. He soughtthe society of Dryden, whom he befriendedIn his Declining years ; andprefixed a copy of verses to the translationof Virgil. Of his intercourse withDryden, the following anecdote wastold, by Pope, to Mr. Berenger, manyyears first equerry to George the Third :St. John happening to pay a morningvisit to Dryden, whom he always respected,found him in an unusual agitationof spirits, even to a trembling.On inquiring the cause, ' I have beenup all night,' replied the old bard ; ' mymusical friends made me promise towrite them an ode for their feast of St.Cecilia: I have been so struck with thesubject which occurred to me, that Icould not leave it till I had completedit; here it is finished at one sitting."Notwithstanding the unenviable reputationwhich St. John procured forrakishness, he evidently could have devotedbut a brief portion of his life tothe pursuit of mere pleasure ; for wefind that in 1700, at the age of twenty-two,he appeared in parliament asmember for Wotton Bassett, in Wiltshire,and soon after occupied an importantpost in the administration,'prior to his entering parliament, he hadformed an advantageous matrimonialalliance with the daughter of Sir HenryWinchescomb, of Bucklers, in Berkshire.It is said, that his friends hadbrought about this match in order toreclaim him from his extravagance andlicentiousness : and it would appear thattheir plan was eminently successful.In that great field of mental warfare,the house of commons, St. John joinedthe Tories, and more particularly thatparty which acknowledged Harley, afterwardsEarl of Oxford, for its leader,and by his talents and assiduity, hesoon became so considerable, that, in1704, he was appointed secretary atwar. He was consequently broughtinto frequent correspondence with thegreat Marlborough, then at the headof the British army in Flanders, whogained the splendid victories of Blenheimand Families, while St. Johnremained at the head of the war department.With the natural magnanimityof genius, Bolingbroke alwaysdisdained to join the cry of that illustriousleader's enemies; but on thecontrary, without denying the duke'sfoibles, he invariably spoke of his transcendantmerits with candour and admiration.It is related that, after Marlborough'sdeath, Bolingbroke was oneday talking warmly in his praise,when some person present observedupon the duke's tendency to avarice :True," said St. John, " the duke certainlyhad that failing; but he was sogreat a man that I had forgotten it."On Harley's removal from office, in1707, Bolingbroke resigned ; but he didnot enter the ranks of opposition. Inthe parliament of 1708, he had no seat ;but at its dissolution in 1710, consequenton the complete triumph of theTory party, Harley being appointedprime minister, St. John became secretaryof state for foreign affairs, anarduous post at all times, but doublyso at that important crisis. He bore theprincipal burthen of the complicatednegociations, which ended in the treatyof Utrecht; and frequently said, inafter life, that he never looked back tothis period without a mingled emotionof terror and elevation of mind. In theparliament then sitting, he representedthe county of Berks ; and at the closeof the session of 1712, was raised to thepeerage, under the title of Baron St.John and Viscount Bolingbroke. Thenew peer, however, considered himselfill-treated by Harley; having, it appears,had reason to expect that anearldom, as well as one of the six vacantribbons of the Garter, would have beenconferred upon him. " It would nothave been hard (he observes in a letterto a friend) to have forced the Earl ofOxford to use me better. In the Houseof Commons his credit was low, andmy reputation very high. You knowthe nature of that assembly : theyVISCOUNT BOLINGBROKE.grow, like hounds, fond of the manwho shows them game, and by whosehalloo their are used to be encouraged."I began, indeed," he adds, in anotherpart of the same letter, " in my heart,to renounce the friendship which tillthat time I had preserved inviolable forOxford. I was not awaie of all histreachery, nor of the base and littlemeans which he employed then, andcontinued to employ afterwards, to ruinme in the opinion of the queen, andeverywhere else. I saw, however, thathe had no friendship for any body ; andthat, with respect to me, instead ofhaving the ability to render that meritwhich I had endeavoured to acquire, anadditional strength to himself, it becamethe object of his jealousy, and areason for undermining me." On theother hand, it said that St. John hadconceived the design of supplantingHarley in his post of prime minister :the secret history of these transactionswill, it is probable, never be exactlyknown ; but it is certain that the differencesof these eminent statesmenbecame irreconcilable, and terminatedon Bolingbroke's side, in thoroughaversion to his political antagonist.On the accession of George theFirst, in 1714, the seals of office weretaken from Bolingbroke, and his paperssecured. It is even said that he wasmeanly obliged by the council ofregency, who acted in the king's namepreviously to his arrival from Hanover,to wait every morning with his bag ofpapers, among the servants in the passage,where persons had previouslybeen stationed to insult and deridehim. His behaviour, whether fromcalculation or from feeling, on thearrival of the king, betrayed no consciousnessof fear or guilt. He failedin no point of respect or duty, thoughstrongly suspected of having intriguedfor years to bring in the Pretender ; heassisted in settling the civil list; andbore his part as a peer of the realm inother public business. Upon the meetingof a new parliament, the expectedstorm burst on the heads of the ex-ministry.A committee of the commonswas appointed to inspect the documentsrelative to the peace of Utrecht, theresult of its labours was the impeachmentof both Oxford and Bolingbrokefor high treason. The latter, on thisoccasion, conducted himself with apparentindifference : he even appearedat the theatre, but after having bespokea play for a subsequent evening, he leftLondon, disguised as a French courier,and arrived safely at Calais, the mayorof which place received him with everydistinction in his power. He afterwardsproceeded to Paris, where hewas solicited to engage in the service ofthe Pretender : to whose cause, however,it is probable that, had not hisenemies in England appeared bent onhis destruction, Bolingbroke wouldnever have lent his aid; but findingthat he could expect no lenity at home,and hearing from his friends, that aformidable effort was to be made infavour of the Stuartss, he accepted theoffice of secretary of state to JamesEdward, and instantly commenced solicitingthe French court for the supportnecessary to effect a meditateddescent upon England.Bolingbroke soon repented of hisconnexion with the Pretender, bywhom he was accused of treachery,even at a time when he had recentlyexpatriated himself, principally, on accountof his alleged efforts to seat thatprince on the throne of England ; andon the return of James Edward fromScotland, he was dismissed from hispost. About this time he wrote hisReflections upon Exile; and, havingbecome a widower, married the relict ofthe Marquis de Villette, a niece ofMadame de Maintenon. With this lady,who brought him a large fortune, heappears to have lived upon much betterterms than he had with his first wife.In 1723, having procured a free pardonfrom the king, whose mistress,the Duchess of Kendal, it is stated, hehad bribed, by a present of 11,000,to procure it, he returned to England,and subsequently an act of parliamentwas passed, restoring to him his familyinheritance. On this occasion he thuswrote to his friend Swift: " Here I am,two-thirds restored, my person safe(unless I meet hereafter with hardertreatment than even that of Sir WalterRaleigh), and my estate, with all theother property I have acquired or mayacquire, secured to me. But the attainderis kept prudently in force, lestso corrupt a member should come againinto the house of lords, and his badTHE SENATE.leaven should sour that sweet untaintedmass." This measure of excludinghim from his seat in the upper house,deeply affected him ; he ascribed itwholly to the jealousy of Walpole, andthat minister afterwards found in hima powerful and indefatigable enemy.Dissatisfied, but wisely resolving toenjoy the happiness within his reach,Bolingbroke settled, for some time, inan elegant, though rustic, retirementat Hawley, near Uxbridge. His betterqualities, both of mind and heart, nowshone out in unclouded lustre. Hisletters to Swift from this place, insertedin Pope's collection, are written withexquisite ease and grace, and oftenexhibit that peculiar polish and. varietyof illustration which is only acquired bya liberal intercourse with the world.We see, (says Lord Orrery,) theywere not intended for the press; buthow valuable are the most carelessstrokes of such a pen !" Pope, whowas his frequent and delighted guest,says, in a letter to Dean Swift, " LordBolingbroke has now returned, totake me with all his other hereditaryrights." On a subsequent occasion, thepoet observes, " I now hold the penfor my Lord Bolingbroke, who is readingyour letter between two haycocks ;but his attention is somewhat divertedby casting his eyes to the clouds, notin admiration of what you say, but forfear of a shower. Upon his returnfrom the bath, all peccant humours arepurged out of him. As to the returnof his health and vigour, were youhere you might inquire of his haymakers; but as to his temperance, Ican answer that (for one whole day)we have had nothing for dinner butmutton broth, beans and bacon, and abarn-door fowl." Bolingbroke himself,about the same time, thus addressedthe dean : " I am in my farm, and hereI shoot strong and tenacious roots: Ihave caught hold of the earth, to usethe gardener's phrase ; and neither myenemies nor my friends will find it aneasy matter to transplant me again."It was not, however, to be expectedthat a mind so comprehensive, so active,and so long habituated to politicalexcitement as Bolingbroke's, shouldthoroughly forego its yearnings foractive employment and public distinction.Unable to recover his seat inthe house of lords, which would havegiven him some chance of sharing inthe government, he became an ardentanti-ministerial writer, particularly inThe Craftsman," a political paper, ofwhich his contributions form the chiefornament. In the height, however, ofthe contentions which then agitated thenation, he never entirely lost sight ofphilosophy and metaphysics, on whichsubjects he occasionally composed.His political exertions ceased in 1735,on a rupture with Pulteney and otheropponents of the ministry, whom heaccused of having been actuated byprivate views in their political conduct.He now again retired to France, resolvingto pass the remainder of hislife in complete privacy. " Plato,"he observes, " ceased to act for thecommonwealth when he ceased to persuade;and Solon laid down his armsbefore the public magazines when Pisistratusgrew too strong to be opposedany longer with hopes of success."Before Bolingbroke withdrew, however,he collected his energies to give aparting blow to Walpole, and dedicatedto him, in an admirable vein of sarcasm,his masterly Dissertation uponParties.While in his retreat near Fontainebleauhe wrote his well-known Letterson the Study and Use of. History ; andalso a letter to Lord Bathurst upon theTrue Use of Retirement and Study. Onthe death of his father, who had beencreated Viscount St. John during hisprevious residence in France, he returnedto England, and passed the remainderof his life at Battersea, wherehe wrote his Letters on the Spirit ofPatriotism, and the Idea of a PatriotKing, a noble treatise, and a worthyclose to his literary and political labours.He died on the 15th of November, 1751,aged seventy-nine, and was buried withhis ancestors in Battersea church.To his wife, whose death had precededhis own by several years, hisuniform kindness and attention, duringa long illness, set his private characterin the most amiable point ofview. As he was without issue, andhad survived all his brothers, his estateand titles descended to a nephew, towhom he left the bulk of his devise-ableproperty, excepting, however, hismanuscripts, which he bequeathed toEARL OF BATH.David Mallet; who afterwards publishedhis works in five volumes,quarto, including those essays on religion,in which Bolingbroke declaredhimself to be an opponent to revelation.A greater sensation was producedby the publication of these " infidelavowals," than, perhaps, they deserved;and they have long sunk into a comparativeoblivion, which neither theirfew admirers, or numerous opponents,expected would so soon have been theirdoom. Johnson expressed great indignationat the manner in which theseessays were published. On the nameof Bolingbroke being mentioned to him,he uttered some such exclamation asthis : " A scoundrel, who charged apop-gun against Christianity; and acoward, who left half-a-crown to abeggarly Scotchman to fire it off."His total absence of principle inthe pursuit of political power, his implicatedhatred to his opponents, and thewhole tenour of his theological writings,have deservedly injured his fame inevery respect : but, it is impossible, incandour, to deny him the possessionof exalted powers. The plan of Pope'scelebrated Essay on Man, was avowedlysupplied by him : his philosophical sentimentswere frequently just and profound; and the style of his prose was,at one period, masculine-elegant, andcorrect. As is the case with all thosewho have principally employed theirpens in political controversy, the greaterpart of his writings have lost their interest; but some of his productions are,and will, doubtless, for a long time continueto be, read with admiration, especiallyby those, who, while they properlyreject his doctrines as to religion, aresufficiently liberal to allow, that heevinced acuteness, and reasoned accuratelyon other topics.Bolingbroke," says Lord Orrery,"had early made himself master ofbooks and men ; but in his first careerof life, being immersed at once in businessand pleasure, he ran through avariety of scenes in a surprising andeccentric manner. When his passionswere subdued by years and disappointments,and when he improved hisrational faculties by more grave studiesand reflection, he shone out in his retirementwith a lustre peculiar to himself,though not seen by vulgar eyes.The gay statesman was changed intoa philosopher equal to any of the sagesof antiquity. The wisdom of Socrates,the dignity and ease of Pliny, and thewit of Horace appeared in all his writingsand conversation."His person appears to have beenhandsome ; his manners dignified andfascinating; his memory and apprehensionexcellent ; and his elocution, aswell as his composition, admirable."Whatever subject Bolingbroke speaksor writes upon," says Lord Chesterfield,he adorns with the most splendideloquence ; not a studied or labouredeloquence, but a flowing happiness ofdiction, which is become so habitual tohim, that even his most familiar conversationswould bear the press withoutthe least correction as to method orstyle."WILLIAM PULTENEY, EARL OF BATH.THIS remarkable English statesman,the Dagon of popular idolatry duringa considerable portion of his life, wasdescended from an ancient family inLeicestershire. Of his father but littleis known. His grandfather, Sir WilliamPulteney, represented the city of Westminsterin parliament, and highly distinguishedhimself by his manly and spiritedeloquence. The subject of our noticewas born in 1682, and was educatedat Westminster school, and Christchurch,Oxford ; where his talents wereso conspicuous, that he was appointedto deliver the congratulatory address toQueen Anne, when she visited thecollege. After quitting the university,he travelled over various parts ofEurope ; making, what was thentermed, the grand tour ; and returningto England a highly accomplishedman, he went into parliament for theTHE SENATE.borough of Peyton, through the interestof his friend, Mr. Guy, who ultimatelyleft him ,40,000, in money, and anestate worth 500 a year.In the house of commons, youngPulteney warmly advocated the hereditaryWhig principles of his family ; andduring a great part of Queen Anne'sreign, distinguished himself as a violentopponent of Tory politics. Hisfirst speeches were, however, remarkablymodest and unassuming ; it beinghis opinion, that young members oughtnot to press on public notice, with topmuch forwardness, but should wait untilthey had acquired experience, and habitsof business, before they attempted toattach much importance to their sentiments.It was not until the prosecutionof Sacheverel took place, that he calledhis full powers into action : on that occasion,he declaimed against the doctrinesof non-resistance, and passive obedience,with so much zeal and eloquence,that he soon grew high infavour among those who professedopinions similar to his own. To theTories he at length rendered himselfso obnoxious, that on their attainingpolitical ascendancy, in 1710, to evincetheir disgust, they meanly removed hisuncle from some inconsiderable office.He participated in the stormy debates ofthe last four years of the reign of QueenAnne; was admitted into all the secretsof the Whigs ; and engaged in theirboldest enterprises, to secure the successionof the house of Hanover. Liberal,and even profuse in expenditure,for the benefit of his party, Pulteneywas now generally regarded as a truepatriot, who had no other object at heartbut the good of the nation. During theprosecution of Walpole, for corruptionand high breach of trust, Pulteney defendedhim with zeal ; and, on his beingsent to the Tower, visited him there,as a martyr to the cause of liberty. Healso wrote various pamphlets in defenceof the Whigs, which procured him thereputation of being a singularly keenand elegant satirist.On the accession of George the First,he was appointed privy-counsellor andsecretary at war, in direct oppositionto the wish of Marlborough ; and sointimate was his connexion with Walpoleand Stanhope, the Whig leaders,that in allusion to the projected triplealliance between England, France, andHolland, they were called the threegrand allies. Shortly after, a schism occurredin the party, which led to theresignation of Walpole ; and Pulteneyretired from office with his friend.Differences, however, soon took placebetween these two celebrated statesmen,which terminated in great politicalhostility. Walpole first gave offenceto Pulteney, by negotiating a reconciliationbetween the king and the prince,without communicating on the subjectwith Pulteney, who obtained informationof the fact from a friend, to whomit had been imparted by Walpole ; andwhen the latter again went into office,he widened the breach, by offeringPulteney a peerage, instead of admittinghim to an important share in theadministration, to which Pulteney consideredhe had a most powerful claim.After two years had elapsed, he thoughtproper to solicit, and immediately obtained,the office of cofferer of the household;although he deemed that placefar below his just expectations. Forsome time he faintly supported theWalpole administration ; but discontentrankled at his heart; and, graduallyseparating himself from those withwhom he had been accustomed to act,he at length became their avowed andmost bitter antagonist.Walpole, conscious of his folly, inirritating so able an associate, causedit to be hinted to him, that ministerscontemplated raising him to the post ofsecretary of state. But Pulteney hadtaken his resolution, and smiled in contemptat the proposal. He delivered amost vehement speech against the liquidationof the king's debts, althoughstill in office as cofferer, (a post whichhe had the meanness to retain, untilformally dismissed ;) and adopted sucha systematic and determined course ofannoyance to the court party, thatQueen Caroline thought proper to offerhim a peerage, together with the sealsof secretary of state for foreign affairs ;but his animosity towards Walpole wasnot to be so appeased, and he declared,that nothing should ever induce himagain to take office with that minister.The most violent altercations nowpassed in the house of commons betweenthem ; their hatred seemed inproportion to their old intimacy, andEARL OF BATH.the most irritating personal allusions,accusations, and invectives, were mutuallyemployed. Walpole denouncedPulteney as a factious demagogue, whowould barely scruple at treason tosatisfy his enmity against the king'sgovernment ; and Pulteney, in an impetuoustorrent of splendid abuse, proclaimedWalpole a traitor to his country;insolent in the abandonment ofprinciple and public honesty; andgorged with the spoils of the people,whom his political profligacy hadruined.His next step was to unite with hisancient opponent, Lord Bolingbroke,whom he assisted in the compositionof the " Craftsman," a publication very .ably written, but which breathed themost furious spirit of party rancour. In1731, the two factions engaged in controversialvituperation, and made thenation their judge. Pulteney's pamphlets,on this occasion, were exceedinglypersonal and abusive. In one of themhe treated Lord Hervey with suchcontempt and ridicule, stigmatisinghim on account of his effeminate appearance,as a species of half man andhalf woman, that a duel ensued, inwhich Pulteney slightly wounded hisopponent. To gratify his intense animosityagainst Walpole, he basely violatedthe confidence of a former unreservedintimacy, by disclosing thesubstance of private conversations, andrepeating certain contemptuous expressions,which Walpole, in an unguardedmoment, had uttered, relative to Georgethe Second, when Prince of Wales.This unworthy conduct, and the circumstanceswhich led to the duel withLord Hervey, so highly incensed theking, that Pulteney was removed fromthe commission of the peace, and alsofrom his seat in the privy council,which, notwithstanding his hostility togovernment, he had hitherto retained.These and other marks of royal displeasuregreatly increased his popularity:he could not appear in public withoutexciting the acclamations of theadmiring multitudes ; his parliamentaryspeeches, printed on broad sheets, werecirculated all over England, and hisenemies burnt in effigy. The supportersof the administration quailedbeneath his vindictive eloquence ; andin 1741, Walpole, who is known tohave admitted that he feared Pulteney'stongue more than another man's sword,was driven to the necessity of resigning.The opposition party immediately wentinto power, but Pulteney, to the surpriseand indignation of the public, took noshare in the administration ; acceptingonly, as a reward for his services indriving the opponents of his friends outof office, his restoration to the privycouncil, and a call to the peerage, bythe title of Earl of Bath. This was adeath-blow to his popularity: the mostviolent invectives were uttered againsthim by his former admirers ; he wasdespised as the dupe of his more craftyassociates ; and after having been forsome time an object of greater publiccontempt than any political characterof his time, he gradually dwindled intomere insignificance.The earl was married early in life :he had one child, a son, whom he survived,and the title he had obtainedbecame extinct at his death, which tookplace on the 8th of June, 1764. Inprivate life, all unprejudiced writersconcur in describing him as havingbeen exceedingly amiable. Of his wit,the following amusing instance is recorded:When told of the determinationto turn out Pitt, and let Foxremain in office, Lord Bath said thescheme reminded him of the story ofthe lord chamberlain at the time of thegunpowder plot, who, on his return fromexamining the vaults under the parliamenthouse, reported that he had foundtwenty-five barrels of gunpowder, tenof-which he had removed, and theother fifteen he hoped would do noharm.Lord Bath was placed among theroyal and noble authors. " Hiswritings," says Horace Walpole, " willbe better known by his name, thanhis name by his writings, although hisprose had much effect, and his verseswere easy and graceful: both wereoccasional, and not dedicated to thelove of fame. Good humour and thespirit of society dictated his poetry ;ambition and acrimony his politicalwritings : the latter made Pope say,How many Martials were in Pult'ney lost !' "To this statement of the earl's meritsas an author, from the pen of an enemy,we have only to add, that althoughTHE SENATE.debased by much bitter abuse, histracts are certainly argumentative andeloquent.It cannot be denied that Pulteney 's oppositionto government appears to haveoriginated in a personal pique againstthe minister, for not having procuredhim an eminent place in the administration; nor that he was guilty ofmeanness, and descended to unpardonablevirulence in the heat of the politicalcontest which ensued : but it must beadmitted, on the other hand, that Walpole'sungrateful conduct, in a greatmeasure justified the indignation ofPulteney. Equal to any, and superiorto most, of his contemporaries as a parliamentaryspeaker, he appears to havewanted that skill for political intrigue,so successfully exerted by some of hisparty, by which his eloquence mighthave been made the means of his elevationto the highest offices in the state.Whether, on the fall of his adversary,he was shuffled out of his legitimateshare in office, by his associates, or,having achieved the victory for whichhe had long fought, he considered hisabandonment of the spoil, and his receivingonly an empty honour for hisexertions, as tending to evince his disinterestednessin the past struggle, andhis dignity at the moment of triumph,it is, perhaps, impossible to ascertain;but whatever may have been the causeof his accepting a peerage, which hehad on two previous occasions indignantlyrejected, and not taking officewhen he might have apparently commandedthe premiership, his conducton the occasion was visited with a severityof popular censure which itdoes not seem to have deserved. Pulsesdid not abandon his post in theheat of the conflict ; but retired onlywhen he had ousted the opponent party,and fixed his confederates in the seatof power.CHARLES FITZROY, DUKE OF GRAFTON.THIS nobleman, the grandson ofCharles the Second, by the Duchess ofCleveland, was born on the 25th ofOctober, 1683. He had scarcely attainedhis majority, when he was marriedto Henrietta, daughter of the Marquisof Worcester, by whom he had alarge family. He took his seat in thehouse of peers on coming of age, hisfather having died during his minority.He acted as high steward at the coronationof George the First: in August,1715, he was sworn of the privy council,and appointed one of the lords justicesof Ireland ; to the lord lieutenancy ofwhich, he was raised in June, 1720.He was repeatedly appointed a memberof the regency during the visits ofGeorge the First, and also during thoseof his successor to the continent ; andfor many years filled the office of lordchamberlain to the latter sovereign.He died on the 6th of May, 1757.In person he was tall, and in demeanourdignified. His talents werenot equal to his ambition, for he aspiredto an eminence in politics, which hehad not the ability to reach. He was,however, active, laborious, skilled inpublic business, possessed of good commonsense and a great knowledge ofthe world. As a speaker, he was hesitating,but humorous. He displayedextraordinary penetration in discoveringfoibles, and a singular capacity toridicule them. Like all wits, he hadmany enemies; the number of whom,perhaps, would have been greater, hadnot the duke, according to Walpole,contrived to pass for a fool. QueenCaroline hated him, because he constantlyrallied her for her apparentwant of affection: " G d!" said heto her, on one occasion, " I should liketo see the person your majesty couldlove." The queen was also displeasedwith him for courting and obtaining theadmiration of the Princess Amelia, withwhom he often hunted ; and who, onone occasion, after losing her attendants,accompanied the duke to a privatehouse in Windsor forest. Afterthe queen's death, he entertained hopes(which, however, proved altogetherEARL OF GRANVILLE.abortive) that, by means of his influenceover the princess, and her favourwith the king, he should rise to thezenith of political power. " Sole minister,"said he, to the Duke of Newcastle,at this period, " I am not capableof being ; first minister, by G d, Iwill be !"Alike careless of money, and heedlessof domestic misfortunes, (all his sonsdied during his lifetime,) he seems tohave passed through life almost withouta care, except that of preserving hisfavour at court. He looked upon himselfas one of royal blood, and thoughtthat it would have been undignified inhim to have felt or expressed sorrowfor any private calamity. Although,to the extent of his employment, hezealously served the reigning family,his heart appears to have been with hisroyal relatives," the Stuartss. Mr.Pelham having said, that he should, inall probability, retire from public life,as soon as the Jacobites were put down,the duke replied, " G d! I hope myfriend will see the rebellion twinkle agood while in the highlands yet!"JOHN CARTERET, EARL OF GRANVILLE.THIS nobleman, the son of George,Lord Carteret, was born on the 22ndof April, 1690. In his fifth year hesucceeded to the title of Lord Carteret,which had been conferred upon hisfather in early youth, as a testimony ofroyal gratitude for the loyalty of his ancestors.While at Westminster school,and afterwards at Christchurch, Oxford,he devoted himself with suchardour to the pursuit of literature, thathis acquirements in the various branchesof knowledge were equalled by few, andsurpassed by none of his noble contemporaries.Dean Swift humorously remarked,that he carried away fromOxford, with a singularity scarcely tobe justified, more Greek, Latin, andphilosophy, than properly became aperson of his rank ; indeed, much moreof each than most of those who wereforced to live by their learning wouldbe at the unnecessary pains to burthentheir heads with.On his first entry into political life,he gave an earnest of those brillianttalents which afterwards raised him tothe highest offices in the state, by thezealous eloquence with which he advocatedthe protestant succession. Hisdevotion to the house of Brunswicksoon attracted the notice and favour ofthe Hanoverian court ; and, on theaccession of George the First, he wasamong the first to experience theeffects of that monarch's esteem. Placesof honour and dignity were lavishedupon him, and his mother was createdCountess of Granville. Actuated, as hewas, by the powerful motives of interestand inclination, it is not surprisingthat we find his lordship lending theaid of his powerful talents to thepromotion of the measures of government.He took a very active part inthe debate for extending the durationof parliament from three to sevenyears; and, on a subsequent occasion,spoke eloquently in favour of the billfor punishing mutiny and desertion.In the session of 1718, he moved anaddress to the king, to congratulatehis majesty on the success of his navalforces, and to assure him that thehouse would support him in the pursuitof those prudent and necessary measureswhich he had taken to secure thecommerce and peace of his dominions,and the tranquillity of Europe.In 1719, the king, being desirous ofsecuring his territorial acquisitions onthe continent, and likewise of opposingsome check to the grasping ambition ofthe Czar of Russia, Peter the Great,concluded an offensive and defensivealliance with Sweden, and mediated atreaty between that country and Denmark,in the negociation of which theprofound diplomacy of Lord Carteretwas successfully employed. Shortlyafterwards, he was appointed one ofthe representatives of this country tothe congress of Camera.On his return to England, LordTHE SENATE.Carteret took an active share in thedebates in the house of lords, on thebest means of restoring the nationalcredit, which had received a severeshock by the bursting of the South Seabubble. He maintained that the estatesof those who had supported that iniquitousscheme should be confiscated,and applied to the relief of the unhappyvictims of their cupidity. During thediscussions on this subject, he was appointedambassador to the court ofVersailles ; but, while preparing to departon his mission, he was unexpectedlynominated, on the 4th ofMay, 1721, to the office of secretary ofstate, which had become vacant by thedeath of Craggs. He continued in officeduring a period of three years ; but, atlength, finding himself counteracted inall his views by the influence of Wai poleand Townshend, with whom the Pelhamhad united against him, he resignedon the 3rd of April, 1724, andwas, the same day, appointed lord lieutenantof Ireland. He declared, onthis occasion, that he felt himself muchhappier and easier as lord lieutenantthan as secretary of state, in whichoffice he had been exposed to constantmortification ; but that he felt no ill willtowards ministers, and should supporttheir measures. So convinced, however,was he of their instability, that,in the expectation of being recalled tothe cabinet, he delayed, for six months,his departure for Dublin.On assuming the vice-regal office, inOctober, 1724, he found Ireland in astate of general excitation and discontent,in consequence of a patent forthe exclusive coinage of copper halfpencehaving been granted to a personof the name of Wood. One of his firstacts was to issue a proclamation, offeringa reward of three thousand poundsfor the discovery of the writer of Drapier'sletters ; the language of whichtended materially to support the popularferment. Swift, who, as it afterwardsappeared, was the writer of the obnoxiousepistles, at this time frequentedthe castle; having, one day. expostulatedwith the lord lieutenant for issuing theproclamation, his lordship replied, withequal justice and elegance, in the wordsof Virgil,R dura, et regni novittu me tala countMoliri."Lord Carteret and the dean frequentlyconversed together on politicalsubjects. On one occasion, the latterhaving expatiated at great length onthe woes of the Irish, and the folly andmismanagement of the English in theadministration of Ireland, Lord Carteretanswered him with such mastery of argument,that the dean exclaimed, in aviolent passion : " What the vengeancebrought you among us ? Get you gone,get you gone! Pray God Almightysend us our boobies back again !" Onanother occasion, Swift having writtentwo lines on a window of the castle,expressive of his absolute independence,Lord Carteret gently rebuked hishaughtiness, by writing under themthe following couplet :My very [food dean, none ever come here,But who've something to hope or something toAlthough the necessary severity ofhis measures, during the early part ofhis vice-regal administration, procuredhim much ill-will, yet the vigorousand successful efforts which he madeto procure the revocation of Wood'spatent, and the general tenour of hissubsequent conduct, rendered him soPopular, that his departure from Ireful,after he had remained the usualperiod in office, was generally lamented.Shortly after the accession of Georgethe Second, in 1727, Lord Carteret wasagain constituted lord lieutenant of Ireland,and his wise and salutary measuresrendered his second vicegerency evenmore popular than the first. Despisingthe petty distinctions of party andfaction, and distributing his prefermentswith regard to the merits rather thanthe politics of individuals, he excitedthe discontent of some of the morebigotted Whigs, who accused him offavouring several persons who werereputed Tories. Dean Swift, on thisoccasion, published a very amusing andclever paper, entitled, A Vindicationof his Excellency John Lord Carteret,from the charge of favouring none butTories, High Churchmen, and Jacobites.In this production, the authordrew up a humorous debtor and creditoraccount of Lord Carteret's disposalof patronage, by which it wasevident that the Whigs had a very-heavybalance in their favour. It isEARL OF GRANVILLE.worthy of remark, that so convincedwas Lord Carteret of the propriety andpolicy of the measures recommendedby the dean, that some years afterwards,he observed in one of his letters,When people ask me how 1 governedIreland, I say that I pleased Dr.Swift."On his return to England, in 1731,he joined the ranks of opposition,and took every opportunity that occurredof thwarting the measures ofa ministry which he despised. Formany years the contest was obstinateand doubtful. At length, on the 13thof February, 1740-1, Lord Carteretbrought forward a motion in the houseof peers, for an address to the king,beseeching his majesty to remove SirRobert Wai pole from his councils andpresence for ever. The speech, bywhich he prefaced this important measure,is characterized by cotemporaryauthors as one of the most splendidbursts of eloquence which had everbeen heard within the walls of thehouse of peers. On this occasion, theminister triumphed by a small majority ;but in the following session, he wasobliged to resign, and Lord Carteretwas immediately appointed secretaryof state. In this station, he displayedthe same ardent love of power, and thesame impetuosity that had characterizedall his proceedings while in opposition.With an inconsistency toooften to be met with in public men onassuming office, he now supported thevery measures which he had formerlyopposed. By flattering the prejudicesand seconding the desires of the king,(whom, in 1743, he attended to thecontinent,) he soon obtained an extraordinaryascendancy over his majesty'smind, and a predominant influence inthe cabinet. But he soon becameso unpopular with the opposition, thatin a debate in the house of commons,on the opening of parliament, in December,1743, for an address to theking, Pitt, afterwards Earl of Chatham,is said to have stigmatised him as anexecrable, a sole minister, who hadrenounced the British nation, andseemed to have drunk of the potiondescribed in poetic fiction, which mademen forget their country."His power, although strongly supportedby the favour of the king, wasevidently on the wane. Deserted by hiscolleagues, by whom he was as muchenvied for his talent, as hated for hisuncourteous deportment, and assailedby a powerful coalition of the Pelham,(whom he had previously forsaken,) withwhat was called the patriotic party,Lord Carteret, who had by this timebecome, by the death of his mother,Earl of Granville, was at length obligedto yield. In the latter end of theyear 1744 he tendered his resignation,which the king most reluctantly accepted.In 1746, Lord Granville made an attemptto recover his influence ; and, onthe sudden resignation of the Pelhamparty, he succeeded in obtaining theseals of office, as secretary of state,which, however, he was compelled almostimmediately afterwards to resign.One of the numerous squibs publishedon this occasion, entitled, A Historyof the Long Administration, concludedwith the following ironical eulogium :And thus endeth the second and lastpart of this astonishing administration,which lasted forty-eight hours, threequarters, seven minutes, and elevenseconds ; which may truly be called themost honest of all administrations ; theminister, to the astonishment of all wisemen, never transacted one rash thing ;and what is more marvellous, left asmuch money in the tr y as hefound in it."In 1749, Lord Granville received theribbon of the order of the Garter ; andthe next year, he once more went intopower, being created president of thecouncil, an office which he retained tillhis death, notwithstanding all the intermediaterevolutions in the cabinet.Being congratulated, at this time, onhis reconciliation with his former opponents,he replied, " I am the king'spresident t I know nothing of the Pelham; I have nothing to do withthem." He, however, entered into officewith views much more moderate thanthose he had formerly entertained: theardour and impetuosity of his youthhad left him, and he rather endeavouredto moderate and direct the designs ofhis colleagues than to pursue any ofhis own. In 1756 he was again offeredthe seals of secretary of state, butdeclined accepting them.When Mr. Pitt, in 1761, proposed toTHE SENATE.the council an immediate declarationof war with Spain, and urged the measurewith his usual energy, threateninga resignation if his advice should notbe adopted, Lord Granville is said tohave addressed him, with the utmostasperity, in the following words : " Ifind that the gentleman is determinedto leave us ; nor can I say that I amsorry for it, for, otherwise, he wouldhave compelled us to leave him. Ifhe be resolved to assume the right ofadvising his majesty, and directing theoperations of the war, for what purposeare we called in council? When hetalks of being responsible to the people,he talks the language of the house ofcommons, and forgets that at this board,he is only responsible to the king.However, although he may possiblyhave convinced himself of his infallibility,it remains that we also shouldbe equally convinced, before we resignour understanding to his direction, orjoin with him in the measure he proposes."Shortly before his death, on thepreliminary articles of the treaty ofParis being brought to him, he appearedso languid that the bearer proposedto wait on him with them on asubsequent day; but the earl saidthat it could not prolong his life toneglect his duty ; and, after repeatinga passage out of Sarpedon's speech,which recalled to his memory the distinguishedpart he had taken in publicaffairs, he desired the treaty to be read,and gave it " the approbation of a dyingstatesman, as the most glorious warand most honourable peace this nationever saw." He retained his vivacityup to the day of his death which tookplace on the 2nd of January, 1763.As a minister Lord Granville hasbeen compared to Cardinal Richelieu :his projects were vast, rash, and seldomsufficiently matured to succeed. Hisconfidence in his own wisdom was sogreat, that he is said to have neverdoubted. Deeming ignorance the bestsecurity for obedience, he opposed theeducation of the poor in this country,and was adverse to the promulgationof Christianity in the colonies. He usedto say, " I wish to God that the Popemay never turn protestant, or theItalians cease to be papists, as then weshall sell them no fish." He seldomaffected to conceal the contempt he feltfor his opponents : being once askedwho wrote the king's speech, in a certainyear, while he was in power, hesaid, " Do you not see the blunt penof the old attorney ?" meaning LordChancellor Hardwicke. As a speaker,he was able and eloquent ; but his impetuosityfrequently betrayed him intothe expression of sheer bombast. Inone of his speeches, relative to an approachingcontest with Spain, he said,We are entering upon a war that willbe stained with the blood of kings, andwatered by the tears of queens!"He was neither implacable in resentment,nor sincere in friendship. Herarely performed his promises and professions,of which he is described ashaving been unsparingly liberal. Asatirical poem, published on the occasionof one his appointments, containsthe following lines :But first to Carteret fain you'd tingIndeed he's nearest to the king,Yet careless how you use him .Give him, I pray, iHe will but promptsAnd laugh if yclaboured laysif you praise,Lord Chief Justice Willes, being complimentedon his friend, Lord Granville's,return to office, replied, " He myfriend 1 He is nobody's friend. Whenhe was in power, I asked a place foran acquaintance. He replied, ' Whatis it to me who is a judge, or who is abishop ? It is my business to makekings and emperors, and to maintainthe balance of Europe.' "In person, Lord Granville is describedas having been handsome andengaging: his conversation was frequentlydiffuse, but always entertaining,and his demeanour eminently frankand conciliating. An elegant, andeven a profound scholar himself, hewas a munificent patron of learning.He encouraged and assisted Lye inthe publication of his edition of JuniusEtymological. Dr. Taylor and Dr.Bentley were both largely indebted tohim : the latter he urged to publish hisedition of Homer, and afforded himgreat assistance in procuring manuscriptsfor collation. On one occasion,old Lady Granville reproached herson, whose habits were very convivial,with having kept the country parson,LORD Welcome.(Bentley) who had been with him thenight before, until he was intoxicated.Lord Carteret stoutly denied the charge ;upon which, his mother replied, " Theclergyman could not have sung in soridiculous a manner, unless he had beenin liquor." It appears, however, thatwhat her ladyship mistook for singing,was Bentley's attempt to instruct andentertain his noble friend, by recitingTerence in the true cantilena of theancients.GEORGE Bulb DODINGTON, LORD Welcome.GEORGE Bulb, the son either of aDorsetshire apothecary, or an Irishfortune-hunter, it is not certain which,was born some time in the year 1691.He is supposed to have received hiseducation at Oxford; in 1715, he wentinto parliament as member for Winchelsea;and soon after, was despatchedas envoy extraordinary toSpain, where he signed the treaty ofMadrid.In 1720, he assumed the surname ofhis maternal uncle, George Dodington,who had bequeathed him a large estate,on which the fortunate devisee afterwardsexpended 140,000 in erectinga mansion. In 1721, he was appointedlord lieutenant of the county of Somerset; and, with a view to obtain a peerage,which was Dodington's darlingobject, he courted the favour, andwarmly supported the measures, ofWalpole. In 1724, he was made a lordof the treasury, and clerk of the tellsin Ireland ; but as the minister manifestedno inclination to recommend hiselevation to the house of lords, Dodingtonjoined the opposition ; withwhom, on the downfal of Walpole, hewent into office, as treasurer of the navy.His ruling passion being still ungratified,he soon seceded from the ministry,and devoted himself wholly tocultivate the favour of the heir apparent,to whom Dodington's riches anddespicable servility, rendered him veryacceptable. He lent the prince money ;gambled with him, and submitted towhat Walpole terms his childish horseplay; having once, according to thatauthor, actually suffered himself to berolled up in a blanket, and trundleddown stairs, for the amusement of hisroyal patron. A new place was createdto gratify him, that of treasurer ofthe chambers ; on his appointment towhich, he went to kiss hands at St.James's, but the king laughed in hisface. He was almost a constant andfamiliar attendant on the prince andprincess ; on one occasion he states, inhis Diary, that after having accompaniedtheir royal highnesses to see themanufactory of silk in Spitalfields, hewent with them and their suite toWormwood Forest, to visit a settlementof gypsies. " We returned," he continues," and went to Bettesworth, theconjurer, in hackney coaches; not findinghim, we went in search of the littleDutchman, but were disappointed; andconcluded the particularities of the day,by supping with Mrs. Cannon, theprincess's midwife."Eventually, he found, to use his ownphrase, that there was but little prospectof " doing any good " at Leicesterhouse. On the death of the prince,he laboured most assiduously, to connecthimself with the party in power,and at length, in 1755, he was restoredto his old post, the treasurership of thenavy ; which, however, he lost in thefollowing year. On the accession ofGeorge the Third, he obtained thefavour of Lord Bute, to whom he addressedthe same poetical epistle which,early in life, he had published in honourof Walpole. At length, in 1761, he wasadvanced to the peerage by the title ofLord Welcome, but died on the 28thof July in the following year.Dodington married a lady of thename of Began, but he would notacknowledge her as his wife, until afterthe death of a Mrs. Drawbridge, whomhe had bound himself to espouse,under a penalty of 10,000. He hadno children, a circumstance which appearsto have grieved him exceedingly,and the bulk of his fortune went to aMr. Windham, of Hammersmith.THE SENATE.The public career of Dodington wastruly contemptible. His abilities andlarge fortune might have procured himhonour and power ; but his time-servingpolicy, his paltry intrigues, and hisutter sacrifice of the different principleswhich he alternately professed, wheneverthey appeared to impede his advanceto that dignity which he so longdesired, and never deserved, broughton him the ridicule of his contemporaries,impeded his rise, and renderedhis name infamous with posterity.As a speaker he was able,though affected. His countenance washandsome, and his figure striking : buthis appearance was generally absurd,on account of the bad taste which hedisplayed in his dress. He wore anodd-looking wig, which has been doublyimmortalized; Churchill having describedit in verse, and Hogarth introducedit among his order of periwigs.Pope frequently amused the town atDodington's expence ; and Sir CharlesHanbury Williams satirized him in aballad, entitled " A Grub upon Bubb."On the other hand, he was complimentedby Thomson, Lyttleton, andYoung : the former dedicated the firstedition of " Summer" to him, and thetwo latter printed some of their productionsunder his patronage. He wasan author himself, having, in additionto his Diary, written some mediocrepolitical tracts and common-placepoems. His house was frequentlycrowded with literary men, and hewas on intimate terms with Fielding,Glover, Bentley, Voltaire, and Chesterfield.Dodington is said to have possessedmuch wit. One day, while walkinghome from the treasury with his colleagues,Bennington and Sundown, thelatter laughed heartily at a remarkmade by Dodington; and having soonafterwards quitted his brother commissioners,Bennington said, " You arevery ungrateful, Dodington : you callSundown stupid and slow ; and yet yousee how quickly he took what you said."Oh ! no," replied Dodington, " youmistake ; depend upon it, he was onlylaughing just now at something I saidlast week."Falling asleep in his chair after dinnerone day, in the company of SirRichard Temple and Lord Cobham,when he awoke, the latter reproachedhim for the breach of decorum which hehad committed. Dodington, however,declared that he had not been asleep,and to prove the truth of his assertion,repeated, with great accuracy, a storywhich Lord Cobham admitted he hadjust been telling Sir Richard. " Andyet," said Dodington, " I did not heara word of it : for, to tell the truth, Idid go to sleep, because I knew thatabout this time of day, you would tellthat particular story."His taste was outrageously bad, inhis houses and their embellishments,as well as his dress. His great bedchamberat Raspberry was hung withrich red velvet ; his crest, an eagle supportinga hunting horn, cut out of giltgather, was pasted on all the panels ;and the bedside carpet was a splendidpatchwork of his old embroideredpocket-flaps and cuffs. The turf infront of his mansion at Hammersmith,subsequently called Brandenburgwas ornamented with his crestin pebbles ; he had a fire-place decoratedwith mock icicles ; a purple andorange bed crowned by a dome of peacock'sfeathers; a marble door, supportedby columns of lapis lazuli, leadingto a gallery (filled with statues),which, although not on the groundfloor, was paved with marble ; and alarge obelisk, in the approach to hishouse, surmounted by an urn of bronze,containing the heart of his wife.THOMAS PELHAM, DUKE OF NEWCASTLE.THOMAS, the eldest son of ThomasLord Pelham, was born on the 21stof July, 1694. He succeeded to hisfather's honours in February, 1712;and subsequently came into possessionof the large estates of his uncle, JohnHolies, Duke of Newcastle. In October,1714, he was created Viscount Pelham,DUKE OF NEWCASTLE.and Earl of Clare ; and in August,1715, Duke of Newcastle. In April,1717, he married Henrietta, eldestdaughter of the earl of Godolphin, bywhom he had no children.Although his talents were below mediocrity,yet riches, rank, and parliamentaryinfluence, raised him to thezenith of political power. His ignorance,considering the high station heoccupied, was extraordinary. At onetime while he was in office, LordLigonier having suggested to him thepropriety of defending Annapolis, hereplied, " To be sure : Annapolisought to be protected. Oh! yes,Annapolis shall be defended ! Whereis Annapolis?"When young, he attracted muchnotice for the zeal, rather than theability, with which he supported theinterests of the house of Hanover ; inwhose favour, as it is stated, he retaineda mob to shout and halloo duringthe latter part of the reign of QueenAnne. With the assistance of hisbrother, he raised a troop of horse, toassist in putting down the Jacobites ;and was, in return for his loyalty,made a knight of the Garter, lordchamberlain, and secretary of state.Sir Robert Walpole expected to havefound him a quiet and imbecile coadjutor; but the duke soon began to intrigueagainst the prime minister, afterwhose resignation he gradually increasedin power, until, at length, withoutevincing any capacity for so exaltedan office, he obtained the premiership.By the aid of his more talented brother,Henry Pelham, and the vast influencewhich the distribution of his richeshad procured him, he contrived to retainhis post almost in spite of George theSecond, who was so irritated by hisinsolence, that he often grossly abused,but could not dismiss, him. The king,on one occasion, complained that hehad so many of the Newcastle footmenabout him, that he should soon beunable to make even a page of theback stairs. The duke acquired sucha victory over his majesty, in 1745,that the monarch, for a considerableperiod, did not dare to hazard anotherstruggle for his prerogative. Duringthe rebellion, attempts were made, bythe king and some of the opposition,to form a new ministry ; but, beforethe plan was matured, the Pelham,having received information of theproceeding, threw his majesty into afrightful dilemma, by suddenly resigningtheir offices. The king, after avain attempt to extricate himself fromthe difficulties of his situation, wascompelled, within a few days, to invitethe deserters to resume their posts.The success of their stratagem securedthe whole of the executive power tothe Newcastle party ; until, eventually,its gigantic influence found so formidablea rival in the genius of Pitt, thatthe duke was compelled to admit him,first to a share in the government, andfinally to the chief direction of publicaffairs. After having dwindled to amere cipher compared with his greatcoadjutor, the duke, at length, retiredfrom office in disgust. He died inJuly, 1776.The duke's person, according toHorace Walpole, was not naturally despicable,but his gross incapacity madeit ridiculous. He affected an importanceof manner ; but was, in fact,hurried and insignificant He had astrong inclination for business, but wasill adapted to execute it. The Earlof Wilmington said of him, " He loseshalf an hour every morning, and runsafter it all the rest of the day withoutbeing able to overtake it." As anorator he was verbose, but not veryintelligible. Although feared by allparties, there were few who did notdespise and laugh at him. He wasextravagant but not generous ; prodigalof professions, but slow to executethe long catalogue of his promises ; servileto obtain power, and arrogant inits exercise. He had some skill forintrigue, although his plans were generallyimpolitic, and it is extraordinarythat they were so often successful, forhe had not even intellect enough tokeep them secret. He made some pretensionsto candour, without attemptingto support them. His great peculiarityconsisted in creating enemies forthose whom he had previously succeededin making his friends. Sir RobertWalpole used to say of him, " Hisname is Perfidy."He spent immense sums of money,and owed as much as he had dissipated.He employed, and liberally paid, severalphysicians and apothecaries, without,THE SENATE.apparently, ever having had much needof them. His gold plate appears tohave been almost as dear to him ashis health. He usually kept it inpawn, except when he wished to displayit on great occasions. He ventured totake it with him to Hanover, in 1752 ;and when he returned, he had itguarded by a party of dragoons, fromthe place in Yorkshire where it waslanded, the whole way to London. Hewas so timid, that he would never sleepin a room alone ; and when he had determinedon accompanying the king tohis electorate, he refused to sail in anyvessel except a yacht in which LordCardigan had previously weathered aterrible storm.PHILIP DORMER STANHOPE, EARL OF CHESTERFIELD.1 HIS celebrated nobleman, of whomDr. Johnson once remarked, " that hewas a wit among lords, but a lordamong wits," was the eldest son ofPhilip, third Earl of Chesterfield, byLady Elizabeth Savile, daughter of theMarquis of Halifax. He was born inLondon, on the 22nd of September,1694 ; and prosecuted his studies, underprivate tutors, until the eighteenth yearof his age, when he was sent to Trinitycollege, Cambridge ; where, althoughhe is said to have laboured diligentlyfor the acquirement of knowledge, itdoes not appear that he obtained anyscholastic honours. Prior to attaininghis majority, he quitted the university,and made the tour of Europe, withouta governor. While abroad he acquireda fondness for gaming, which clung tohim during the remainder of his life ;but although his conduct in general, atthis period, was exceedingly dissolute,he continued to cultivate his talents,and appears to have been resolved onattaining a high degree of celebrity asan orator and a statesman.In 1715, he became a gentleman ofthe bedchamber to the Prince of Wales ;and about the same time, took his seatin the house of commons as memberfor St. Germains, in Cornwall. In oneof his letters to his son, he states, thatfrom the day of his election, to thaton which he delivered his maidenspeech, which was a month afterwards,he thought and dreamed of nothing butspeaking. His first parliamentary effort,was an oration in support of the proposedimpeachment of those who hadbeen concerned in the treaty of Utrecht.Shortly afterwards he discontinued hisattendance in parliament, and passedseveral months at Paris, in consequenceof some notice having been taken of hisillegal conduct in taking his seat whileyet a minor ; for he was still under age.He returned to his senatorial dutiessome time in the year 1716, and warmlysupported the septennial bill. On therupture taking place between Georgethe First and the heir-apparent, hejoined the opposition party, headed bythe latter; and rendered himself particularlyoffensive, for a considerableperiod, to the king and his administration.In 1723, he was, however, madecaptain of the yeomen of the guards,but received his dismissal in 1725.In the following year, he succeeded tothe titles of his father.Soon after the accession of Georgethe Second, he was sent out as ambassadorto the Hague, where he displayedconsiderable diplomatic talent; on hisreturn to England, in 1730, he wasmade a knight of the Garter, and highsteward of his majesty's household.He subsequently repaired again to theHague, and participated in concludingan important treaty between the courtsof London and Vienna, and the StatesGeneral. At the latter end of 1732, hequitted the party of Sir Robert Walpole,whose excise bill he opposed withgreat vehemence. His dismissal fromoffice immediately followed, and theking treated him with such markedcoolness, that he ceased to attend atcourt. From this time, until the year1744, he was constantly in opposition,not only to Walpole, but to whateverparty happened to be in office : his animositybeing, it seems, directed notagainst men, or their measures, so muchas against the government itself, byEARL OF CHESTERFIELD.whomsoever it happened to be conducted.During this period, he deliveredsome of his best speeches ; noneof which obtained more admiration thanthose in which he opposed the bill forsubjecting dramatic productions to theauthority of the lord chamberlain.On the union of parties takingplace in 1744, he connected himselfwith the administration ; and, in thefollowing year, obtained his old officeof ambassador to the Hague ; whencehe proceeded to Ireland, of which,while in Holland, he had been appointedlord-lieutenant. He had thegood fortune, although he occupied thisimportant station at a very criticalperiod, to acquire the good will of allparties, by his dignity, prudence, andhostility to any kind of persecution.While in Ireland, he is foolishly said tohave incurred the suspicion ot being aJacobite, by having indulged in thefollowing joke. During the height ofthe insurrection in favour of the Pretender,a zealous bishop came to himone morning, before he was out of bed,and told him he feared the Irish Jacobiteswere about to rise ; " I fancy theyare," replied the lord-lieutenant, coollylooking at his watch, "it is nineo'clock, I perceive."On his return to England, in 1746,he was restored to the king's favour,and made chief secretary of state. In1748, partly on account of his declininghealth, but chiefly because his opinionsin favour of a peace had been overruledin the cabinet, he retired fromoffice, and took no part in any futureadministration. Nor did he afterwards,except in a few rare instances, beingafflicted with deafness, join in the parliamentarydebates. In 1751, however,he delivered a speech in favour of theproposed alteration of the style, whichprocured him considerable applause.On this occasion he stated, that everyonecomplimented him, and said, thathe had made the whole matter veryclear to them ; " when, God knows,"continued he, "I had not even attemptedit. I could as soon have talkedCeltic or Slavonic to them, as astronomy,and they would have understoodme full as well. Lord Macclesfield, whois one of the greatest mathematiciansand astronomers in Europe, spoke afterwards,with infinite knowledge, and allthe clearness that so intricate a matterwould admit of; but as his words, hisperiods, and his utterance, were notnear so good as mine, the preferencewas most unanimously, though mostunjustly, given to me."Having no children by his wife,Messina de Schulemberg, Countessof Walsingham, (natural daughter ofGeorge the First, by the Duchess ofKendal,) to whom he was married inSeptember, 1733, a natural child, bysome Dutch beauty, had, from its infancy,been an object of the earl's mostanxious solicitude. So great was histenderness towards the boy, that whenthe latter was only ten years old,Chesterfield wrote him long letters,almost daily, and waited for answersto each of them with considerableanxiety. In November, 1768, he lostthis beloved being, whose educationand advancement he had, during anumber of years, most zealously andaffectionately forwarded. His sorrowwas greatly aggravated on this occasion,by discovering that his son had left awife and two children, having long beensecretly married. He assisted the latter ;and, it appears, purchased from theformer all his letters to his son, copiesof which were, however, retained by thewidow, who published them in twoquarto volumes, immediately after theearl's decease, which took place on the24th of March, 1773.His health and spirits appear to havebeen seriously affected by the loss ofhis son ; after whose death, the earl,in one of his letters, described himselfas being totally unconnected with theworld ; detached from life, bearing theburden of it with patience, from instinctrather than reason; and, from thatprinciple alone, taking all proper methodsto preserve it. For some timebefore his decease, he was confined tohis bed, by extreme weakness ; he still,however, continued to receive visitors.On the morning of his death, his valethaving announced the arrival of avisitor, the polite earl feebly said,Give him a chair :" and sinking onhis pillow, instantly expired.His conversational wit was muchapplauded by his contemporaries. Walpolesays of him, " Chesterfield's entranceinto the world was announcedby his bon mots; and his closing lipsTHE SENATE.dropped repartees, that sparkled withhis juvenile fire."One night, on being asked, in theHaymarket theatre, if he had been tothe other house, in Lincoln's-innFields, which, although preferred bytheir majesties, was not so fashionablyattended as its rival, Chesterfield repliedin the affirmative ; " but," addedhe, "there was nobody there but theking and queen ; and as I thought theymight be talking about business, I cameaway."His style as a writer was easy, pure,and brilliant; Pope once borrowed hisdiamond ring, and wrote the followingextemporaneous couplet, in complimentto his literary abilities, on thewindow of an inn :Accept a miracle instead of wit,See two dull lines, with Stanhope '< pencil writ.His collected works occupy severalquarto volumes; but they have lostmuch of their interest, in consequenceof the subjects on which he wrote beingfor the most part of a temporary nature.He was the author of some elegantverses, in Dudley's collection ;and many poems published during hislife, were falsely, but, as it has beeninsinuated, by his connivance, attributedto his pen. He corresponded constantlywith Algarotti, Montesquieu and Voltaire; and most of the literary men inthis country accorded him the reputationof being the Maecenas of his age.Numerous books were dedicated tohim ; and he was eulogised as beingthe all-accomplished arbiter of taste,both in literature and the drama. Butdoubts may be reasonably entertainedif his own pretensions, or even a titheof the applause conferred on him byhis literary adherents, were warrantedby facts. At one period he treatedJohnson with contempt ; but subsequently,when the dictionary was onthe eve of publication, in a spirit oftrue meanness, he courted the lexicographer'sfavour, in hopes of having hisname immortalized, in a dedication toso important a work. Johnson, however,rejected his advances, in a letterremarkable for its stern sarcasm anddignified rebuke.His biographer, Dr. May, describeshim as having been a nobleman unequalled,in his time, for variety oftalents, brilliancy of wit, politeness,and elegance of conversation ; at oncea man of pleasure and business ; yetnever suffering the former to encroachupon the latter ; an able statesman ; afirst rate orator ; in public life upright,conscientious and steady : in private,friendly and affectionate ; in both, pleasant,amiable and conciliating.'" Lord Chesterfield's eloquence,"says the same author, " though thefruit of study and imitation, was, in agreat measure, his own. Equal to mostof his contemporaries in elegance andperspicuity, perhaps surpassed bysome in extensiveness and strength,he could have no competitors in choiceof imagery, taste, urbanity, and gracefulirony. This turn might have originallyarisen from the delicacy of hisframe; which, as on the one hand, itdeprived him of the power of workingforcibly upon the passions of his hearers,enabled him, on the other, to affect theirfiner sensations, by nice touches ofraillery and humour. His strokes,however poignant, were always underthe control of decency and good sense.He reasoned best when he appearedmost witty ; and while he gained theaffections of his hearers, he turned thelaugh on his opposers, and often forcedthem to join in it."Although evidently endowed withgreat talents, his letters to his son provehim to have been a man of despicableprinciples. No attack of an enemycould have degraded him so much asthe publication of these epistles, which,as Johnson says, inculcate the moralsof a strumpet with the manners of adancing-master.HENRY PELHAM.HENRY, son of Thomas, Lord Pelham,was born in 1695. His boyhood andyouth appear to have been passed atWestminster-school, and at Trinity-college,Cambridge, where his classicaland mathematical attainments are saidto have procured him considerable reputation.LORD HOLLAND.He went into parliament at an earlyage, as member for one of the boroughsin the interest of his brother, the Dukeof Newcastle, and soon obtained notice,as much for his attention to business,and promising parts, as on account ofhis influential connexions. He sharedthe political eminence of his brother,whom his talents partly contributedto raise, and materially tended to support.It is probable that the resignation,during the rebellion in 1745, of allthe persons in office, from the premierdown to the youngest clerk in eachdepartment of the administration, inorder to distress the king, originatedwith Pelham ; who, however, incurrednone of the odium attached to themeasure; but preserved a high characterfor uprightness of intention, aswell with the king as the people. Sinceritywas a virtue that seems to havebeen very generally, although, it is suspected,erroneously attributed to him.When the Duke of Cumberland wastold that the brothers had both wept atthe crisis of a dangerous illness, fromwhich he had just recovered, his royalhighness said, that the Duke of Newcastlecried because he had not calledin the morning ; but Pelham was sucha fellow, that it was probable he wasin earnest.It has been said of him, that he contrivedto obtain his full share of thebenefit, but to escape all the obloquyof his brother's proceedings, which,perhaps, were in general projected byhimself. He affected to condemn theduke's duplicity, but did not fail to takeadvantage of its consequences. He indulgedhis resentment, when the gratificationof it was not prejudicial to hisinterest ; and he had sufficient skill andhypocrisy to persuade the victims of hisindignation, that their disgrace was to beattributed to the fickleness or jealousyof his brother. He had the good fortuneto be pitied rather than censuredfor a connexion to which he principallyowed his eminence. His attachmentswere, for the most part, mercenary ;moderation was his motto ; and hethought, or affected to think, that itwas sound policy for the nation seldomto gain, so that her enemies might notbe offended. Want of confidence wasone of his ruling foibles. Despairing ofsuccess, he was often defeated, on occasions,when, with an ordinary degreeof exertion, he might have been triumphant.He was neither clear norfluent, as a speaker, except when heatedby opposition. " He must lose his temper,"says Horace Walpole, " before hecould exert his reason."Sir Charles Hanbury Williams, in anapostrophe to the Goddess of Prudence,thus draws the character of Pelham :See Pelham ever kneeling at your shrine.By you at first by slow degrees he rose,To you the zenith of his power he owes ;Yon taught him in your middle course to steer,Impartial, moderate, candid to appear ;Fearful of enmity, to friendship cold,Cautiously frank, and timorously bold ;And so observant never to offendA foe, he quite forgets to fix a friend.Long versed in politics, but poor in parts,The courtier's tricks, but not the statesman's arts;His smile obedient to his purpose still,Some dirty compromise bis utmost skill ;In vain th' exchequer robes about him flow,By his wife, Lady Catherine Manners,eldest daughter to the secondDuke of Rutland, with whom he livedon very affectionate terms, Pelham hadsix children. His death took place onthe 6th of March, 1764.HENRY FOX, LORD HOLLAND.HENRY, the son of Sir Stephen Fox,by his second wife, whom he marriedafter he had attained his eightieth year,was born some time in 1705. Early inlife he became a reckless gamester, andsoon dissipated his paternal inheritance :family occurrences, however, restoredhim to independence ; but he was stillprofuse, and but for the official emolumentswhich he eventually obtained, hewould, in all probability have died poor.In 1735, he obtained a seat in parliament,as member for Tendon, inWiltshire, and his abilities soon procuredTHE S Senate.him public employment In 1737, hewas appointed surveyor-general to theboard of works ; in 1743, one of thecommissioners of the treasury ; and in1740, secretary at war. He was honouredfor a considerable time with theconfidence of the king ; but, at length,his great political rival, Pitt, after amost vehement struggle, drove himfrom office. Fox resigned his secretaryshipin 1756, but remained in oppositiononly until the following year, whenministers thought proper to appointhim paymaster of the forces. While inthis lucrative post he was boldly accusedof peculating enormously : in an addressfrom the city of London, he wastermed " the public defaulter of unaccountedmillions;" and, although thecharge conveyed by the citizens' phrasewas preposterous, it is quite clear thatFox rendered the perquisites of hisoffice enormous, by means which werenot always strictly honourable. Havingmade a princely fortune, he amusedhimself, in the decline of life, by building,at a vast expense, a fantastic villaat Kingsgate, in the isle of Thanet. Hewas raised to the peerage by the titleof Baron Holland, of Foley, in 1763,(his wife had previously been created abaroness,) and died at Holland-house,Kensington, on the 1st of July, 1774.By his wife, Lady Georgian CarolinaLenox, eldest daughter of the Dukeof Richmond, he had three sons : Stephen,who succeeded to the peerage;Charles James, the celebrated orator;and Henry Edward, who became ageneral. He was devotedly attached tohis wife, and even criminally indulgentto his children: never thwarting themin their juvenile follies, encouragingthem to act and speak among men asthough they were men themselves, andsuffering them to dissipate considerablesums of money in pursuits that werehighly reprehensible. During a visitto Spa, he is said to have allowedCharles James, then only fourteen yearsof age, to spend, or at least, risk, fiveguineas per night in games of hazard !He was urbane in manners, and thoughprofuse, perfectly unostentatious.On his first appearance in parliament,prejudices were raised against him asaspeaker, on account of what Walpoleaptly terms, his barrenness of expression; but he rapidly improved in elocution,although, to the last, he wasoccasionally hesitating, and never florid.His speeches abounded in good sense,and were masterpieces of close reasoning.Pitt, as he admitted, was a betterorator, but he consoled himself with believingthat he excelled his rival in judgment.He was, unquestionably, a man ofextraordinary talent ; but, apparently, oflittle patriotism. His reckless profusionrendered the attainment of place superlativelydesirable to him, on account ofits perquisites rather than its power.He was very amiable, without being virtuous;indulgent, not upon principle,but to gratify his feelings ; and generousfrom impulse rather than conviction.Chesterfield says that he had no fixedprinciples, either of religion or morals.WILLIAM PITT, EARL OF CHATHAM.William, the eldest Son of RobertPitt, of Boconnock, in the county ofCornwall, was born on the 15th ofNovember, 1708, in the parish of St.James, Westminster. At an early agehe was placed on the foundation atEton, and in January, 1726, enteredhimself as a gentleman-commoner atTrinity college, Cambridge ; where hedisplayed much talent, and was particularlyapplauded for his skill in poeticalcomposition. The tendency of hisconstitution to attacks of the gout,which was hereditary in his family,compelled him to quit the universitywithout obtaining a degree; and subsequentlyto abandon the army, inwhich, for some time after his secessionfrom college, he served as a cornet ofdragoons. He then made the tour ofFrance and part of Italy; and by employingevery leisure moment whileabroad, in the cultivation of his mind,acquired, as Chesterfield states, " agreat fund of premature and usefulknowledge."EARL OF CHATHAM.In 1735, he went into parliament asmember for Old Sarum, and attachedhimself to the party then headed bythe Prince of Wales. His exaltedtalents, his lofty spirit, and commandingeloquence, soon rendered him singularlyconspicuous ; and his oppositionto the ministry, in a short time, becameso annoying, that Sir Robert Walpolemeanly deprived him of his commission.Horatio Walpole also tauntedhim bitterly on account of his youth,although he was then thirty-two, andsneeringly observed, that the discoveryof truth was little promoted by pompousdiction and theatrical emotion. " Iwill not attempt," replied Pitt, " todetermine whether youth can justly beimputed to any man as a reproach ; butI will affirm, that the wretch who, afterhaving seen the consequences of repeatederrors, continues still to blunder,and whose age has only added obstinacyto stupidity, is surely the objectof either abhorrence or contempt, anddeserves not that his grey head shouldsecure him from insults. Much moreis he to be abhorred, who, as he has advancedin age, has seceded from virtue,and becomes more wicked with lesstemptation ; who prostitutes himselffor money which he cannot enjoy, andspends the remains of his life in theruin of his country."Pitt gradually obtained the reputationof being one of the most vigilantand powerful opposers in the house, toimpolitic measures or unconstitutionalinnovations. In 1744, the DowagerDuchess of Marlborough, by a codicilto her will, left him 10,000 expresslyfor having defended the laws of hiscountry, and endeavoured to save itfrom ruin." In the following year, theDuke of Newcastle felt desirous of increasingthe strength of administration,by procuring for Pitt the post of secretaryat war ; but was thwarted in hiswishes by the king, who hated Pittfor having opposed and ridiculed hispredilection towards the electorate.Shortly afterwards the duke and hisfriends resigned, but they were speedilyrecalled to office ; and in 1746, Pitt wasappointed, in the first place, joint vicetreasurer of Ireland, and afterwardsobtained the post of treasurer and paymasterof the army, with a seat in theprivy council. He was, however, stillobnoxious to the monarch, who, onPitt's attending to kiss hands on hisappointment, is said to have turnedaside and shed tears.In 1754, he formed a connexion withthe Grenville party, through his marriagewith Hester, the daughter ofRichard Grenville, of Wotton, in Buckinghamshire.His avowed disapprobationof the treaties of alliance withRussia and Hesse-cassel, in defence ofHanover, procured his dismissal fromoffice in the following year, and he oncemore appeared in the ranks of opposition.His popularity, however, soonmade it prudent to invite him back tooffice, and in 1756, he achieved a politicalvictory over his great rival, Fox,afterwards Lord Holland, and wasconstituted secretary of state for thesouthern department. His hostility tothe war in Germany, or rather, perhaps,his objections to the command of theBritish troops on the continent beingentrusted to the Duke of Cumberland,brought on him a renewal of the king'sdispleasure ; and in April, 1757, heagain received his dismissal ; but soearly as the month of June following,the popular clamour in favour of Pitt,compelled the reluctant monarch, notonly to recal, but also to entrust himwith the supreme direction of publicaffairs. He now, in fact, became premierof that celebrated war administrationwhich raised this country toa proud pre-eminence over the othernations of Europe. Shortly after hisaccession to power, he gave a strikingproof of his high and honourable feelings.The Duke of Cumberland, withwhom he had long been at variance,having entered into an unpopular conventionwith the French troops in Germany,the king protested that he hadgiven his son no orders to do so. " Butfull powers," replied Pitt, firmly; "veryfull powers, sir."The vigour of the new administrationsoon produced an extraordinary effect.The spirit, activity, and resolution ofPitt, wrought miracles in the governmentoffices. To those who told himthat his orders could not be executedwithin the time required, he peremptorilyreplied, " It must be done;" andalacrity ceased to be considered impossible.To foreign diplomatists heassumed a tone of determined energy,THE SENATE.and avoided entering into any speciousand protracted negotiations, by boldlystating how he meant to act, andbidding his opponents, in so manywords, to do as they pleased. He infusednew life and vigour into the armyand navy ; invariably providing commanderswith the best means in hispower to carry their instructions intoeffect. He once asked an officer whohad been appointed to conduct a certainimportant expedition, how many menhe should require : " Ten thousand,"was the reply. " You shall havetwelve," said the minister, " and thenit will be your own fault if you do notsucceed." Under his auspices, thewhole fortune of the war was changed :England triumphed in every quarter ofthe globe ; the boldest attempts weremade by her sea and land forces ; andalmost every enterprize they undertookwas fortunate. In America theFrench lost Quebec; in Africa theirchief settlements fell; in the EastIndies their power was abridged ; inEurope their armies suffered defeat;while their navy was nearly annihilated,and their commerce almost reducedto ruin.On the accession of George theThird, Pitt, who felt strongly impressedwith the policy of declaring war againstSpain, was thwarted in his wishes bythe influence of Lord Bute; and disdainingto be nominally at the head ofa cabinet which he could not direct, heresigned his offices in October, 1761,and accepted a pension of 3000 ayear for the lives of himself, his son,and his wife, who was created Baronessof Chatham. He had written toa female relation, some years before,severely reproaching her for the " despicablemeanness" of which she hadbeen guilty, in having accepted an annuityout of the public purse ; the lady,on the present occasion, it is said, hadher revenge, by sending him a copyof his own letter.In 1764, he greatly distinguishedhimself by his opposition to generalwarrants, which, with all his accustomedenergy and eloquence, he stigmatizedas being atrociously illegal. A searchfor papers, or a seizure of the person,without some specific charge, was, hecontended, repugnant to every principleof true liberty. " By the Britishconstitution," said he, " every man'shouse is his castle ! Not that it is surroundedby walls and battlements ; itmay be a straw-built shed ; every windof heaven may whistle round it ; all theelements of nature may enter it ; butthe king cannot ; the king dare not !"His patriotism had already been rewardedwith a considerable legacy : itnow gained him a very valuable estate.Sir William Present having, about thistime, disinherited his own relatives, andbequeathed the bulk of his extensiveproperty to Pitt; who, unlike Pliny,under similar circumstances, did notthink proper to relinquish his legalrights in favour of the natural heirs.At the latter end of 1766, he tookoffice again as lord privy seal ; andlost his enviable title of The GreatCommoner, with some portion of hisdeserved popularity, by accepting apeerage; having been called to thehouse of lords, as Viscount Pitt, of BurtonPresent, and Earl of Chatham.His views being but feebly supportedin the cabinet, he resigned his place inNovember, 1768, and never took officeagain. But although an old man, anda martyr to the gout, few debates ofimportance occurred in which he didnot still render himself conspicuous. Heattacked Lord Mansfield's doctrine oflibel with great power, and animadvertedseverely on the proceedings ofthe lower house, with regard to theMiddlesex election. He had invariablyopposed, with the whole force of hiseloquence, the measures which led tothe American war ; and long after hisretirement from office, had exertedhimself most zealously to bring about areconciliation between the mother countryand her colonies. But when theDuke of Portland, in 1778, moved anaddress to the crown, on the necessityof acknowledging the independence ofAmerica, Lord Chatham, although hehad but just left a sick bed. opposedthe motion with all the ardent eloquenceof his younger days. " Mylords," said he, " I lament that myinfirmities have so long prevented myattendance here, at so awful a crisis.I have made an effort almost beyondmy strength, to come down to thehouse on this day, (and, perhaps, itwill be the last time I shall ever be,able to enter its calls,) to express myEARL OF CHATHAM.indignation at an idea which has goneforth of yielding up America. Mylords, I rejoice, that the grave hasnot yet closed upon me, that I am stillalive to lift up my voice against thedismemberment of this ancient andmost noble monarchy. Pressed down,as I am, by the hand of infirmity, Iam little able to assist my country inthis most perilous conjuncture; but,my lords, while I have sense and memory,I will never consent to deprivethe royal offspring of the house ofBrunswick of their fairest inheritance.Where is the man that will dare toadvise such a measure ? My lords, hismajesty succeeded to an empire greatin extent, as it was unsullied in reputation: shall we tarnish the lustre ofthis nation, by an ignominious surrenderof its rights and best possessions? Shall this great kingdom, whichhas survived, whole and entire, theDanish depredations, the Scottish inroads,and the Norman conquest, thathas stood the threatened invasion ofthe Spanish armada, now fall prostratebefore the house of Bourbon ?Surely, my lords, this nation is nolonger what it was ! Shall a people,that, seventeen years ago, was the terrorof the world, now stoop so low as to tellits ancient, inveterate enemy, ' take allwe have, only give us peace'? It isimpossible ! I wage war with no manorset of men I wish for none of theiremployments nor would I co-operatewith those who still persist in unrestrictederror; or who, instead of actingon a firm, decisive line of conduct, haltbetween two opinions, where there isno middle path. In God's name, if itbe absolutely necessary to declare eitherfor peace or war, and the former cannotbe preserved with honour, why isnot the latter commenced without hesitation? I am not, I confess, well-informedof the resources of this kingdom,but I trust it has still sufficient tomaintain its just rights, though I knowthem not. But, my lords, any state isbetter than despair. Let us, at least,make one effort ; and, if we must fall,let us fall like men !"The Duke of Richmond having repliedto this speech, Lord Chathamattempted to rise again, but fainted,and fell into the arms of those whowere near him. The house instantlyadjourned, and the earl was conveyedhome in a state of exhaustion, fromwhich he never recovered. His deathtook place at Hayes, early in the followingmonth, namely, on the llth ofMay, 1778. The house of commonsvoted the departed patriot, who hadthus died gloriously at his post, a publicfuneral, and a monument in WestminsterAbbey, at the national expense.An income of ,4000 per annum wasannexed to the earldom of Chatham,and the sum of ,20,000 cheerfullygranted to liquidate his debts : for,instead of profiting by his public employments,he had wasted his propertyin sustaining their dignity, and died inembarrassed circumstances.In figure, Lord Chatham was eminentlydignified and commanding.There was a grandeur in his personalappearance," says a writer, who speaksof him when in his decline, " whichproduced awe and mute attention ; and,though bowed by infirmity and age,his mind shone through the ruins ofhis body, armed his eye with lightning,and clothed his lip with thunder."Bodily pain never subdued the loftydaring or the extraordinary activity ofhis mind. He even used his crutch as afigure of rhetoric. " You talk, mylords," said he, on one occasion, " ofconquering America ofyour numerousfriends there, and your powerful forcesto disperse her army. I might as welltalk of driving them before me withthis crutch !"Sir Robert Walpole could not lookupon, or listen to him, without beingalarmed; and told his friends, " that heshould be glad, at any rate, to muzzlethat terrible cornet of horse." " Hewas born an orator," says Wilkes, " andfrom nature possessed every outwardrequisite to bespeak respect, and evenawe : a manly figure, with the eagleeye of the great Conte", fixed your attention,and almost commanded reverence,the moment he appeared ; andthe keen lightning of his eye spokethe high respect of his soul, before hislips had pronounced a syllable. Therewas a kind of fascination in his lookwhen he eyed any one askance. Nothingcould withstand the force of thatcontagion. The fluent Murray hasfaltered, and even Fox shrunk backappalled from an adversary 'fraughtTHE SENATE.with fire unquenchable,' if I may borrowan expression of our great Milton.He had not the correctness of language,so striking in the great Roman orator,but he had the verba ardent, thebold, glowing words." Horace Walpoledescribes his language as having beenamazingly fine and flowing ; his voiceadmirable, his action most expressive,and his figure commanding. A moremodern writer says, that Pitt was unequalas a speaker ; and that the firsttime he heard him, nothing could bemore common-place than his languageand manner ; but that, on some contradictionin argument being given him,his real powers instantly burst forth,and he displayed all the wonderful eloquencefor which he was so celebrated.He felt impatient of contradiction inthe cabinet, and reposed unlimited confidencein his own talents. It was hisambition to raise his native countryabove all other powers; and to elevatehimself by her exaltation. He was sagacious,firm, and admirably patriotic.His opinions were liberal ; his viewslofty and enlightened ; and his measuresso eminently successful, that hehas, perhaps, with truth been termedthe greatest statesman of his country.Walpole says that his conversationwas affected and unnatural, his mannernot engaging, nor his talents popular.Chesterfield describes him as beinghaughty, imperious, and overbearing;and yet, according to the latter authority,he was a most agreeable andlively companion in social life ; and hadsuch a versatility of wit, that he couldadapt it to all sorts of conversation.It is evident, from the tone of hisletters, that he was fondly attached tohis family : he had two daughters andthree sons, one of whom became thesuccessful rival of the son of that celebratedstatesman, Fox, over whom hehad achieved a political supremacy.In his domestic circle, he frequentlyamused himself by reading the seriousparts of Shakespeare's plays; the comicscenes being, on such occasions, invariablytaken by some other person present.He would never suffer himself, ifpossible, it is said, to be seen, by hisnearest friends, in an undress ; and that,while in office, he would not transact anypublic business until he had assumedhis full official costume. He was, however,often compelled, on account of hishereditary complaint, to receive his colleaguesin bed. One evening, in thedepth of winter, the Duke of Newcastle,on whom he frequently inflicted a lecture,had a consultation with him inhis chamber. Pitt had so great a horrorof heat that he would never suffera fire to be lighted in his room ; theduke had an equal antipathy to cold ;and the night being excessively severe,and his coadjutor's lecture unusuallylong, perceiving a second bed in theroom (for the premier and his lady thenslept apart) he seated himself upon it,and covered his legs with a blanket.But still feeling insupportably cold, hegradually crept, full-dressed as he was,into Mrs. Pitt shed; and the two ministerslay, for a considerable time, atopposite ends of the room, the onewarmly declaiming, and the other,shivering, and submissively listening,with nothing but their heads visibleabove the bed-clothes.GEORGE, LORD LYTTELTON.GEORGE, the eldest son of SirThomas Lyttelton, of Hagley, in Worcestershire,was born in 1709. He receivedhis education at Eton, where hisearly proficiency attracted notice, andhis exercises were recommended asmodels. On leaving Eton, he wasplaced at Christchurch, Oxford. Whileat college, he first solicited public attentionby a poem on the battle ofBlenheim. He was, indeed, a precociouswriter, both in prose and verse.His Persian Letters, as well as hisProgress of Love, were composed inearly youth, and they both exhibit thecharacteristics of juvenility: the PersianLetters, however, are ingenious andamusing; although, in after-life, hedeemed them altogether unworthy ofhis name, and was opposed to theirbeing inserted in any collections of hisworks.LORD LYTTELTON.Lyttelton did not long remain at theuniversity. In 1728, he commencedhis travels, and made the usual tour ofFrance and Italy. On his return, in1730, he entered the house of commonsas member for Southampton; and, althoughhis father was a lord of the admiralty,evinced the most uncompromisinghostility to the minister, SirRobert Walpole. Frederick, Prince ofWales, being, in 1737, driven from thepalace of his father, George the Second,kept a kind of rival court, and gave awarm reception to the opponents of thegovernment. Lyttelton was appointedhis secretary, and he appears to havemade a judicious and liberal use of hisinfluence. Through his recommendation,Mallet was appointed undersecretary,and Thomson obtained apension of jglOO a year from his royalhighness. Pope classed him amongthe patriots of the day ; and, in return,Lyttleton, on being upbraided by Fox,for his intimacy with Pope, whom Foxdesignated as an unjust and malignantlibeller, Lyttelton replied, that he felthimself honoured in being received intothe friendship of so great a poet.To the enjoyments derivable fromfame and influence, Lyttelton nowadded those of the most perfect connubialfelicity. In 1741, he marriedMiss Lucy Fortescue, and became thefather of a son and two daughters. Onher death, in child-bed, about fiveyears afterwards, he wrote a monody,which is, perhaps, the best of his poeticalproductions. With his second wife,the daughter of Sir Robert Rich, towhom he was united in 1749, Lytteltonpassed a few years in domestic strife,and a separation between them eventuallytook place by mutual consent.On Walpole's defeat, Lyttelton wasappointed a lord of the treasury; theduties of office, however, by no meansabsorbed his attention. It appears thathe had, in his youth, entertained doubtsof the truth of Christianity ; but havingnow turned his more matured intellectand information to the study of that importantsubject, the result was that hebecame a firm believer, and, in 1747,gave the world his excellent Observationson the Conversion of St. Paul.This treatise attracted immediate attentionand applause ; but, probably,the praise which gave its author thehighest satisfaction, was conveyed inthe following letter from his father :I have read your religious treatisewith infinite pleasure and satisfaction.The style is fine and clear ; the argumentsclose, cogent, and irresistible.May the King of Kings, whose gloriouscause you have so well defended, rewardyour pious labours ; and grantthat I may be found worthy, throughthe merits of Jesus Christ, to be an eyewitnessof that happiness which I donot doubt he will bountifully bestowupon you ! In the mean time, I shallnever cease glorifying God for havingendowed you with such useful talents,and giving me so good a son."On the death of his father, in 1751,Lyttelton succeeded to the baronetcyand an ample estate. The house andpark, with which he adorned his patrimony,raised him a great reputation forelegant taste and judicious munificence.His improvements at Hagley are commemoratedby Thomson in the Seasons.Lyttelton gradually rose to higherdistinctions in the state. In 1754, hewas made cofferer and privy-counsellor ;and, in the following year, obtained theimportant office of chancellor of theexchequer, which, however, he resignedwithin a year, and, on the dissolutionof the ministry, retired entirely frompublic employment, with the honourablereward of a peerage for his services.His Dialogues of the Dead, whichare, perhaps, better known at thepresent day than any of his otherproductions, were published in 1780.Though certainly not profound, theyare lively, judicious, and evidentlythe production of a man anxious togive every support in his power tovirtue and refined sentiments. HisHistory of Henry the Second, awork of great labour, research, andconsiderable merit, was Lyttelton'slast contribution to literature, and occupieda large portion of his decliningyears. His anxiety with regard to thecorrectness of this production, appearsto have been remarkable, even amongthe most curious instances of fastidiousauthorship. The whole work wasprinted twice over ; many parts of itwere passed three times, and somesheets four or five times, through thepress. Three volumes of the Historyappeared in 1764, a second edition ofTHE Senate.them in 1767, a third in 1768, and theconclusion was published in 1771.Lyttelton's life was now drawing toa close. His appearance never betokenedstrength of constitution ; hehad a slender frame and a meagreface : he lived, however, until the ageof sixty-four. Of the piety and resignationthat cheered his last moments,an instructive account has beengiven by his physician. After detailingthe progress of the patient's disease,the writer says, " On Sunday, abouteleven in the forenoon, his lordshipsent for me, and said he felt a greathurry, and wished to have a little conversationwith me in order to divertit.He then proceeded to open thefountain of that heart from which goodnesshad so long flowed as from a copiousspring. ' Doctor,' said he, youshall be my confessor. When I firstset out in the world, I had friends whoendeavoured to shake my belief in theChristian religion. I saw difficultieswhich staggered me, but I kept mymind open to conviction. The evidencesand doctrines of Christianity,studied with attention, made me amost firm and persuaded believer ofthe Christian religion. I have made itthe rule of my life, and it is the groundof my future hopes. I have erred andsinned, but have repented, and neverindulged any vicious habit. In politicsand public life, I have made publicgood the rule of my conduct. I nevergave counsels which I did not at thetime think the best. I have seen thatI was sometimes in the wrong, but Idid not err designedly. I have endeavoured,in private life, to do all thegood in my power ; and never for amoment could indulge malicious orunjust designs upon any person whatever.'" He died on the 22nd of August,1773, and was buried at Hagley.Although certainly not eminent inthe highest sense of the term, thetalents and virtues of Lyttelton entitlehim to a place among the worthies ofhis era. Consistent in public conduct,benevolent in disposition, and elegantas a writer, he presents a characterwhich the mind contemplates withpleasure, though not with high admiration.It is probable, however, that,had his powers been exclusively confinedto literature, they were capable,with industrious cultivation, of raisinghim to a height in the scale of merit,which, at present, he cannot be said tohave attained.Lord Lyttelton's son and successor,a man of some talent, but profligatemanners, asserted, shortly before hisdeath, that an apparition had not onlywarned him of his approaching decease,but had indicated the precise time whenit would take place. It is said that heexpired within a few minutes of thehour which he had mentioned ashaving been indicated by his unearthlyvisitant; and, for a considerable period,this was considered the best authenticatedmodern ghost story extant. Butit has lately been stated, that LordLyttelton having resolved to takepoison, there was no miracle in thetolerably accurate fulfilment of theprediction he had promulgated. " Itwas, no doubt, singular," says SirWalter Scott, in one of his amusingLetters on Demonology and Witchcraft," that a man, who meditated hisexit from the world, should have chosento play such a trick upon his friends :but it is still more credible that awhimsical man should do so wild athing, than that a messenger should besent from the dead to tell a libertine atwhat precise hour he should expire."GEORGE GRENVILLE.THIS distinguished statesman wasthe second son of Richard Grenville,Esq. and his wife Hester, afterwardsCountess Temple. He was born on the14th of October, 1712. After passingsome years at the Charter-house, hewent to Cambridge, where his proficiencyin mathematics acquired himgreat honour. In his twenty-fifth year,he was called to the bar; and, in 1741,he was returned to parliament for thetown of Buckingham, for which placehe served during the remainder of hislife. In 1749, he married Elizabeth,MARQUESS OF BUTE.the daughter of Sir William Wyndham,by whom he had a very large family.On the 25th of December, 1744, hewas constituted one of the lords commissionersfor executing the office oflord high admiral ; on the 23rd of June,1747, a lord commissioner of the treasury;and, on the 6th of April, 1754,treasurer of the navy, and a privy-counsellor.In November, 1755, heresigned the treasurership of the navy,to which he was restored in December,1756 ; and continued to hold it, (exceptfrom April the 6th to June the 27th,in 1757,) until May the 28th, 1762,when he was appointed secretary ofstate. On the 6th of October, in thesame year, lie was raised to the headof the admiralty; and on the 16th ofApril, 1763, he became first lord of thetreasury, and chancellor of the exchequer.He resigned his offices onthe 10th of July, 1765, and died on the13th of November, 1770.George Grenville's character was thuspowerfully, and, if we may judge fromthe testimony of many of his contemporaries,accurately, described by Burke :With a masculine understanding, anda stout and resolute heart, he had anapplication dissipated and unwearied.He took public business not as a dutyhe was to fulfil, but as a pleasure hewas to enjoy ; and he seemed to haveno delight out of the house, except insuch things as some way related to thebusiness that was to be done within it.If he was ambitious, I will say this forhim, his ambition was of a noble andgenerous strain : it was to raise himself,not by the low, pimping politicsof a court, but to win his way to power,through the laborious gradations ofpublic service ; and to secure himselfa well-earned rank in parliament, bya thorough knowledge of its constitution,and a perfect practice in all itsbusiness."JOHN STUART, MARQUESS OF BUTE.1 HIS nobleman was born in 1713:he received a careful education, and,at an early age, evinced a great partialityfor literature ; a taste which heindulged to the latest period of his life.He succeeded his father as Marquess ofBute in the ninth year of his age ;when he is described as having beentall, fair, intelligent, and endowed withvery considerable personal graces. Ashegrew up he manifested a very restlessand inquisitive disposition : theearly part of his life, he was, however,compelled by his circumstances, tospend in comparative retirement-In1738, he married the only daughter ofEdward Worsley Montagu, by whom hehad several children, and with whom helived on the most affectionate terms ; afact, which strongly tends to rebut theinsinuations of Walpole and others asto the nature of the intimacy existingbetween Lord Bute and the mother ofGeorge the Third.In 1749, he was appointed lord ofthe bed-chamber to Frederick, Princeof Wales, with whom he became a greatfavourite. For his introduction to theprince, an event which laid the foundationof his future political eminence, hewas indebted, as Seward asserts, to thefollowing circumstance : being at acricket match, to which he had gone inthe chariot of an apothecary who livednear him, in the midst of the sport itbegan to rain ; the shower compelledthe Prince of Wales, who was present,to retire to his tent, where he intimateda wish to play whist until the weatherbecame fair again. For some timenobody could be found to take thefourth hand ; but, at length, one of thegentlemen in attendance, perceivedLord Bute in the apothecary's chariot,and immediately asked his lordship if hewould have the honour completing theprince's party. This invitation was, ofcourse accepted ; and the prince felt sopleased with the manners of his newacquaintance, as to desire him to payan early visit at Kew, where his royalhighness then resided.The death of this prince, which tookplace in 1751, was productive of little,if any, disadvantage to Lord Bute,his lordship at that time possessing aTHE SENATE.great ascendancy over the mind of theyouthful heir-apparent, and the unlimitedconfidence of the widowed princess; his close intimacy with whom thescandalous gossips of the day at lengthattributed to the captivating effect ofhis manners and person on her heart.His influence at Leicester-house dailyincreased ; he was made groom of thestole, and under that tide acted inreality as governor of the young prince,who (even after he had attained hismajority) was completely under the dominionof his mother and the marquess.On the accession of George the Third,the highest dignities in the state weresupposed to be within the grasp ofLord Bute : but, however he mighthave swayed the king's mind in private,he took no public part in the directionof affairs until 1761, when he acceptedthe secretaryship resigned in that yearby Lord Holdernesse. At length hebecame prime minister ; and, immediatelyon coming into power, determined,if possible, to effect a peace,which had for some time been negotiating.He accomplished his object ;but his success rendered him exceedinglyunpopular. He was accused, bysome weak-minded persons, of havingbeen bribed by the enemies of hiscountry ; and it was added, that theprincess dowager had shared with himin the price at which peace had beenpurchased by the French.He quitted office in April, 1763, andintimated that he had retired altogetherfrom public business : but the king, whois said to have advised his resignation,still continued on the most intimateterms with the marquess, by whoseprivate counsels his majesty was forsome time afterwards accused of beinggoverned. Lord Bute, it appears, frequentlywent to the princess dowager'sresidence incognito, at that time in theevening when the king usually paid hismother a visit; and it was rumouredthat these meetings were held for thepurpose of directing the operations ofthe ostensible administration. In consequenceof the suspicions of the peopleon this subject, as there is reason tosuspect, he ceased to meet his majestyin private ; " and though," says a recentbiographer of George the Thirdand his family, "he continued to visitthe princess dowager, yet he alwaysretired by a private staircase, wheneverthe king arrived at her residence."It has been confidently asserted, thatthe suspicions of the people as to thealleged influence of Lord Bute overthe king, after that nobleman hadavowedly retired from public affairs,were totally unfounded: but it is impossible,perhaps, satisfactorily to settlethe question. The cessation of privateinterviews between his majesty andLord Bute, could not possibly havetended to disprove the current reports :as it must have occurred to those whosupposed them to be accurate, thatadvice on public affairs might, withthe greatest facility, have been conveyedfrom the marquess to his sovereignby means of the princess dowager,whose apartments, we find, thenobleman was frequently in the habitof quitting, a moment before they wereentered by the king.Lord Bute died on the 10th of March,1792. He was such a lover of literature,that he affected to be the Maecenasof his age. In addition to theallowance which Home received fromthe princess dowager, he procured forthat author, the appointments of commissionerof sick and wounded seamen,and conservator of the Scottish privilegesat Ampere, in Zealand. Johnsonwas also indebted, in some measure,perhaps, to Lord Bute's zeal inthe cause of letters, for his pension of300 a year; and a letter from themarquess to Bubb Dodington, dated in1761, shews that he felt a warm interestin behalf of the younger Bentley.While in office, he proposed that theAntiquarian Society should undertakea history of the antiquities of this country,similar to Montfau<^on's antiquitiesde la Monarchic Franchise;and, it appears probable, that had hecontinued prime minister, the workwould now have been in the librariesof the learned. He published, at hisown expense, nine quarto volumes onEnglish plants, of which he causedonly a few copies to be worked off, andthen destroyed the plates.Lord Bute evinced a most extravagantpartiality for his fellow-countrymen.A Scotch name was said to beapassport to his favour, and he warmlyresented the slightest aspersion on theland of his birth. He used his utmostCHARLES TOWNSMEN D.influence, but without effect, to preventthe performance of Macklin's Love ala Mode, in which the character of SirArchly Macsarcasm was particularlyoffensive to him. His predilection towardshis fellow-countrymen was, indeed,so notorious, that a disappointedwit, who had long danced attendanceat his levees to little purpose, once saidto him, " If your lordship would butmake me a Scotchman, you would ensuremy gratitude for ever !"As a political character, judging fromhis public acts while prime minister,he appears to have met with morecensure than he deserved : but, even ifwe reject the most important insinuationsof Walpole, with regard to theextent of the intimacy subsisting betweenhis lordship and the princessdowager, the means which ne evidentlyadopted to obtain and secure anascendancy over the mind of his pupil,the manner in which he used thatascendancy, and the extraordinaryperiod to which he protracted it, renderedhim, we must confess, deservedlyunpopular. He rose to exalted rankinthe state, by arts which evinced alittleness of mind ; and although hisgeneral conduct, as a patron of menof letters was exceedingly laudable,even in his assumed character of amodern Maecenas, he often betrayedsymptoms of a paltry and contemptiblespirit.CHARLES TOWNSHEND.CHARLES, the second son of Charles |the third Viscount Townshend, was jborn on the 29th of August, 1725. He jevinced great quickness of concepttion and extraordinary curiosity in his |childhood : and at school and at college,although notorious for his utterdefiance of discipline, he was eminentfor his acquirements in various branchesof knowledge. In 1747, he went intoparliament as member for Yarmouth,for which place he sat until 1761, whenhe was elected for Harwich, and continuedits representative until he died.On his entrance into public life, hejoined the opposition ; but his politicalconnexions soon brought him into office.In June, 1749, he was appointed acommissioner of trade and plantations ;in the following year, a commissionerfor executing the office of lord highadmiral; in 1756, a member of theprivy council; in March, 1761, secretaryat war ; in February, 1763, firstlord of trade and plantations ; in June,1765, paymaster general and chancellorof the exchequer; and a lord of thetreasury in August, 1766, from whichperiod he remained in office until hisdecease, which took place on the 4th ofSeptember, 1767.In person, Charles Townshend wastall and beautifully proportioned; hiscountenance was manly, handsome, expressive,and prepossessing. He wasmuch beloved in private life, and enjoyedan unusual share of domestic happiness.On the 15th of August, 1755, he marriedCaroline, eldest daughter of theDuke of Argyle, and widow of Francis,Earl of Dalkeith, by whom he had twosons and a daughter. His conduct as ahusband and a father is said to havebeen exceedingly amiable.Burke, in his speech on Americantaxation, thus admirably depicted thegeneral character of Charles Townshend: " Before this splendid orb, (alludingto the great Lord Chatham,)had entirely set, and while the westernhorizon was in a blaze with his descendingglory, on the opposite quarter ofthe heavens arose another luminary,and for his hour became lord of theascendant This light, too, is passedand set for ever ! I speak of CharlesTownshend, officially the re-producerof this fatal scheme (American taxation); whom I cannot even now remember,without some degree of sensibility.In truth, he was the delightand ornament of this house, and thecharm of every private society whichhe honoured with his presence. Perhaps,there never arose in this country,nor in any country, a man of morepointed and finished wit, and (wherehis passions were not concerned) of amore refined, exquisite, and penetratingjudgment. If he had not so great aTHE SENATE.stock, as some have had who flourishedformerly, of knowledge long treasuredup, he knew better by far than anyman I ever was acquainted with, howto bring together, within a short time,all that was necessary to establish, toillustrate, and to decorate that side ofthe question he supported. He statedhis matter skilfully and powerfully ; heparticularly excelled in a most luminousexplanation, and display of hissubject. His style of argument wasneither trite and vulgar, nor subtle andabstruse. He hit the house just betweenwind and water ; and not being troubledwith too anxious a zeal for any matterin question, he was never more tedious,or more earnest, than the pre-conceivedopinions and present temper of hishearers required ; with whom he was alwaysin perfect unison. He conformedexactly to the temper of the house; andhe seemed to guide, because he wasalways sure to follow it. Many of myhearers, who never saw that prodigy,Charles Townshend, cannot know whata ferment he was able to excite in everything,by the violent ebullition of hismixed virtues and failings ; for failingshe had, undoubtedly. But he had nofailings which were not owing to anoble cause; to an ardent, generous,perhaps, an immoderate passion forfame; a passion which is the instinctof all great souls. He worshipped thatgoddess wheresoever she appeared ;but he paid his particular devotions toher in her favourite habitation, in herchosen temple, the house of commons.That fear of displeasing those whoought most to be pleased, betrayed himsometimes into the other extreme. Hehad voted, and in the year 1765, hadbeen an advocate, for the stamp act.He therefore attended at the privatemeeting in which resolutions leadingto its repeal were settled ; and he wouldhave spoken for that measure too, ifillness had not prevented him. Thevery next session, as the fashion ofthis world passeth away, the repealbegan to be in as bad odour as thestamp act had been before. To conformto the temper which began to prevail,and to prevail mostly among thosemost in power, he declared that revenuemust be had out of America.Instantly he was tied down to his engagements,and the whole body ofcourtiers drove him onward. Here thisextraordinary man, then chancellor ofthe exchequer, found himself in greatstraits: to please universally was theobject of his life; but to tax and toplease, no more than to love and to bewise, is not given to men. However,he attempted it. He was truly thechild of the house. He never thought,did, or said any thing, but with a viewto you. He every day adapted himselfto your disposition, and adjusted himselfbefore it, as at a looking-glass. Hehad observed that several persons, infinitelyhis inferiors in all respects, hadformerly rendered themselves considerablein this house, by one methodalone. The fortune of such men wasa temptation too great to be resisted byone to whom a single whiff of incensewithheld gave much greater pain, thanhe received delight in the clouds of itwhich daily rose around him from theprodigal superstition of innumerableadmirers. He was a candidate for contradictoryhonours; and his great aimwas to make those agree in admirationof him who never agreed in any thingelse."CHARLES Jenkins, EARL OF LIVERPOOL.CHARLES, the eldest son of ColonelCharles Jenkinsonon, was born on the16th of May, 1727, and educated at theCharter-house and the University college,Oxford ; where he took his degreeof M. A. in 1752, after having greatlydistinguished himself by his scholasticattainments. He first attracted publicnotice by the active part which he took,as a writer, in an election controversy :and, it is said, procured the patronageof George the Third, when Prince ofWales, by a poetical eulogium on hisdeceased father.EARL OF LIVERPOOL.Having obtained the post of privatesecretary to Lord Bute, he abandonedthe views which he had previouslyentertained of taking holy orders. In1761, he went into parliament as memberfor Cockermouth, and becameunder secretary of state. During thetwo following years, he was secretaryto the treasury ; in 1766, he held a seatat the admiralty board, from which hewas removed, in 1763, to that of thetreasury. In 1773, he became a memberof the privy council, and obtainedthe vice-treasurership of Ireland, whichhe afterwards exchanged for the lucrativeclerkship of the pells. In 1778,he was made secretary at war, and remainedin that office until the downfalof Lord North's administration. Underthe auspices of Pitt, in 1784, he procuredthe post of president of the boardof trade, which he retained until 1801 :and two years afterwards, he resignedthe chancellorship of the duchy ofLancaster, to which he had been appointedin 1786. On the 21st ofAugust, in that year, (1786,) he hadbeen created Baron Hawksbury; andon the 28th of May, 1796, Earl ofLiverpool.At the time of his decease, which tookplace on the 17th of December, 1808,he was still clerk of the pells, and alsocollector of the customs inward for theport of London. His death is said tonave been greatly accelerated by alarmat an accident which befel his wife, who,about a week before his dissolutiontook place, was dreadfully burnt, owingto some part of her dress having unfortunatelycaught fire. He was twicemarried : first in 1765, to Amelia,daughter of Mr. Watts, governor ofBengal, by whom he had one son, hissuccessor ; and on the 22d of June,1782, to Catherine, daughter of SirCecil Bishop, Bart, widow of his firstcousin, Sir Charles Cope, by whom hehad a son and daughter. He is describedas having been exceedingly amiable inall the relations of private life.The earl was a respectable politician,a neat speaker, an assiduous man ofbusiness, and an able expositor of internationallaw ; on which subject, hepublished several works. Of his lastproduction, A Treatise on the Coins ofthe Realm, the Edinburgh Reviewersspoke in the following terms : " It ispleasing to find one, who must necessarilyhave been bred among the explodeddoctrines of the elder economists,shaking himself almost quiteloose from their influence, at an advancedperiod of life ; and betraying,while he resumes the favourite speculationsof his early years, so little biastowards errors which he must oncehave imbibed. It is no less gratifyingto observe one who has been educatedin the walks of practical policy, andgrown old amid the bustle of publicemployments, embellishing the declineof life by pursuits which unite thedignity of science with the usefulnessof active exertion."During a considerable part of hispolitical career, Lord Liverpool wasodious to the multitude, on account ofa generally-received opinion, whichBurke strengthened, in a pamphlet onpopular discontents, that he was thesecret adviser of his sovereign. Inconsequenceof this supposition, hewas designated as leader of the king'sfriends. But his fortunes prospered inspite of his unpopularity : he out-livedthe generation that hated him ; andaltogether ceased to be obnoxious. Hewas one of those practical men ofbusiness, who, by moderate abilities,and prudence of conduct, invariablyget forward, in whatever situation oflife circumstances may throw them ;who improve events to their own advantage; who, while they possess sufficientskill to be useful, are not endowedwith enough of talent to produceenvy; who, eventually, obtain a generalexperience that renders them ofimportance, with an intimate knowledgeof subordinate matters, whichtheir superiors usually scorn to acquire,but must possess in another, if not inthemselves ; and who, at last, tortoise-like,slowly, but surely outstrip such oftheir competitors as, with natural powersvastly superior, are not endowed withthe same all-conquering steadiness andperseverance.THE SENATE.JOHN WILKES.JOHN, the second son of Israel Wilkes,an opulent distiller, was born in 1727.After receiving the rudiments of educationat Hertford and Aylesbury, hewent to the university of Leyden, wherehe prosecuted his general studies withconsiderable success ; and acquired sucha knowledge of Latin, in particular, asto render him capable of editing Tibullusand Catullus.He returned to England in 1749 ;and, soon afterwards, married a personof the name of Mead, merely, as it appearedin the sequel, for the sake ofher property; for, in after life, he frequentlydeclared that the union, on hispart, was a sacrifice to Plutus ratherthan Venus. The lady was his seniorby full ten years, and, unlike herhusband, had retained the dissentingprinciples in which they had mutuallybeen brought up. The gravity of hermanners, and her love of retirement,formed a striking contrast to the gayand social habits of her husband. Withdispositions so utterly discordant, it isnot surprising that their union, formed,as it had been, without love, at least onone side, and with such a disadvantagewith regard to years on the other,should be productive of no domestichappiness. Wilkes betrayed a want ofprinciple but too common, in marryingMiss Mead merely for her money; anda want of feeling, which, also, was not,unfortunately, without numerous precedents,in neglecting his victim aftershe had become his wife, and dissipatingher fortune among a set of gayand dissolute companions. Disgustedwith his profligacy, she, at length, requireda separation, which accordinglytook place ; but the unfortunate womanwas afterwards compelled to procure theinstitution of a suit against her abandonedhusband, for the purpose of enforcingthe due discharge of an annuitywhich he had stipulated to pay. Onedaughter was the fruit of their marriage.In 1754, Wilkes made an unsuccessfulattempt to obtain his return toparliament for the town of .The contest cost him betweenthree and four thousand pounds;and this loss, added to the larger expensesof his election for Aylesbury,three years afterwards, plunged him indifficulties, from which he was scarcelyever able completely to extricate himself.Soon after he had taken his seat,his friend, Earl Temple, procured forhim the commission of lieutenant-colonelof the Buckinghamshire militia.At the general election which tookplace on the accession of George theThird, he was again returned forAylesbury. His increasing embarrassmentsnow rendered him exceedinglyanxious to obtain a place ; and it isprobable that, had his wishes on thispoint been complied with, he wouldscarcely have acquired that conspicuousstation in the annals of his time, whichhe afterwards gained by adopting thecourse usually pursued by the disappointedplace-hunter of strong feelingsand good talents. Circumstances blightedhis hopes of procuring the governorshipof Canada ; but the failure of hisapplication to be sent out as ambassadorto Constantinople, he attributed chiefly,if not solely, to Lord Bute's disinclinationto befriend him. It would havebeen well for his lordship had he assistedWilkes to accomplish his object ;for, in that case, the needy politician,instead of writing North Britons, andsatirical dedications, would, perhaps,have spent the' vigorous portion of hislife at Constantinople, or elsewhereabroad, a lazy and luxurious diplomatist.But events hurried Wilkes into politicalwarfare. Having nothing to lose, he hadbut little to fear : and the spleen withwhich he expressed himself against government,exposed him to a persecutionthat raised him to eminence. He recklesslystigmatized ministers as the enemiesof their country, to gratify hisown malice, probably, more than frompatriotic motives ; and assailed theScotch with the most determined rancour,for no other reason as it wouldappear, than because Lord Bute wasa Scotchman.JOHN Wilkes.In 1762, he attacked the administrationwith great spirit, in a pamphleton the papers relative to the rupturewith Spain ; and, in the following year,he prefixed an ironical dedication toBen Jonson's Fall of Mortimer, inwhich he lavished the most causticridicule upon the country, as well asthe conduct of Lord Bute ; whoseresignation is, by some writers, supposedto have been accelerated by thepower and virulence with which Wilkesassailed him, in the famous paper calledthe North Briton. In this publication,which attained a remarkable degreeof popularity, Wilkes constantlyabused the Scotch with extraordinarybitterness ; and, at length, antipathy totheir northern fellow-subjects became aprevalent feeling among a large portionof the people of England. Wilkesnever lost an opportunity of expressinghis contempt for " the land cakes.""Among all the flights," said he,during a discussion with Johnson, on thegenius of Shakspeare, " among all thevagaries of that author's imagination,the boldest certainly is that of Birnamwood being brought to Dunsinane ;making a wood where there never wasa shrub ! A wood in Scotland ! Ha !hal ha!"On the 23rd of April, 1763, was publishedthe famous Number Forty-fiveof the North Briton, in which Wilkescommented on the king's speech withsuch unmeasured severity, that ministersdetermined on making it thesubject of a prosecution. A generalwarrant was accordingly issued by thehome secretary, by which the authors,printers, and publishers of the obnoxiouspaper, without being mentionedby name, were ordered to be apprehended.Wilkes was arrested in thestreet, and brought before the secretaryof state for examination ; but he refusedto answer any interrogatories:and, having been committed to theTower, procured a writ of habeas corpus,a few days afterwards, on which hewas taken to the chambers of the lordchief justice of the common pleas ;who being of opinion that generalwarrants were illegal, Wilkes, to themost enthusiastic joy of the people,immediately obtained his liberty.Throughout these proceedings hiscoolness and confidence had neverdeserted him : the former was displayedin a remarkable manner on the day ofhis capture. Being compelled by theking's messengers to accompany themto his own house, he there foundChurchill, the poet, who, having hadsomething to do with the North Briton,was verbally designated as one of thepersons to be taken into custody, underthe general warrant. Wilkes, however,saved his friend from arrest, (themessengers not being acquainted withthe person of the poet,) by addressinghim as Mr. Thomson.Wilkes was now deprived of his commissionin the Buckinghamshire militia.Shortly afterwards he broughtactions against all the parties implicatedin the seizure of his person andpapers under the general warrant; andin every case obtained damages, which,by an express order in council, werepaid by the treasury.Flattered by his great popularity,and rendered daring by success, heboldly reprinted the obnoxious number,Forty-five ; a criminal information was,consequently, filed against him, on whichhe was afterwards found guilty, and, atthe same time, convicted on an indictmentfor publishing an obscene poem,entitled, An Essay on Woman ; written,it is said, by Potter, a son of the Archbishopof Canterbury. In the meantime,measures had been taken to expelhim from the house of commons ;and he had fought a duel with Martin,the member for Camelford, on accountof some passages in the North Briton.Wilkes was so severely wounded inthis affair, that he declared himselfincapable of appearing in the house ofcommons to make his defence. Suspicions,however, appear to have beenentertained that this was a subterfuge :for Dr. Heberden and Mr. Hawkinswere appointed to visit him ; but, as hesaid, the house had forgotten to desirehim to receive them, and he would notadmit them to his presence. He afterwardssent for the king's physicianand the sergeant-surgeon, to whom hestated, that as the commons were desirousof having him watched, he considereda couple of Scotchman werethe most proper persons to become hisspies.Although avowedly incapable of appearingin parliament, he musteredTHE SENATE.strength enough to make a retreat toFrance, which the aspect of his affairshad rendered exceedingly prudential.On his arrival in Paris he obtained acertificate from the French king's medicalmen, that he could not leave hisroom, and that it was therefore impossiblefor him to return. The house ofcommons, however, without waitinguntil it should suit his convenience andhealth to make his defence, voted hisexpulsion, and ordered a new writ to beissued for Aylesbury. Outlawry was theresult of his protracted absence on thecontinent ; but on a change of ministrytaking place, in 1768, and a new parliamentbeing called, he returned toEngland, and offered himself as one ofthe candidates to represent the city ofLondon. So great was his popularity,that he was defeated only by a smallmajority ; and he soon afterwards obtainedhis return for the county of Middlesex.Having surrendered himself forjudgment, on the verdicts which hadbeen returned against him, his outlawrywas reversed, and he was sentenced totwenty-two months imprisonment, aswell as to pay a fine of 1000 to theking.While a prisoner, Wilkes was at thezenith of his fame. Subscriptions wereopened for payment of his debts ;valuable presents were conferred onhim ; and his likenesses were multipliedto such an almost incredible extent, thathis portrait squinted at the travellereven from the sign-boards of half theinns in the kingdom. He used to relatethat, one day, an old lady, behind whomhe happened to be walking, exclaimed,with much spleen, as she looked up toone of his public-house profiles, " Ah !he swings every where but where heought!"In 1769, he was again expelled thehouse of commons, for having publishedsome severe censures on a letter addressedby the secretary of state to themagistrates and military who had beenemployed in quelling some of thedreadful riots which were occasionedby Wilkes's imprisonment. He wasimmediately re-elected ; but no soonerdid the commons receive his return,than they not only declared his seatvacant, but that he should be deemedincapable of sitting in that parliament.A third time he was re-elected by theMiddlesex freeholders, and rejected bythe house. Luttrell was then put forwardto oppose him, and, notwithstandingWilkes obtained an overwhelmingmajority, was declared to be the sittingmember.In the meantime, Wilkes, althougha prisoner, had become one of the cityaldermen ; and in that capacity, notlong after he had been set at liberty,he discharged a printer who had beenapprehended by order of the house ofcommons, and bound him over to prosecutehis captors for an assault. Two ofthe city magistrates, who happened tobe members of parliament, were sentto the tower for acting in a similarmanner, and Wilkes was ordered toattend at the bar of the house ; but herefused to appear, except in his placeas member for Middlesex. The orderwas repeated, and again disobeyed.The house now found itself in a dilemma,and, to save its credit, had re-come to what Junius terms the meanand pitiful evasion, of summoningWilkes a third time, for the 8th ofApril, and then adjourning to the 9th.His popularity among the citizensincreased; in 1772, he was chosensheriff, and, two years afterwards,elected mayor. On the dissolution ofparliament, about the same period, hewas again returned for Middlesex, andtook his seat without opposition. Henow most zealously advocated the necessityof appeasing America, and wasgenerally adverse to the measures ofLord North ; on whose dismissal Wilkesprocured a vote of the house for rescindingthe. various resolutions which hadpreviously been carried against him.From this period, he rarely meddledwith political affairs, deeming himselfto be " an extinguished volcano;" andoccupied, or rather amused, his decliningyears, by fulfilling his duties as chamberlainof the city of London, whichlucrative office he had fortunately obtainedby a considerable majority in1779. After having been for manyyears comparatively forgotten, he died,aged seventy, on the 26th of December,1797.In person, Wilkes was tall, and, atthe latter part of his life, exceedinglyslender. His features were such as thecaricaturist delights to dwell upon.But, in spite of his personal defects, heEARL OF GUILDFORD.was, at one time, a leader of fashion,and imported the vanity of blue hair-powder.Many years before his deathhe became a confirmed sloven, and attractednotice by invariably wearing anold cocked hat and a shabby coat, thecolour of which had been scarlet."In private life, and at table," saysWraxall, " he was pre-eminently agreeable,abounding in anecdote, ever gayand convivial ; converting his very defectsof person, manner and enunciation,to purposes of merriment andentertainment. If ever any man waspleasing who squinted, had lost histeeth, and lisped, it was Wilkes."His conversational wit has been muchlauded, but no remains of it have beenpreserved from which we can form anopinion of its value, even upon the expestle Hercules principle. It appears,however, to have been rather causticthan jovial. He once told AldermanBurnet, previously a bricklayer, whowas carving a pudding with awkwardnessand difficulty, to take a trowel to it.His writings were nearly equal in virulence,but far inferior in all that is admirableto those of the masterly Junius.He was one of the persons to whom thecelebrated letters published under thatsignature were attributed. On beingcharged by some of his friends with theauthorship of them, he exclaimed energetically," Utinam scripsissem !"His epistles to his daughter are cleverand characteristic ; but his essay, in contradictionto the assertion made byJohnson in his dictionary, that the letterh seldom, perhaps never, begins anybut the first syllable of a word, by nomeans merits the praise which it has received.To prove that the lexicographerwas glaringly in error, required neithergreat ingenuity, nor much reading.It is really astonishing how Johnson,when he wrote the passage in question,could have forgotten the words, behest,behove, behaviour, behold, behind,vehement, vehicle, apprehend, comprehend,reprehend, &c. &c.In parliament, the votes of Wilkeswere always more valuable to the partyhe supported than his speeches. Hewas not an orator. It was a maxim ofhis that, in addressing the house it wasadvisable to be impudent, merry, andto give utterance to whatever cameuppermost. But like many others,Wilkes did not practise what hepreached : his speeches were preparedwith great care, and he sent copies ofthem to the papers, in order that whathe meant to say might be correctlypublished.As a political character he was, perhaps,desperately daring, rather thancalmly courageous ; and his motives appearto have been less patriotic than personal.If the result of those proceedings,in which he involuntarily bore soconspicuous a part, were gloriously favourableto the independence of hisfellow-subjects, the merit was not somuch his, as that of the chief justicewho first declared general warrants tobe illegal, and that of the differentjuries who supported his lordship'sopinion, by giving verdicts against thosewho had issued and acted under thatabsurd government order, by which thepapers of Wilkes had been seized, andhis person held in durance. We canscarcely accord the palm of patriotism toa man who happens to achieve a greatpublic good, for his private advantage ;who frees a nation from the terror ofgeneral warrants, by struggling againsttheir legality in order to obtain hispersonal liberty ; and who secures hiscountrymen against similar official tyranny,by prosecuting his individualaggressors, for damages to put into hisown pocket, after he has obtained asecurity against defeat, by so high ajudicial declaration in his own favour,as that of the chief justice of the courtof common pleas.FREDERICK NORTH, EARL OF GUILDFORD.FREDERICK, Lord North, theeldest son of Francis, Earl of Guildford,was born in 1729. After studyingfor some years at Eton, he was sent toTrinity college, Oxford, and subsequentlywent to Leipsic. On his returnto England he was elected memberfor Banbury, which he representedTHE SENATE.during the parliaments of 1761, 1768,1774, 1780, and 1784. Shortly after hisfirst appearance in public life, he wasmet one morning, by George Grenville,and another gentleman, walking in thepark, and as it appeared, rehearsing anoration. " Here comes blubberingNorth," said the latter to Grenville;I wonder what he is getting by heart,for I am sure it can be nothing of hisown." " You are mistaken," repliedGrenville ; " North is a young man ofgreat promise, and high qualifications;and if he does not relax in his politicalpursuits, he is very likely to be primeminister."In June, 1759, he was appointed acommissioner of the treasury, and remainedin office until 1765. In thefollowing year he was made joint receiverand paymaster of the forces, andobtained a seat in the privy council.In 1767, he became chancellor of theexchequer; and in 1770, first lord ofthe treasury. " His administration''says Dr. Bisset, " teemed with calamitousevents, beyond any of the sameduration to be found in our annals.The war with America lost us thirteengreat and powerful colonies. Year afteryear, our blood and treasure were expendedto no purpose ; myriads of menwere sacrificed ; and hundreds of millionswere lavished, without obtainingany valuable object. Temporary gleamsof partial success were followed by thepermanent gloom of general disaster.Yet the chief minister possessed veryconsiderable talents and fair intentions,though mingled with defects, and actingin such emergencies as precluded beneficialexertions and consequences."Lord North continued in office until1782 ; in the following year he formeda coalition with Fox, who had previouslybeen his most virulent parliamentaryopponent, and had morethan once threatened him with an impeachment.This disgraceful and unnaturalalliance, although unpopular,obtained a temporary political dominion.After driving Lord Shelburne,the minister, from his post, the unitedparties, avowedly against the wishes ofthe king, forced their leaders into office,from which, however, they were soondismissed, and Pitt obtained the premiership.The most violent debates ensued ;night after night the youthful ministerwas defeated in the house by large majorities: but he resolutely kept his post,in spite of all the efforts of the coalition.An union of the conflicting partiesbeing; at length suggested, Pitt declaredthat it was impossible for him ever to actwith Lord 'North, who instantly rose,and though evidently hurt by so pointedan exclusion, declared, in a manly anddignified manner, that he would not beanobstacle to any arrangement whichmight benefit his country. No reconciliation,however, took place ; and,after a tremendous struggle, Pitt completelytriumphed over his antagonists.In 1790, Lord North succeeded hisfather, as Earl of Guildford, but tookno active part in the debates of thepeers. For several years before hisdeath, which took place on the 5th ofAugust, 1792, he was afflicted withtotal blindness. His sight had beenearly affected, and was at length totallydestroyed, by the consequences of apernicious habit of sanding his letters,owing to his being short-sighted, closeto his eyes. He once said of ColonelBarre, who was also blind in his latteryears, " Although the worthy gentlemanand I have often been at variance,there are few men living who wouldfeel more delighted to see each other."He was a knight of the Garter, chancellorof the university of Oxford, andpresident of various scientific and charitablesocieties. By his wife, Anne,daughter of George Speke, Esq. ofWhite Washington, Somerset, he hadseveral children ; and his domestic lifeappears to have been particularly felicitous.In his last moments he onlyregretted that he could not see hisyoungest son, who, on the morning ofhis father's death, had landed at Doverfrom his travels, but did not reachLondon in time to receive the paternalblessing.He was distinguished for his urbanedeportment, his excellent temper, hisgreat liberality, and those other finequalities, which, in the highest degree,endear a man to those who composehis social circle. When blind and infirm,his company still continued to beexceedingly desirable. He had numerousopponents as a minister, butscarcely any enemies as a man. Heappears to have outlived all politicalEARL OF GUILDFORD.animosity ; and even during that periodof his life, when his administration wasmost grossly and deservedly abused,his adversaries, it is stated, were BOwell satisfied of his good-nature, thatthey did not scruple to solicit variouslittle favours for their friends, which itwas only in his power to grant. Thesesmall beginnings, however, probablyhad great ends ; the worthy gentlemen,who, at first obtained trifles forothers, at length, perhaps, procuredsomething beneficial for themselves ;and in return, gratefully joined theminister's band of political apostates.It is well known that he employedthe influence of the crown, in furtheringthe measures of government, to analmost incredible extent ; many pretendedpatriots whom he failed to convinceby argument, he converted to hispolitical creed by the talismanic powerof official emoluments; invariablyacting on those occasions with suchdecent secrecy, that the public beheldhim constantly making proselytes,whom it was supposed he had convinced,rather than corrupted. Hecarried his fear of giving offence tothose who might injure him, or hisnatural unwillingness to wrong another,so far as peremptorily to refuse displacingthe brother of one of his principalparliamentary antagonists from alucrative post ; observing, invariably,when the subject was mentioned tohim, that he saw no reason for visitingthe sins of his brother upon a manwho did his duty, and had never renderedhimself personally obnoxious tothe administration.During the twelve years of his swayas premier, he originated no one measurewhich can entitle him to theadmiration or gratitude of posterity.As a public speaker, he succeededrather by his wit, suavity, and apparentcandour, than by force of argument,or splendour of diction. Gibbonspeaks of the felicity of his incomparabletemper, which Adolphus describesas having been seldom ruffled, andBurke pronounces to have been delightful.As a wit, his contemporaries appearto have considered him almostwithout a rival ; but his reputation inthis respect, entirely rests upon theirrecorded assertions ; the following beingthe best specimens of the dicta preservedof a man who often kept thehouse in a roar of laughter for severalminutes ; and of whom Burke said,Well, there's no denying it, this manhas more wit than than all of us(meaning the opposition) put together."Walking one day into the china shopof Fog and Son, he said to one of thepartners, " This strange coalition ofyours, sir, will soon be at an end ; oneof the principals must shortly obtainan ascendancy : for Fog will eithereclipse Sun, or Sun chase Fog ; so that,you see, the partnership cannot last."Two brothers having realized handsomefortunes by their commercialtransactions with government, LordNorth nicknamed one of them a roguein spirit, in allusion to his rum contract,and the other a rogue in grain,some of his dealings in corn havingelevated him to the pillory.To a friend who had asked himwhat could be his brother's motive formarrying Miss Bannister, he replied,Why, to confess the truth, I can saybut little for either her beauty or herfortune; but, with regard to family, itis different, for I hear she is nearly relatedto the Stairs."A nobleman having alluded to himas " that thing of a minister," he wasadvised to resent the expression. " Iwill," said he, " by continuing inoffice ; as I know his lordship has noother resentment against me, thanwishing to be the thing I am."He used to relate that when he askedthe lord mayor, during the riots in1780, why he did not call upon theposse comitatus, he received for answer," I would have done so, but,deuce take the fellow ! I don't knowwhere he lives."He was frequently upbraided forsnoring on the treasury bench, duringthe discussion of important topics.While Alderman Sawbridge was speakingin favour of annual parliaments, heraised a laugh among the opposition,by calling the attention of the house tothe noble premier, who was drowsilynodding in his place. Lord North,however, protested that he was notasleep while the alderman spoke ;but," added he, " I wish to heavenI had been !"THE SENATE.EDMUND BURKE.LIKE his great contemporaries, Foxand Pitt, this accomplished author,orator, and statesman, was a youngerson. He was born on Arran Quay,Dublin, on the 1st of January, 1730.His father was an attorney, who, formany years, enjoyed a very extensivepractice in the Irish capital ; and hismother was a relative of the gallantSir Edmund Eagle.Burke, who was a very delicate child,received the first rudiments of educationfrom an old woman, who livednear his father's house. He afterwardswent to a school at Castlewood Roche :whence he was removed to another inDublin, where he remained about ayear; and, on the 2Gth of May, 1741,he was sent to a classical academy atBallitore, in the county of Kildare,which was then under the superintendenceof Abraham Shackleton, anintelligent member of the society ofFriends. Among the numerous errorswhich occur in many of the biographiesof Burke, it is stated, that while atschool he did not display any promiseof future greatness : whereas it hasbeen incontestably proved that, withina short period after his arrival at Ballitore,he exhibited very extraordinarypowers for a lad of his age ; and possessed,not merely an ardent desire,but a singular capacity, for the acquirementof knowledge. An anecdote isrecorded of him which shews, that evenat this early period of his life, he occupieda superior station among his companions,and was capable, as in afterlife,of successfully exerting his abilitieson a sudden emergency. Burke andhis schoolfellows were one day permittedto go and see the processionof the judges of assize, on conditionthat all the senior boys should, aftertheir return, write an account of thespectacle in Latin verse. When Burkehad finished his own task on the occasion,he was earnestly solicited to prepareanother description of the scene,for a schoolfellow to whom he hadoften before rendered a similar service.Hoping to obtain some hint for a secondcomposition on the same subject, heasked the lad, what had struck him asbeing most remarkable in the procession.The boy replied, that he hadno iced nothing particular, but a fatpiper in a brown coat On this, Burkeimmediately commenced, and, in ashort time, completed, a humorousdoggerel poem, on the prescribed subject,the first line of which ran as follows:Piper erat fattui, qui brown seamen habet.A circumstance is also related of himwhich shews that in boyhood, as wellas during his riper years, he felt an invinciblehatred to oppression. A poorman having been compelled to pulldown his humble cottage, by the surveyorof the roads, because it was denouncedas standing too near the highway,Burke, who saw the cottagerperforming his melancholy task, observed,with indignation, that if hewere in authority, such tyranny shouldnever be exercised over the defencelesswith impunity.On the 14th of April, 1744, afterhaving been about three years atBallitore school, he was entered as apensioner at Trinity college, Dublin.In June, 1746, he was elected a scholarof the house : a distinction which conferson its possessor the advantages ofa small annuity, a vote for the representativeof the university, and freechambers and commons during a periodof five years. The successful candidatesgo through an examination beforethe provost and senior fellows in theclassics: the correctness, therefore, ofGoldsmith's assertion, that Burke displayedno superiority in academicalexercises while at college, is, at theleast, doubtful. History, moral philosophy,the classics, rhetoric, composition,and metaphysics, are reported tohave been his favourite studies : tothese, however, he did not at all restricthimself; on the contrary, he appearsto have adopted the recommendationof his preceptor, Dr. Pelisse, to aimat the acquirement of multiform know-edmundBURKE.ledge. That he was successful in thispursuit, to a very considerable extent,is shewn by the versatility of powers,and the capacity of discoursing eloquentlyand correctly on almost everysubject that was started in his society,which he displayed in his manhood.Johnson, than whom no man knewBurke better, said of him, on differentoccasions, " Take up whatevertopic you will, Burke is ready to meetyou :" " If he were to go into a stable,and talk to the ostler for a short time,they would venerate him as the wisestof human beings:" and ' No personof sense ever met him under a gatewayto avoid a shower, who did not go awayconvinced that he was the first man inEngland."While a collegian, Burke is describedas having been a young man of quiethabits, and of a very unpretending character.No academical irregularity ison record against him, except his joininghis fellow collegians to supportBrindled Sheridan, (the father of hisfuture friend, R. B. Sheridan,) thenmanager of the Dublin theatre, againstthe rioters of 1746, who nearly destroyedthe playhouse. It has been said,that he quitted college without a degree: this, however, is contradicted byhis late biographer, Prior, who states,that he commenced A. B. in February,1747-8, and proceeded A. M. in 1751.It was intended by his friends, thathe should follow the legal professionat the English bar; and his name wasaccordingly enrolled at the MiddleTemple so early as the 24th of April,1747. In 1750, according to one usuallycorrect writer, but in 1753, as statedby others, he began to keep his terms.His talents soon brought him into notice:and he became acquainted withseveral individuals of literary eminence,partly by whose persuasion and example,perhaps, or it may be, promptedsolely by his own desire to distinguishhimself as an author, he contributedmany papers to the periodicals of theday. Some biographical writers assertthat he was compelled to exercise hisliterary talents for his support; whileothers protest that he received a sufficientallowance, from his father, for ayoung man of his habits to maintainhimself with comfort and credit; andthat his family were so able and willingto supply his wants, as well at this,as at subsequent periods of his life,that he actually received from his relations,at different times, no less asum than 20,000. His wife, a womanof very amiable character, is said tohave declared, that the report of Burkehaving been dependent on his pen forsupport, previously to coming into parliament,was a gross untruth. That hedid write for the periodicals, and waspaid for his productions, is, however,admitted on all hands ; but whetherhe derived the means of subsistencefrom* his literary exertions, or fromother sources, is a matter of much uncertainty,and little consequence.Almost every step in the early partof Burke's life, is involved in doubt,and encumbered with controversy. Accordingto one author, he became acandidate for a Glasgow professorshipbefore his arrival in London : butDugald Stewart doubts the fact of hisever having aspired to it, while it isasserted, on the authority of ProfessorTaylor, that Burke decidedly endeavoured,but without success, to procurethe chair of the professor of logic,at the university of Glasgow, either in1752 or 1753.His first avowed production was theVindication of Natural Society, a remarkablyclever production, publishedin 1750, in which the author covertlyimitated the style and principles of ,with admirable effect. Butthe burlesque was not sufficiently grossto be generally palpable ; Burke's intentionsin the pamphlet were consequentlymistaken ; and many yearsafterwards, he was attacked for promulgatingideas, which it was his aim,in the work in question, to have heldup, by an ironical advocacy, to scornand detestation.In the course of the same year heproduced his original and ingeniousTreatise on the Sublime and Beautiful.He paid dearly for the fame which thiswork acquired him, by a severe fitof illness ; before his complete recoveryfrom which, he went to Bath,where he resided in the house of atalented physician of the name of Nugent,whose daughter, Jane Mary, heafterwards married. In this lady,Burke found such a wife as few men ofgenius have had the good fortune toTHE SENATE.be blessed with : so far from ever repentingof his choice, he was oftenknown to declare, at different periodsof his life, that all his cares left him ashecrossed the threshold of his home.Connected with this union, anotherpoint of difficulty and dispute occursin the life of Burke. It has been assertedthat Miss Nugent was not onlya catholic, but that after Burke marriedher, he constantly entertained apopish priest in his house. This reportstrengthened the suspicion whichhad previously prevailed of his beinga catholic himself. He was stigmatisedwith having been educated at St. Omens ;although it is declared, that during theseveral tours which he made in France,he had by accident, and not by design,omitted visiting that celebratedplace. His exertions to remove thedisabilities under which the catholicslaboured, procured him the appellationof a Jesuit in disguise: and as areputed papist, his life was on one occasionactually endangered. He scornedto refute the slanders propagated againsthim on this score, and in reply to a remonstrancefrom his wife, (who, by-the-by,was, in fact, a presbyterian,)for suffering them to be passed uncontradicted,he stated, that he was determinedto treat them with the dignifiedcontempt they deserved ; satisfied,as he felt, that he should have thepleasure of outliving them.His reputation as an author graduallyproduced him an enlarged circleof eminent acquaintance, and full employmentfor his pen. He was engagedby Dudley, on the AnnualRegister, which was conducted underhis direction until an advanced periodof his life. For his labours in thiswork, the first series of which appearedin June, 1759, he probably receivedabout 100 per annum. Dr.Johnson, Hume, Lord Lyttleton, Murphy,Garrick, and many other celebratedmen, were now his companionsand friends ; and he was one of the firstnine members of the club held at theTurk's Head, near Soho-square, whichwas established under the auspices ofJohnson.About the year 1759, Burke obtainedan introduction to Mr. WilliamGerard Hamilton, better known asSingle-speech Hamilton, a nick-namewhich he obtained through havingspoken one eloquent oration, and neverafter, during a period of thirty years,opening his lips in the house of commons,except to say aye or no, in adivision. This one celebrated speechwas attributed to the powerful pen ofBurke ; but no good reason has beenoffered against the prima facie presumptionof its having been composedby the man who delivered it.Hamilton was appointed secretary tothe lord-lieutenant of Ireland, in 1761,and Burke accompanied him to Dublin,not in an official capacity, but as aprivate friend and adviser. For hisservices on this occasion, he obtained apension of 300 a year on the Irishestablishment; which, however, he indignantlythrew up, after enjoying itonly eighteen months, in consequenceof a rupture with Hamilton ; who, itseems, claimed his servitude for life,in consequence of the pension havingbeen procured partly through his(Hamilton's) interest.About the latter end of 1763, Burkebecame acquainted with Barry, thepainter, who was introduced to hisnotice and protection by Dr. Sleigh, ofCork. At one of the first interviewsbetween these two distinguished men,Barry, in support of an opinion he hadbroached, quoted a passage, from theEssay on the Sublime and Beautiful,of which he expressed his most enthusiasticadmiration; but he had nosuspicion that his new friend was theauthor of it. Burke depreciated thework as being of no authority : Barrygrew warm ; and, at length, Burke, toappease him, confessed that the essaywas his own production ; on which, theenthusiastic painter rushed up to him,embraced him with great earnestness,and, to Burke's extreme gratification,produced a copy of the volume, completelytranscribed with his (Barry's)own hand.Although Burke's means were slender,he contrived to get the youngpainter across the Channel, and to assisthim until he obtained sufficient employmentfor his support. In 1765, withthe assistance of his friend, WilliamBurke, he sent him for improvement toItaly ; where Barry remained for fiveyears wholly dependent on his twogenerous friends. In one of his lettersEDMUND BURKE.to Burke, he gratefully says, " youought surely to be free with a man ofyour own making; who has found in youfather, brother, friend, every thing !"On Barry's return, Burke endeavouredto root out the deistical notionswhich had taken possession of hismind ; he afterwards befriended him onevery occasion ; and, it is stated, weareinclined to think incorrectly, thatsome portion of the merit, so far asregards conception, is due to him, ofBarry's paintings, in the great room ofthe Society of Arts. Some anecdotesare related of these eminent men,which shew that Burke, on several occasions,kindly conformed to the curiouswhims of his talented friend ; and, it issaid, that he once dined with Barry,in the painting loft of the latter, onbeef steaks, which he partly cookedwhile Barry went to a neighbouringpublic-house to fetch porter.Burke, at length, obtained an entryinto public life : the Marquis of Rockingham,on being called to the head ofthe treasury, in 1765, having appointedhim his private secretary, and procuredhis return to parliament as member forWendover, in Buckinghamshire. Burkenow commenced his long and brilliantpolitical career, and the succeedingevents of his life, are almost as muchmatter of history as biography. Previouslyto his entering parliament, hehad, for some time, attended every importantdiscussion in the house of commons.He had also studied politicaleconomy; taken lessons in the art ofspeaking, from Garrick ; disciplinedhimself for debate at the famous RobinHood society, and was supposed by hisfriends to be already an accomplishedorator. Shortly after the opening ofthe session, in 1766, he took a prominentpart in a debate relative to theaffairs of America. For the abilityhe displayed on this occasion, he obtainedthe most flattering approbationfrom Pitt, afterwards Earl of Chatham,whose applause was of itself, in generalestimation, a passport to fame. Sir JohnHawkins having, at this period, expressedhis amazement at Burke's precociouseminence, Johnson said to him,There is nothing marvellous in it, SirJohn ; we, who know Burke, feel surethat he will be one of the first men inthe country."After a remarkably brief reign, theRockingham party retired from office :on which occasion Burke drew up asort of manifesto, entitled, A ShortAccount of a late Short Administration.About this time he purchased a villanear Beaconsfield, for which he gave asum exceeding ^20,000. How he acquiredso large an amount is exceedinglydoubtful. While one set of hisbiographers assert that the money inquestion was nominally a loan, but inreality a gift, from his munificent friend,Lord Rockingham, it is contended byothers, that a part only of the amountwas advanced by his patron, a considerableportion of it being cash whichhe received under the wills of his fatherand elder brother. His old friend Johnson,frequently visited him at Beaconsfield; and one day, after wanderingover the grounds for some time, exclaimed,in an animated manner,Burke soon took a leading part in theprincipal debates in the house of commons.He signalized himself as a decidedenemy to all the obnoxious measuresof government against the Americancolonies; as a champion for theliberty of the subject; and as a powerfuladvocate for religious toleration. In1774, he was unexpectedly invited tobecome a candidate for Bristol, andobtained his return, free of expense.At the conclusion of one of hisbrilliant harangues from the hustings,during this election, a rival candidate,who was an American merchant, insteadof making a speech in his turn,exclaimed with great emphasis, " Gentlemen,I say ditto to Mr. Burke."In his address of thanks at the terminationof the contest, Burke boldlytold his constituents that he intendedto vote in parliament according to thedictates of his own conscience, and notin blind obedience to the instructionsof those who sent him there. " Yourrepresentative," said he, "owes you notonly his industry, but his judgment;and he betrays, instead of serving you,if he sacrifices it to your opinion."The affairs of America for some timealmost entirely engrossed his attention:one of his numerous speeches in favourof conciliating the colonies, Mr. Fox,nearly twenty years afterwards, recoilSENATE.mended the members of the house ofcommons to read by day, and meditateupon by night ; to peruse and study itagain and again, until it was firmly imprintedon their minds, and impressedon their hearts. During one of thedebates on this important subject,Hartley, the member for Hull, afterhaving driven four-fifths of a very fullhouse from the benches, by an unusuallydull speech, at length, requested thatthe riot act might be read, for thepurpose of elucidating one of his propositions.Burke, who was impatientto address the house himself, immediatelystarted up and exclaimed, " Theriot act ! my dearest friend, why in thename of every thing sacred, have theriot act read ? The mob, you see, isalready dispersed !" Peals of laughterfollowed the utterance of this comicappeal, which Lord North frequentlydeclared to be one of the happiest instancesof wit he ever heard.*Burke was equally felicitous in manyother expressions which, as on this occasion,were elicited by the circumstancesof the moment. While Lord Northwas at the head of public affairs, Burke,during a conversation relative to theScotch anti-popish mob, thought properto censure the supineness of governmentwith great severity: in the midstof his speech, he suddenly perceivedthat the premier had fallen into a profoundnap ; and directing the attentionof the house to the circumstance, heobserved, " Government, it is to behoped, is not defunct, but drowsy.Brother Lazarus," continued he, pointingto Lord North, " is not dead, heonly sleeper !" On another occasion,having supported a strong recommendationto economy in the public expenditure,by the apothegm, " MagnumOf this incorrigible proser (Hartley) it if related,that one afternoon, Jenkiuiou, the first LordLiverpool, left the house when the member for Hullrose to speak, and presuming that the honourablegentleman would, as usual, deliver a very long dullspeech, he walked home, mounted hii horse androde to his country house, where he dined ; andafter strolling fur one time about his grounds,returned at a gentle pace to town. On his arrivallain what had been done, and how sooth the divisionmight be expected to take place. The reply he receivedwas, that Mr. Hartley had not yet done speaking; and when Jenkins, at length, thought itadvisable, in order to be in time for voting, to fodown to Westminster, he found the long-windedorator still on his legs!vertical est parsimony," somebody remindedhim, in a low tone, that he hadused a false quantity in the word vertical,having pronounced it vectKgal,instead of vertical. The orator instantlytook advantage of his own mistake :"I have just received a hint," said he,that I committed an error of quantityin my quotation; I rejoice at the circumstance,as it affords me an opportunityof repeating, with ten fold emphasisand energy, the immortal adageof the Romans, ' magnum vertical estparsimony !' "During the dreadful riots of 1780,which were occasioned by the zeal ofcertain associations, whose object wasto oppose the granting of any indulgencesto Catholics, Burke, who hadbeen one of the leading advocates ofthe latter in parliament, was caricaturedas a friar, in the act of trimming thefires of Smithfield. He was nicknamedNeddy St. Omens, denouncedas a Jesuit in disguise, and repeatedlythreatened with the vengeance of thefanatical rioters. It appears, however,from one of his own letters, that heone day had the courage to ventureamong a portion of the mob, not merelywithout any attempt at disguising himself,but openly avowing who he was.Some of the rioters, he states, weremalignant; but he found friends amongthem, and suffered no injury. Thedisturbances were, at length, terminated,and several of the ringleaderstaken, convicted, and sentenced todeath. At this time, Burke wrote tothe chief persons in power, entreatingthem to use their influence in savingas many of the misguided wretchesfrom execution as possible. Theseletters do equal honour to his philosophyand his feelings : on no otheroccasion, perhaps, did it fall to hislot to exhibit his wisdom and humanityin so splendid a light. To Sir GreyCooper he wrote as follows : " ForGod's sake, entreat Lord North totake a view of the sum total of thedeaths, before any are ordered for execution; for, by not doing somethingof this kind, people are decoyed indetail into severities they never wouldhave dreamed of, if they had had thewhole in their view at once. The scenein Surrey would have affected thehardest heart that ever was in humanEDMUND BURKE.breast. Justice and mercy have notsuch opposite interests as people areapt to imagine. I have ever observed,"he adds, " that the execution of oneman fixes the attention and excitesawe ; the execution of multitudes dissipatesand weakens the effect ; menreason themselves into disapprobationand disgust ; they compute more asthey feel less ; and every several actwhich may only appear to be necessaryis sure to be offensive."At the next dissolution of parliament,he found himself so unpopular with alarge portion of his Bristol constituentson account of his supporting the Irishtrade acts, and the claims of theCatholics for relief, that he declinedentering into a contest for the representationof that city. He afterwardsbecame member for Malton, which herepresented in parliament, during theremainder of his political career.Fox and Burke carried on so powerfulan opposition to the ministry, that atlength, in 1782, Lord North and hisfriends resigned. The Marquess ofRockingham returned to power, andBurke received the lucrative office ofpaymaster of the forces, with a seatin the privy council. It was aboutthis time, that, on the news arriving ofthe great naval victory in the WestIndies, he uttered the celebrated expression," If there were a bald spot onthe head of Rodney, I would willinglycover it with laurels !"The unexpected death of the Marquessof Rockingham, threw Burke andhis friends out of office. Lord Shellwho succeeded the marquess aspremier, was, however, soon compelledto retire, by the political junctionof Fox, Burke, and their friends,with the party headed by Lord North.This celebrated coalition succeeded topower on the resignation of Lord ShellBurke returning to his officeof paymaster-general : but their reignwas deservedly brief. The famousIndia bill of Fox, having been rejectedby the lords, after passing the commons,the king immediately dismissedthe ministry.During the administration of Pitt,which succeeded that of the coalition,Burke was in opposition. His popularityhad, however, considerably declined: his speeches were sometimesnot honoured with a reply ; on otheroccasions he was put down by vociferation,or rendered inaudible by continualcoughing. His best friendsadmit, that he was occasionally dull indebate at this period. His prolixitywas sometimes so tedious, that he obtainedthe nick-name of The DinnerBell, from the circumstance of two-thirdsof the house retiring to refreshas soon as he rose to speak. Agentleman, on entering the lobby, onenight, was met by such a number ofmembers, that he was induced to inquireif the house was up? " No," repliedone of the fugitives, " but Burkeis." " Ask any well-informed publiccharacter," said General Fitzpatrick,in speaking of Burke, " who is the bestinformed man in parliament, and theanswer will certainly be, Burke ; inquirewho is the most eloquent, or the mostwitty, and the reply will be, Burke ;then ask who is the most tiresome, andthe response will still be, Burke mostcertainly, Burke." On one occasion,this extraordinary man having risento speak with several documents in hishands, a plain county member presumedto inquire if the honourable gentlemanmeant to read his large bundle ofpapers, and to bore the house with oneof his long speeches into the bargain.Never before, to adopt the observationof George Selwyn, was the fable of thelion put to flight by the braying of anass so completely realized : burstingwith rage, yet incapable of uttering aword, Burke strode across the floor, andpositively ran out of the house.In 1784, he was elected lord rector ofthe university of Glasgow. About thesame time, he lost his old companion,Dr. Johnson, who, almost in his lastmoments, when Burke feelingly remarked,that the presence of a friendmight be irksome to him, replied,Sir, you are in error : I must be in awretched state, indeed, when your companywould not delight me."In 17S6, Burke entered on one of themost eventful tasks of his whole politicallife namely, the prosecution ofWarren Hastings. His motives in bringingforward the charges, on which animpeachment against Hastings was atlength founded, have been variously represented.He has been bitterly reviledby some writers, for his conduct in thisTHE SENATE.matter, and as warmly applauded byothers. One writer accuses him of originatingthe accusations out of personalpique, because a slight had been shewnby Hastings to Mr. William Burke;another stigmatizes the whole affair asamere job ; a third suggests that itarose out of a desire to justify Fox'srejected India bill ; and a fourth attributesit solely to Burke's feelings asapatriot, and an enemy to oppression.Whatever difference of opinion mayexist with regard to his motives, it isgenerally admitted that he supportedthe charges with eloquence almostsuperhuman. He occupied four daysin opening the case, and it has beenpowerfully observed, that no termscan describe the more than mortalvehemence with which he uttered hismanifold accusations. While describingsome of the cruelties practised in India,during the period that Hastings wasgovernor-general, " curses, not loud butdeep," are said to have been utteredagainst the perpetrators of them, by themale portion of his hearers ; and sopowerful was the impression producedby his statements on the females present,that sobbing, tears, and evenscreams, ensued. Mrs. Sheridan, andsome other ladies, fainted during therecital. Even the iron-hearted Thur-lowwas affected ; and Hastings, himself,admitted, that for half an hour helooked up to the orator in a reverie ofwonder, and actually felt himself tobe the most culpable being on earth.But," he adds, " I returned to myown bosom, and there found a consciousnesswhich consoled me under allI heard and all I suffered."It must be confessed that these extraordinaryeffects were produced by strongexaggerations, and the vehement expressionof the orator's feelings at horrorswhich were never perpetrated, atleast, to the extent alleged against theaccused. Instead of acting with thecalm dignity of a public prosecutor beforethe highest tribunal in the kingdom,he suffered his feelings, as anadvocate, or, perhaps, his desire of producingadmiration at his stupendouspowers, so far to overwhelm his judgment,that he assailed the late governor-generalwith the most virulent invectives; and magnified facts which heeither knew or ought to have known,were peccadillos, rather than crimes,into the most revolting enormities.While exhausting the whole powers ofhis mind in execrating the tyrannicalconduct of the accused, he renderedhimself obnoxious to the charge ofoppression, by persecuting the temporaryvictim ot his miraculous eloquence.As a proof of his feelingsagainst the supposed delinquent, it isrelated, that on one of the days of thetrial, he said to a young nobleman, theheir-presumptive to a peerage, whomhe found in the manager's box, " I amglad to see you here ; I shall be stillmore happy to see you there (pointingto the peers' seats) ; I hope you will bein at the death : I should like to bloodyou !" For the honour of his head, aswell as his heart, it is to be hoped, thatthese atrocious expressions have beenfalsely attributed to him. It is proper,however, to observe that the anecdoteis reported upon very good authority.His rancorous hostility to Hastingsoccasioned the following severe epigram,(written, it is said, by the lateLord Ellenborough) which was handedto him, in an envelope, just as he wasabout to open one of the charges of theimpeachment :Oft hare we wonder'd that on Irish groundNo poisonous reptile has ere yet been fouiiil ;Reveal'd the secret stand of Nature'! work.She lav'il her venom to create a Bur IThis bitter effusion produced a momentaryeffect on the orator's nerves :he indignantly tore the paper on whichit was written in pieces; but the lineswere so impressed on his memory, that,long afterwards, he repeated them tosome of his friends.During the illness of George theThird, in 1788, Burke, in opposition toPitt, advocated the right of the Princeof Wales to a regency without restriction: the contest of opinions, on thispoint, had scarcely been concluded,when the cause was removed, for thattime at least, by the king's recovery.On the breaking out of the Frenchrevolution, while his friends, Fox andSheridan, expressed their warm admirationat the event, Burke, in thelanguage of an intelligent writer,preached a crusade" against the principlesof those who had effected andsupported it. The consequence of thisEDMUND BU RK E.schism was a rupture between the principalmembers of the opposition. In adebate on the Canada bill, in 1791,Burke, who had previously declared,that he and Sheridan were separated inpolitics for ever, solemnly renouncedall connexion, either public or private,with Fox; and neither humiliation orentreaties, on the part of the latter couldever after appease him. "My separationfrom Mr. Fox," said he, " is aprinciple, and not a passion : I hold itmy sacred duty, to confirm what I havesaid and written, by this sacrifice. Andto what purpose would be the re-unionfor a moment? I can have no delightwith him, nor he with me." When thespeedy dissolution of Burke was confidentlypredicted, Fox wrote to Mrs.Burke, earnestly entreating that hemight be permitted to have an interviewwith her husband ; but even that favourwas refused. Mrs. Burke, in reply tohis letter, stated, " That it had costMr. Burke the most heartfelt pain toobey the stern voice of his duty, inrending asunder a long friendship : butthat he had effected this necessarysacrifice ; and that, in whatever life yetremained to him, he conceived that hemust continue to live for others, andnot for himself."The violent feelings of Burke, withregard to the French revolution, arestrikingly exemplified by the followinganecdotes : During a debate on thealien act, he was guilty of the outrageousabsurdity of displaying a drawndagger to the amazed commons.This," said he, throwing the weaponviolently on the floor, " is what youwill gain by an alliance with France."Curwen relates that, one night, whilehe was waiting for his carriage, Burkecame up to him and requested, as thenight was wet, that he would set himdown. " I could not refuse," continuesMr. C. " though I felt a reluctance incomplying. As soon as the carriagedoor was shut, he complimented me onbeing no friend to the revolutionarydoctrines of the French, on which hespoke with great warmth for a fewminutes, when he paused, to affordme an opportunity of approving theview he had taken of those measuresin the house. Former experience hadtaught me the consequences of differingfrom his opinions, yet, at themoment, I could not help feeling disinclinedto disguise my sentiments.Mr. Burke, catching hold of the check-string,furiously exclaimed, ' You areone of these people, set me down!'With some difficulty I restrained him ;we had then reached Charing-cross asilence ensued, which was preserved tillwe reached his house, in Gerrard-street,when he hurried out of the carriagewithout speaking, and thus our intercourseended."His Reflections on the Revolution,were published in 1790; in a short time,by means of a French translation, theywere spread all over Europe; and theauthor received the warmest testimonialsof approbation, from the Emperorof Germany, the King of Poland, theFrench Princes, and Catherine ofRussia. George the Third distributedseveral copies of the work among hisfriends, and said it was a book whichevery gentleman ought to read. Trinitycollege, Dublin, conferred on the writerthe honorary degree of LL.D. ; andthe resident graduates of the universityof Oxford, communicated an address ofthanks to him through the celebratedMr. Windham. He produced variousother works on the French revolutionand other political subjects, which procuredhim the applause of some, andthe contempt and execrations of others.In 1794, he effected an union betweenthe old Whigs and the ministry, andwithdrew from parliament. Shortlyafterwards, he lost his beloved son,Richard, whom he seems to have consideredas a more talented man thanhimself. His grief on this occasion isdescribed as having been truly heartrending.In October, 1795, he obtaineda pension of , 1,200 a year on the civillist, and subsequently an additional annuityof 2,500, on the four and a halfper cent. fund. His acceptance of thesefavours from government, brought onhim the most rancorous abuse : and inthe opinion of many persons, it remainsan indelible stain on his political character.In the beginning of the year 1797,Burke's health declined with great rapidity.Although enfeebled in body,his mind remained unimpaired, and heconversed with his usual powers, untila short time before he died. His youngfriend, Mr. Eagle, of the war office,THE SENATE.attended him in his last moments. Whilethat gentleman and Burke's servantswere conveying him to his bed, on the8th of July, 1797, he faintly articulated,God bless you !" and after a briefstruggle, expired in their arms. Hewas buried in Beaconsfield church.Burke was about five feet ten inchesin height ; robust in form, but not corpulent; in his youth he was remarkablefor activity, and his countenance, duringthe early part and prime of his life, wasgenerally accounted handsome. Hisfeatures were expressive of benevolenceand sensibility, rather than indicativeof exalted talent. He was near-sighted,and used spectacles from about theyear 1780. He was negligent in dress ;and towards the latter end of his lifewore a little bob-wig, and a brown coat,which appeared so tight as almost toimpede the free natural action of hisarms.His character in private life wasalmost unimpeachable: as a friend, ahusband, and a father, his conduct appearsto have been exemplary. Hispowers of conversation were equal, ifnot superior to those of any man of hisday. On one occasion, when Johnsonwas ill, he said, " Edmund Burke, indiscourse, calls forth all the powers ofmy mind : were I to argue with him inmy present state, it would be the deathof me." He loved praise, abhorredslander, and was loath to give offence.There was more safety in his societythan in that of his friend, the surlylexicographer ; not that he was lesspowerful, but because he was moreamiable. He never crushed those withwhom he had been gambolling, for themere purpose of exhibiting his strength :he protected rather than assaulted hisinferiors, and appears to have occasionallydelighted in descending to thelevel of those about him, as much asJohnson gloried in constantly assertinghis supremacy. He was always preparedto enter upon subjects of themost exalted interest, and frequentlystarted them himself; but, in general,he seems to have felt a preference forlively and familiar conversation. Heloved humour, and among intimatefriends, his fancy and spirits occasionallyled him, " nothing loath," into extravaganceand folly. He not onlypunned, for the purpose, as he stated,of pleasing the ladies, but punned somiserably, that his niece, Miss French,frequently rallied him for his failures.He was so very partial to children,that he would play at tee-totus andpush-pin with them, and, apparently,take as much delight in the stories ofJack the Giant Killer and Tom Thumbas themselves. " Half an hour mightpass," says Murphy, " during which hewould keep speaking in such a waythat you could see no more in himthan an ordinary man, good-naturedlyamusing his young auditors, when someobservation or suggestion calling hisattention, a remark of the most profoundwisdom would slip out, and hewould return to his tee-totus." Itis related of him that one day, afterdining with Fox, Sheridan, Lord JohnTownshend, and several other eminentmen, at Sheridan's cottage, he amusedhimself by rapidly wheeling his host'slittle son round the front garden in achild's hand-chaise. While thus employed,the great orator, it is added,evinced by his looks and activity, thathe enjoyed the sport nearly as muchas his delighted play-fellow.He was an intense admirer of poetry,particularly that of Milton ; but likePitt, Fox, and Johnson, he had no earfor music. He was neither addicted tothe bottle or the dice-box : he scarcelyknew the most simple games at cards :and although he drank wine, in moderation,(claret was his favourite,)during the early part of his life, he preferredvery hot water, latterly, to anyother beverage. " Warm water," hewould often observe, " is sickening, buthot water stimulates." He was a manof extraordinary application : his studieswere so extensive, and his attentionwas so much occupied by public affairs,that he had, as he said, no time to beidle. While some of his political friendswere sleeping off the effects of a taverncarousal, or recruiting their mental andbodily powers, after having exhaustedboth at the gaming table, he was engagedin political or private business, instudy or literary labour. On his wayto the house, he was in the habit ofcalling on Fox, whom he usually foundjust risen from bed, fresh and unsatedfor the struggles of the evening, whileBurke was at the same moment nearlyexhausted by the occupations of theEDMUND BURKE.morning. " It is no wonder, therefore,"he would sometimes say, " that Charlesis so much more vigorous than I am inthe debate."At his entrance into public life, hecan scarcely be said to have joined aparty on conviction of the propriety oftheir principles : he seems rather tohave enlisted as a recruit, in hopes ofpromotion, under the banners of thefirst political leader who offered himbounty. He partook largely of the publicopinions of his noble patron, LordRockingham, and was more of an aristocratthan the majority, if not all, ofhis junior coadjutors in opposition. Hedetested what he termed pedlar principlesin public affairs, but maintainedthe necessity of retrenching the publicexpenditure; of being economical withoutdegenerating into parsimony.One of the chief errors of his politicallife was, his joining Fox in an attemptto strengthen their own party, by anunion with another, on which he and hisfriends had previously lavished the mostvehement invectives. That the coalitionministry was unpopular, althoughsupported by the most splendid talents,is by no means surprising. In publicopinion, it stood between the horns ofa dilemma : if the abuse of Burke'sparty were merited by Lord North andhis adherents, they were unfit to holda place in administration, especially inconjunction with those who had exposedtheir incapacity : on the otherhand, if the censure which had beenso liberally bestowed on them, werenot warranted by facts, Burke andhis political friends, from whom it emanated,were subject to a triumphantcharge of having acted most unworthilyduring their opposition to Lord North'sadministration j and each party wasalike guilty of meanness, in collecting,for motives of political interest, withthe other, from which it had endured,or on which it had inflicted, the mostexasperating abuse.On no other subject, except, perhaps,Pitt's bill for parliamentary reform,which Burke strenuously opposed,did his aristocratic feelings sofaroverwhelm his popular principles ason that of the revolution in France.A difference of opinion on the topicwas sufficient to extinguish his privateregard : he ceased to be conciliatory,and lost his usual liberality while discussingit. " He left no means unemployed,"says Nicholls, " to inflamethe whole of Europe to the adoptionof his opinion. The late Sir PhilipFrancis used to say, that if the friendsof peace and liberty had subscribed30,000 to relieve Burke's pecuniaryembarrassments, there would have beenno war against the French revolution.As a public speaker, Burke's mannerwas bold and forcible ; his delivery vehementand unembarrassed; but, thougheasy, he was inelegant. His head continuallyoscillated, and his gesticulationswere frequently violent. To the lasthour of his life his pronunciation wasHibernian. Although a great orator,he was not a skilful debater. Fewmen ever possessed greater strength ofimagination, or a more admirable choiceof words. His mind was richly stored,and he had the most perfect masteryover its treasures. His astonishingexuberance was often fatal to his success.He crowded trope on trope, andmetaphor on metaphor, with such profusion,that, although he always keptthe main question in view, every oneelse often lost sight of it. He morefrequently astonished than convinced.It has been said, that, to have attaineda relish for the charms of his compositions,was to have greatly advanced inliterature ; but, unfortunately for hissuccess in debate, he was not aware of,or did not heed, this important facthimself. He gave his hearers creditfor an alacrity of comprehension, " aknowledge of things visible and invisible;" the sober realities of historicaltruth, the arcana of science, the mostexalted flights of poetry, and the feelings,habits, and opinions, of the variousgrades of society in different ages andcountries, which few men possess. Hedrew his illustrations from what, tomost of his hearers, was terra incognita; his figures were startling, and,to many of his auditors, mysterious.He amazed and stultified the countrygentlemen by his gorgeous imagery ;the splendid ornaments with which heoften bedecked and half buried hisarguments; and, at length, they turneda deaf ear to what they could notunderstand. In his most brilliantefforts, he was sometimes deemed dull,because, by those whom he addressed,THE SENATE.he was incomprehensible ; and he wasnot unfrequently laughed at for beingabsurd when safely winging his gloriousway along the brink of the sublime.The numerous technical terms, derivedfrom a variety of occupations,with which he enriched and invigoratedhis diction, often tended to disguise hismeaning; and the luxuriance of hisfancy frequently betrayed him, duringthe warmth of debate, into a ludicrousconfusion of metaphor. He carriedfew of the virtues of his social deportmentinto the house of commons ;where, on many occasions, he wascoarse, intemperate, and reckless ofinflicting pain on those who were opposedto him in political opinions. Hiscopiousness repeatedly bordered on prolixity; his praise, on fulsome flattery ;his indignation, on virulence; his imaginativeflights, on nonsensical rhapsody; and his splendid diction on grossbombast.But, with all his faults, Burke was oneof the very few of whom it may safelybe said, " This man was a genius." Hiscontemporaries have applied almost everylaudatory epithet in the language to hiseloquence. Johnson said he was notonly the first man in the house ofcommons, but the first man everywhere; and, on being asked if he didnot think Burke resembled Cicero,replied " No, sir ; Cicero resembledBurke." Crabbe states that his powerswere vast, and his attainments various.Pitt characterized some of his remarksas the overflowing of a mind, the richnessof whose wit was unchecked forthe time by its wisdom. In the languageof Castles, he possessed the sublimesttalents, the greatest and rarest virtues,that ever were enshrined in a singlecharacter. When he died, Windhamsaid that it was not among the leastcalamities of the times that the worldhad lost him. Curwen asserts that henot only surpassed all his contemporaries,but, perhaps, never was equalled.Instance, principal of Alban Hall,and Camden professor of ancient history,asserts that it would be exceedinglydifficult to meet with a personwho knew more of the philosophy, thehistory, and the filiation of languages,or the principles of etymological deduction,than Burke. Wilberforce. whowas usually opposed to him in politics,confessed that his eloquence hadalways attracted, his imagination continuallycharmed, and his reasoningoften convinced him. " Who is there,"says Dr. Parr, speaking of Burke,among men of eloquence or learningmore profoundly versed in every branchof science ? Who is there that hascultivated philosophy, the parent of allthat is illustrious in literature or exploit,with more felicitous success ? Whois there that can transfer so happily theresult of laborious and intricate researchto the most familiar and populartopics? Who is there that possessesso extensive, yet so accurate, an acquaintancewith every transaction recentor remote?"His mind, by one author, has beendescribed as an encyclopedia, fromwhich every man who approached itreceived information. As an orator,says another, notwithstanding somedefects, he stands almost unrivalled.Learning, observes a third, waited uponhim like a handmaid, presenting to hischoice all that antiquity had culled orinvented ; and if grandeur, says a fourth,is not to be found in Burke, it is to befound nowhere. Gerard Hamilton,when at variance with him, protestedthat this extraordinary man understoodevery thing but gaming and music.Goldsmith, speaking of Johnson, said,Does he wind into a subject like aserpent, as Burke does?" Lord JohnTownshend, after' hearing one of hisearly speeches, exclaimed, " Good God !what a man is this ! How could heacquire such transcendent powers!"Lord Thurlow is reported to have expressedan opinion that he would beremembered with admiration when Pittand Fox would be comparatively forgotten; and Fox himself, on more thanone occasion, confessed, that all he hadever read in books, all that his fancyhad imagined, all that his reasoningfaculties had suggested, or his experiencehad taught him, fell far short ofthe exalted knowledge which he hadacquired from Burke.His writings exhibit most of the excellenciesand some of the defectswhich characterize his speeches. Hadhe eschewed politics, and devoted himselfto literature, he would, probably,have become the greatest author of hisage. " With respect to his facility inMARQUESS OF ROCKING II AM.composition," says Hazlitt, " there arecontradictory accounts. It has beenstated by some, that he wrote out a plainsketch first, and added the ornamentsand tropes afterwards. I have beenassured by a person, who had the bestmeans of knowing, that the Letter to aNoble Lord (the most rapid, impetuous,glowing, and sportive of all his works)was printed off, and the proof sent tohim, and that it was returned to theprinting-office with so many alterationsand passages interlined, that thecompositors refused to correct it as itwas, took the whole matter to pieces,and reset the copy." [This is no extraordinarycase : we have it on literaryrecord against one author, that he wrotethree volumes of corrections, to onevolume of proofs.] " Perhaps, amongthe passages interlined," continuesHazlitt, " was the description of the Dof Bedford, as the leviathan among allthe creatures of the crown, the catalogueraison nee of the Abb Sieves'spigeon holes or the comparison of theEnglish monarchy to the proud keep ofWindsor, with its double belt of kindredand coeval towers."To conclude, Goldsmith, who was onintimate terms with him, humorously,but most truly, sketched the weakerparts of Burke's character in the followingsportive epitaph :Flee lies our good Edmund, whose genius was such,We scarcely can praise it or blame it too much ;Who, born for the universe, narrow'd his mind,And to party RHVB up what was meant for mankind ;Tho' fraught with all learning, kept straining histhroat,Who, too deep for his hearers, still went on refining',And thought of convincing, while they thought ofdining.Though equal to all things, for all things unfit,For a patriot too cool, for a drudge disobedient,And too fund of the right to pursue the expedient.In fine, 'twas his fate, unemploy'd or in pay, sir,To eat mutton cold, and cut blocks with a razor.CHARLES WATSON WENTWORTH, MARQUESS OFROCKINGHAM.THIS amiable nobleman was born onthe 13th of May, 1730. He succeededhis father as Marquess of Rockingham,and Earl of Malton, in Ireland, on the14th of December, 1750 ; and it was noordinary proof of the firmness of hisprinciples, that, at the age of twenty,although in possession of an immensefortune, his conduct was invariablymarked by the strictest propriety. Oncomingof age, in 1751, he took hisseat in the house of peers ; on the 9thof July, in that year, he was constitutedlord-lieutenant of the county of York;and in 1760, he was made a knight ofthe Garter.In 1763, disgusted with the proceedingsof Lord Bute, then the reigningfavourite at court, he resigned the situationof a lord of the bed-chamber,which he had for some time beforeheld, and also his lord-lieutenancy ofYorkshire. Two years had scarcelyelapsed, however, when the whole systemof government having undergone achange, he was appointed, in July,1765, first lord of the treasury, in theroom of George Grenville. He seemsto have brought to his exalted station,an anxious desire to advance the prosperityof his country; and had histalents been equal to his good intend -tons, his administration might haveproved fortunate. But the crisis inwhich he took office was important,and even dangerous ; and he had tostruggle against the intrigues of anopposition, powerful both in numbersand talent. He soon became convincedof the impracticability of remaining atthe helm of affairs, and resigned thepremiership on the 1st of August, 1766.During the long administration ofLord North, the marquess was consideredin the house of lords, as the headof the aristocratic part of the opposition; but his conduct was entirely freefrom that political rancour which hastoo often disgraced the parliamentarybehaviour of our greatest statesmen. Atlength, Lord North felt compelled tosuccumb beneath the fierce and continuedattacks of his powerful rival,Fox; and George the Third offered theTHE SENATE.premiership to Lord Shelburne, who,however, declared, that in his judgmentno one was so well fitted to take the leadin administration, as the Marquess ofRockingham. Accordingly, in March,1782, the marquess was again elevated tothe chief direction of affairs, having, forhis principal colleagues, the Earl ofShelburne and Mr. Fox. The ministrythus formed, seemed likely to be permanent; for it united in its favourmuch of the wealth and talent of thecountry. The hopes of the nation were,however, doomed to be miserably disappointed.On the 1st of July, themarquess was seized with a violentspasmodic affection, and almost instantlyexpired. He had long anticipatedhis approaching death, and is saidto have expressed but one motive forwishing a continuance of life, whichwas, that he might see his country extricatedfrom her troubles.The respectability of his characterrendered the marquess an object of generalinterest, and considerable importance; but he possessed neither masterlyeloquence, nor great political sagacity.Of his good intentions no doubtcan be entertained ; and it is to belamented that among the numbers whoexcelled him in talent, but few possessedhis admirable probity, and unalloyedpatriotism. " The late marquess,"says the Public Advertiser of July the8th, 1782, " was a warm encourager ofthe arts. He esteemed an artist, whoseworks promoted the practice of virtue,as a common benefactor to mankind.In short, there was no description ofmerit that he did not foster. His actions,both in public and private, correspondedwith our idea of true nobility; that is, a nobleness of sentimentand conduct. While the whole empirelaments him as a statesman, those whowere partakers of his munificence,who shared in the comfort and plentyof Wentworth house, where hospitalityalways stood porter at the door, mustdeplore their benefactor with deepsorrow. Here the industrious poorwere relieved, age and infirmity cherished,merit promoted, the widow consoled;and the orphan fed."The marquess was married on the26th of February, 1752, to Mary, thedaughter of Thomas Bright, Esq., ofWadsworth, Yorkshire, but left noissue.AUGUSTUS HENRY FITZROY, DUKE OF GRAFTON.THIS nobleman, who has received sounenviable an immortality from thestrictures of Junius, was the son ofLord Augustus Fitzroy, third son ofthe second Duke of Grafton. He wasborn in October, 1735, and receivedhis education at Westminster school,and St. John's college, Cambridge,where his classical attainments acquiredhim some distinction, and his profligateconduct a disgraceful notoriety.In November, 1756, he was appointeda lord of the bedchamber to George theThird, then Prince of Wales ; towardsthe end of the same year, he took hisseat in parliament, as member for St.Edmonsbury ; and in May, 1757, havingsucceeded to his grandfather's honours,he was called up to the house of lords.In July, 1765, he entered into office assecretary of state ; and resigned in May,1766. From the following August, untilJanuary, 1770, he was first lord commissionerof the treasury; and lord privyseal, from June, 1771, until November,1775.Junius, in a letter addressed to theduke, thus narrates, and severely animadvertsupon, the circumstances ofhis grace's appointment to the premiership:" The spirit of the favourite(Lord Bute) had some apparent influenceupon every administration, andevery set of ministers preserved an appearanceof duration, as long as theysubmitted to that influence : but therewere certain services to be performedfor the favourite's security, or to gratifyhis resentments, which your predecessorsin office had the wisdom, or theDUKE OF GRAFTON.virtue, not to undertake. A submissiveadministration was, at last, graduallycollected from the deserters ofall parties, interests, and connexions ;and nothing remained but to find aleader for these gallant, well-disciplinedtroops. Stand forth, my lord, for thouart the man ! Lord Bute found noresource of dependence or security inthe proud, imposing superiority of LordChatham's abilities ; the shrewd, inflexiblejudgment of Mr. Grenville ; norin the mild, but determined, integrityof Lord Rockingham. His views andsituation required a creature void ofall these properties : and he was forcedto go through every division, resolution,composition, and refinement ofpolitical chemistry, before he happilyarrived at the caput mortuum of vitriolin your grace. Flat and insipid in yourretired state; but brought into action,you become vitriol again. Such arethe extremes of alternate indolence orfury, which have governed your wholeadministration!"In July, 1769, the duke was installedchancellor of the university of Cambridge.At the latter end of the sameyear, he caused proceedings to be institutedagainst a person named Vaughan,who had attempted to corrupt his integrityby an offer of 5,000 for apatent place in Jamaica. The duke'svirtue and patriotism, on this occasion,in having refused the bribe, and prosecutedthe offender, were vaunted andextolled in all quarters, by his partyand their adherents, until, to theirdeep confusion, and the utter dismayof his grace, Junius, unexpectedly,charged him with having, some timebefore, sold a patent place in the customs,to a Mr. Hone, for the sum of3.500. The prosecution againstVaughan was, consequently, forthwithabandoned.In 1771, his mysterious and relentlesspersecutor thus addressed the duke,relative to the dismissal of the deputysurveyor-general, for having causedsome timber to be felled in Whittleburyforest, of which his grace was hereditaryranger : " Upon a representationfrom the admiralty, of the extraordinarywant of timber for the repairs of thenavy, the surveyor-general was directedto make a survey of the timberin all the royal chaces and forests inEngland. Having obeyed his orderswith accuracy and attention, he reportedthat the finest timber he hadanywhere met with, and the properest,in every respect, for the purposes ofthe navy, was in Whittlebury forest,of which your grace, I think, is hereditaryranger. In consequence of thisreport, the usual warrant was preparedat the treasury, and delivered to thesurveyor, by which he, or his deputy,were authorised to cut down the treesin Whittlebury forest, which shouldappear to be proper for the purposesabove-mentioned. The deputy, beinginformed that the warrant was signed,and delivered to his principal in London,crosses the country to Northamptonshire,and, with an officious zeal in thepublic service, begins to do his duty inthe forest. Unfortunately for him, hehad not the warrant in his pocket : theoversight was enormous, and you havepunished him for it accordingly. Youhave insisted that an active, usefulofficer, should be dismissed from hisplace : you have ruined an innocentman and his family. In what languageshall I address so black, so cowardlya tyrant? Thou worse than one ofthe Brunswick, and all the Stuartss !"Although the duke's administration,towards the close of his official career, issaid to have been exceedingly unpopular,yet the invectives of his anonymousfoe were, it is supposed, more instrumentalin driving him from power, thanthe angry murmurs of the people, orthe coolness displayed towards him bythe sovereign, with whom he had ceasedto be a favourite. Nor is it surprisingthat a man, even so daring in profligacy,public and private, as the Duke ofGrafton is represented (but certainlynot proved) to have been, by the authorof the letters of Junius, should abandonthat conspicuous station, which exposedhim to the constant repetition of attacks,equal in severity to the following passage: " There are some hereditarystrokes of character, by which a familymay be as clearly distinguished as bythe blackest features of the human face.Charles the First lived and died ahypocrite; Charles the Second was ahypocrite of another sort, and shouldhave died upon the same scaffold. Atthe distance of a century, we see theirdifferent characters happily revived andTHE SENATE.blended in your grace. Sullen andsevere, without religion; profligate withoutgaiety, you live like Charles theSecond, without being an amiable companion; and, for aught I know, maydie as his father did, without the reputationof a martyr."The duke passed the remainder ofhis long life, after his final resignationof office, in comparative retirement.He occasionally attended the house oflords, to deliver his sentiments on importantquestions, and generally votedwith the Whigs, but avoided takingany conspicuous part in politics. Earlyin life he had been suspected of a tendencytowards the principles of the dissenters,and his heterodoxy is said tohave been more and more confirmedas he advanced in years. He was fondof field sports, and had some relish forliterary enjoyment ; but it does not appearthat he ever patronized any authorexcept Bloomfield, who was born nearhis country residence. He died on the14th of March, 1811, aged seventy-six.The duke was married on the 29thof January, 1756, to Anne, heiress ofHenry Liddell, Lord Ravens worth ;who, after she had been twelve yearshis wife, and borne him four children,eloped with John, Earl of Upper Os-sort.Having obtained a parliamentarydivorce in March, 1769, in the followingMay the duke married ElizabethWrottesley, daughter of the Dean ofWindsor, and a near relative of LordOssory, who had previously been unitedto the repudiated duchess. By hissecond wife, the duke had twelvechildren. Junius did not fail to dwellseverely on his indelicate conduct, inmarrying a first cousin of the man whohad fixed that mark and title of infamyupon him, which, at the samemoment, makes a husband unhappyand ridiculous.He also speaks with great indignationof his grace's open and shamelessprofligacy. " Did not the Duke ofGrafton," he asks, "frequently lead hismistress into public, and even place heratthe head of his table, as if he hadpulled down an ancient temple ofVenus, anil could bury all decency andshame under the ruins ?" " The exampleof the English nobility may, for aughtI know," he observes in another letter,"sufficiently justify the Duke of Grafton,when he indulges his genius in allthe fashionable excesses of the age ; yet,considering his rank and station, Ithink it would do him more honour tobe able to deny the fact, than to defendit by such authority. But if vice itselfcould be excused, there is yet a certaindisplay of it, a certain outrage to decency,and violation to public decorum,which, for the benefit of society, shouldnever be forgiven. It is not that hekept a mistress at home, but that heconstantly attended her abroad ; it isnot the private indulgence, but the publicinsult, of which I complain. Thename of Miss Parsons would hardlyhave been known, if the first lord of thetreasury had not led her in triumphthrough the opera-house, even in thepresence of the queen. When we seea man act in this manner, we mayadmit the shameless depravity of hisheart, but what are we to think ofhis understanding?"However glaring the Duke of Grafton'sprivate and political demerits mayhave been, it is clear that he possessedconsiderable talent. In manners andperson he was equally disagreeable ; hiscountenance being heavy and saturnine,and his deportment haughty,sullen, and repulsive.WILLIAM PETTY, MARQUESS OF LandownerHIS nobleman, who is principallyknown by his inherited title of Earl ofShelburne, was born in May, 1737.When young, he procured a commissionin the guards, :uul exhibited eminentpersonal valour at the battles ofCamden and Minded. In 1760, he wasappointed aide-de-camp to George theThird, with the rank of colonel. In1761, he went into parliament as Chipping Combe, and in thecourse of the same year, took his seatMARQUESS OF Landownersthe house of peers, on succeeding tohis father's title of Earl of Shelburne.On entering into political life, he joinedthe Earl of Bute, and warmly supportedthe unpopular peace of 1762.In 1763, he was admitted to the privycouncil, and placed at the head of theboard of trade ; he, however, soonbroke with the ministry, and resignedhis office, to join the opposition underPitt, afterwards Lord Chatham. In1765, he married Sophia, the daughterof Earl Granville, in whose right heacquired large estates, including Lans-downhill,near Bath, from which hesubsequently took his title of marquess.The formation of a new ministryhaving devolved on Lord Chatham, onthe fall of the Rockingham administration,in 1766, he nominated LordShelburne secretary of state for thesouthern department and the colonies.When that celebrated statesman retiredfrom office, in 1768, Lord Shelburneshowed his attachment to his leader'spolitical principles, by resigning hisseals. During the American war whichsucceeded, and up to the time of LordNorth's resignation, Lord Shelburnecontinued in active opposition. Thiswas, perhaps, the most brilliant periodof his life : for although destitute ofcommanding eloquence, he attractedconsiderable notice and admiration, forthe apparently zealous patriotism andevident good sense with which heopposed the measures of government.In March, 1780, he became involvedin a serious quarrel with Fullarton, amember of parliament, who, after havingbeen for some time private secretaryto Lord Torment, was raised tothe rank of lieutenant-colonel in thearmy, and appointed to the commandof a newly-raised regiment. LordShelburne animadverted severely onthe circumstance in the house oflords; and having, in the course of hisspeech, designated Fullarton as a merecommis," the latter called him out,and a duel took place between them,on the 22nd of March, 1780. Theyfired at each other, and missed; but,on discharging his second pistol, Fullartonwounded his antagonist in thegroin. Lord Shelburne then fired hissecond pistol in the air ; but declaredthat he was ready to receive anotherfire, if Colonel Fullarton harbouredany resentment against him. The colonel,however, declared that he wassatisfied : and thus the affair ended.On the overthrow of the North administration,in 17b2. and the accessionof the Marquess of Rockingham to thepremiership, Lord Shelburne was appointedsecretary of state for foreignaffairs ; and on the death of the marquess,succeeded him as prime minister.His elevation to the head of publicaffairs, however, so disgusted the Portlandparty, that some of his principalcolleagues, including Fox and Burke,resigned. Although possessed of considerablepolitical knowledge, he wasless adapted for so exalted a station,especially at a very critical period,than for some secondary post, in which,says Dr. Bisset, from his abundantstores, he might have supplied materialsfor the operation of a more energeticand less experienced genius. He labouredhard to finish the negotiationsfor peace which had been commencedunder his predecessor; but his endeavours,were thwarted by the disgracefulunion of Fox and Lord North,which gave them such a predominancein parliament, that, early in 1783, hewas compelled to yield up office in theirfavour.It was anticipated that Lord Shellwould have been, nominally atleast, at the head of the new administration,when the coalition ministrywas dismissed : the younger Pitt was,however, appointed premier, and LordShelburne obtained no place in thecabinet, but was rewarded for his pastservices with the titles of Marquess ofLansdowne, and Earl of Combe.He now determined to retire from publiclife, but on the breaking out of theFrench revolution, he emerged fromhis seclusion and joined the opposition,to which he continued to lend the aidof his waning talents until his death,which took place on the 7th of May,1805.His first wife died in 1771, at theearly age of twenty-five ; and in 1779, hemarried Lady Mary Fitzpatrick, sisterto the Earl of Upper Ossory, who diedin 1789. By each of these ladies hehad a son, both of whom succeeded tothe honours of the marquess, the elderhaving died, after coming to the title,without issue.THE SENATE.In all the relations of private life, heappears to have been a truly amiableman ; adding lustre to his elevated stationby his virtues, and dignified yetunostentatious manners. As a publiccharacter, he was evidently ratherformed for speculation than action. Hisabilities were considerable, but he didnot possess that commanding geniuswhich moulds the public mind to itswill. After his secession from office,he devoted much of his time to literaryand scientific pursuits, and formed avaluable library, the manuscripts ofwhich were purchased, after his death,for the British Museum.WILLIAM HENRY CAVENDISH BENTINCK,DUKE OF PORTLAND.THIS nobleman was the eldest sonof the second Duke of Portland. Hewas born on the 14th of April, 1738,and received his education at Eton,and Christchurch, Oxford. He wentinto parliament, in 1761, as memberfor Weobly, in Herefordshire, whichplace he continued to represent, untilcalled to the house of peers, on thedeath of his father, in May, 1762.In the early part of his politicalcareer, he generally voted with theopposition against Lord North. Underthe brief administration of the Marquessof Rockingham, he was appointed, in1782, to the office of lord-lieutenant ofIreland, which he resigned on the 15thof September in the same year, in consequenceof the death of the premier.On the 5th of April, 1783, he becamefirst lord of the treasury, in the memorablecoalition ministry of which Foxwas virtually the head ; but the dukeretained the seals of office only untilthe 27th of the following month ofDecember ; from this time he actedwith the Whig opposition, until takingalarm at the revolution in France, heseceded, with Burke and others, fromhis party, and did all in his power tostrengthen the government. On thellth of July, 1794, he was appointedto the home secretaryship, which heretained until the resignation of Pitt,in 1801, when he was chosen presidentof the council, and remained inoffice until the dissolution of the Addingtoncabinet.On the dismissal of Lord Grenvilleand his colleagues, in 1807, the dukewas once more placed at the head ofthe treasury. This appointment excitedgreat ridicule and discontent; thepremier was caricatured as a block ofPortland stone, against which the oppositionmembers were breaking theirshins ; and the people in general appearto have considered his abilities inadequateto the proper discharge of hisimportant official duties. But althoughhe failed to excite admiration, his ministerialconduct rarely provoked censure.He continued at the head of theadministration until his decease, whichtook place, after a brief illness, on the30th of October, 1809. In addition tohis other dignities, the duke was aknight of the Garter, chancellor of theuniversity of Oxford, landlord-lieutenantof Nottinghamshire.He was married on the 8th of November,1766, to Dorothy Cavendish,daughter of the Duke of Bedford, bywhom he had six children. His domesticqualities have been highly eulogised,and he appears to have had abetter claim to the epithet of good,than great. He was eminent for hisstation and his virtues rather than forhis abilities, being chiefly indebted forhis political importance to high rankand dignified probity ; his talents beingfar from brilliant, and his powers oforatory humble. Long experience,however, rendered him practically conversantwith all the forms of government,and, although not an able, itmust be allowed that he was at leasta useful, a disinterested, and a patrioticminister.VISCOUNT MELVILLE.HENRY DUNDAS, VISCOUNT MELVILLE.HENRY, a younger son of RobertDuncan, (who, in 1737, was raised tothe judicial bench, under the title ofLord Arniston, and, in 1748, becamepresident of the court of session,) wasborn in 1740, and educated at the universityof Edinburgh. He was calledto the bar at an early age, and althoughof gay habits, soon obtained considerablecelebrity as an advocate. In 1773,he was appointed solicitor-general; in1775, lord-advocate ; and two yearsafter, joint keeper of the signet forScotland.The misfortunes of the American war,and the general weakness of LordNorth's administration, had encouragedthe Whigs to entertain sanguine hopesof a speedy return to power, whenDuncan began to distinguish himself inthe house of commons, of which he becamea member, on being nominatedlord advocate. He, of course, supportedthe measures of the ministry ; but stroveto make himself so eminently masterof some of the grand branches of thenational business, that, in whateverchanges might ensue, his aid or oppositionshould be too important to beslighted. In proportion as the Britishcause became desperate in America, thepublic attention was directed to India,as the source whence alone counterbalancingadvantages could be obtained.A secret committee of the house ofcommons was appointed to inquire intothe causes of the wac in the Carnatic,and of the unfavourable condition ofthe British possessions in those parts.In the report that Duncan made fromthis committee, as its chairman, and inthe formation of a bill, which he subsequentlyintroduced for the regulationof Indian affairs, his abilities for businesswere conspicuously displayed.The efforts of the opposition preventedthe passing of his bill ; but in the courseof the inquiry by which it was suggested,he acquired and exhibited aknowledge of oriental politics that afterwardseminently contributed to his advancement.During the premiership of the Marquessof Rockingham, and that ofhis official successor, Lord Shelburne,Duncan held the office of treasurer ofthe navy ; but he was obliged to retirewhen Lord North and Mr. Fox cameinto power, at the head of the famouscoalition. As soon, however, as thisunpopular administration yielded to therising influence of Pitt, Duncan resumedhis official post, and was subsequentlyappointed president of the board of control,and honoured with a seat in thecabinet. In 1791, he became secretaryof state for the home department. In1794, he was nominated secretary atwar, and continued in active employmentuntil 1801, when he retired fromadministration with Pitt and his friends,and was created Viscount Melville. Hetook his title from the name of an estate,to which his wife, the daughter of anopulent ship-builder, of the name ofJennie, was heiress.On the resignation of Addington, andthe return of Pitt to power, in 1804,Lord Melville was created first lord ofthe admiralty, and remained in thatoffice till he was impeached, in 1805, ofhigh crimes and misdemeanors allegedto have been committed by him whiletreasurer of the navy. Public opinion,was, at the time, greatly excited againstLord Melville ; but now that partyspleen has subsided, there seems noground to quarrel with the decision ofthe house of lords, which, after thefullest investigation, acquitted him ofall the charges that had been preferredagainst him by the commons. Theproceedings preparatory to the impeachment,had, however, led to hisresignation, and the erasure of his namefrom the list of privy-counsellors. Hewas subsequently restored to his seatat the council board, but never returnedto public business. He died in Scotland,on the 27th of May, 1811, and wassucceeded by his son.Lord Melville was distinguished bylaborious application ; and possessed, inan uncommon degree, those powers ofintuitive discernment, of despatch, andof arrangement, by which the toil ofbusiness is exceedingly abridged. Herose early, and was, consequently, ableTHE SENATE.to accomplish much which social intercourseand parliamentary attendancewould otherwise have hindered himfrom performing. His manners andgeneral conduct, in private life, werewinning and courteous ; and he is saidto have enjoyed, with a high relish,the pleasures of domestic and conviviallife. To him, the entire merit oforiginating and carrying the Egyptianexpedition into effect, has been confidentlyattributed. He was honouredwith the personal regard of the king, andmuch esteemed by Pitt, of whom he wasone of the most distinguished and mostzealous partisans. He was a neat andsensible speaker, a clever debater, anda shrewd, diligent, and useful minister.SIR PHILIP FRANCIS.THIS remarkable man was the sonof the well-known translator of Horaceand Demosthenes. He was born inDublin, on the 22nd of October, 1740.Early in 1750, he came over to England,and being placed on the foundation ofSt. Paul's school, he made so rapid aprogress in learning, that Thicknessee,the head master, deemed him to be oneof the most promising youths ever placedunder his care.In 1756, when barely sixteen yearsold, Lord Holland, his father's patron,nominated him to a place in one of thegovernment offices. He soon afterwardsprocured an introduction toPitt, afterwards Lord Chatham, forwhom he occasionally acted as amanuensis,and by whose influence he became,at the early age of eighteen,private secretary to General Bligh,when that officer was appointed to commandan expedition against the coastof France. Young Francis attendedthe landing of the British troops atSt. Males ; and, on his return to thiscountry, or shortly afterwards, by therecommendation of Pitt, he was nominatedsecretary to the Earl of Kinnoul,British ambassador at the court ofLisbon, with whom he proceeded toPortugal. At this time he was onlytwenty years of age. He returned toEngland in 1763, and received fromWelcome Ellis, then secretary at war, anoffice in his own department, which heresigned in 1772, and spent the remainderof that year in travellingthrough France, Flanders, Germany,and Italy. In June, 1773, he was nominatedone of the members of the councilof Bengal, with a salary of 10,000per annum, through the interest ofLord Barrington, whose conduct in thepreceding year had caused him to retirefrom the war office in disgust.In the summer of 1774, he embarkedfor India with his coadjutors, Sir JohnClavering and Colonel Jonson, whoagreed with him in opinion, that itwas advisable to conciliate the nativepowers, and to oppose the giganticplans of aggrandisement conceived,and in part executed, by WarrenHastings, the governor-general. Accordingly,soon after their arrival atBengal, they signed a minute, thatpeace with the country powers, togetherwith an inviolable observance ofpublic faith, and a strict attention topublic justice in all transactions withthe natives, constituted the systemof policy most advantageous for theinterests of the British nation.The designs of the governor-generalwere frequently thwarted by Francisand his two colleagues, until the suddendeath of the latter restored toHastings his ascendancy in the council.Various bickering now ensued betweenthe governor-general and Francis ; and,at length, on the 14th of August, 1780,the former caused the following memorandumto be forwarded to the latter :My authority for the opinions whichI have declared concerning Mr. Francis,depends on facts which have passedwithin my own certain knowledge. Ijudge of his public conduct by my experienceof his private, which I havefound to be void of truth and honour.This is a severe charge, but temperatelyand deliberately made, from thefirm persuasion that I owe this justiceto the public and myself, as the onlyredress to both, for artifices of whichSIR PHILIP FRANCIS.I have been a victim, and whichthreaten to involve their interests withdisgrace and ruin. The only redressfor a fraud, for which the law has madeno provision, is the exposure of it."Francis immediately challenged thegovernor-general, and a duel ensued,in which he was severely wounded.On his recovery, he embarked for thiscountry; and on his arrival in England,at the latter end of 1781, forthwithaccused the governor-generalof various crimes and malversations;but Hastings, on account of the dazzlingsuccesses of his administration, was sopopular, that the charges at first metwith no attention. Francis, however,persevered in his implacable enmity ;and, it is supposed, assisted Burke inhis gigantic attacks against the governor-general.In March, 1787, Francis, whohad been returned for Yarmouth, in theIsle of Wight, at the general election in1784, moved the revenue charge againstHastings, which was carried by a majorityagainst the wishes of the minister." Fox, soon afterwards, proposedthat Francis should be one of the managersof the impeachment : Burke andWindham supported the motion, whichPitt very properly opposed. " This,"said he, " is a question of feeling, andnot of argument ; and I am disinclinedto appoint, as a representative of thehouse of commons, the only memberwho has, upon a former occasion, beenengaged in a personal contest with theaccused."The proposed appointment of Franciswas eventually negatived by a large majority.On this occasion, the house actedwith eminent dignity, justice, and goodfeeling. Those who supported the proprietyof an avowed, a determined, anda most virulent enemy to the accused,being selected as one of the managersof an impeachment against him, wereguilty of a daring offence against decorum,humanity and common sense : andthe avidity which Francis evinced forthe employment was altogether unpardonable.To the deep dishonour,however, of all the parties concerned,his solemn rejection by the commons,as one of their representatives beforethe peers, was evaded, on the pretextthat there appeared nothing in theorders of the house which could preventthe managers from receiving hisassistance ; and the bitter antagonist ofHastings, consequently became, nextto Burke, the most active director ofthe managing committee's proceedings.But all their exertions were futile ; theimpeachment, after having " draggedits slow length" through a period ofseven years, at length perished ignominiously;and Hastings, doubtless tothe great chagrin of Francis, perhapswithout having deserved the honour,(but we forbear to pronounce anyopinion on the subject,) was nominatedone of his majesty's privy-counsellors.For many years afterwards Francisappears to have been a prominentspeaker in the house of commons, uniformlytaking part with the opposition,and denouncing the measures of governmentwith a degree of vehemencewhich seemed rather to arise from personalpique and disappointed hope,than pure conviction. He was a sturdyadvocate for parliamentary reform, andwith a view to its more speedy attainment,founded the celebrated societycalled The Friends of the People. Healso wrote a very powerful pamphleton the subject, which brought on himthe severe animadversions of his formercoadjutor, Burke.In 1792-3, he warmly opposed thenecessity for a war with France ; andat the dissolution of parliament in 1796,he stood a contested election for Coventry,but could not procure his return.During the following six years, hehad no seat in the house, and signalizedhimself only by various publicationson the politics of the day, allof which indisputably prove that hewas a man of extraordinary intellectualpowers, vexed and irritated by disappointmentin his ambitious aspirationsafter high political eminence. He hadpassed the meridian of his life in unprofitablestruggles with opponents,who, with less intellect, had outstrippedhim in the race of preferment; andalthough he had established his characteras a statesman and an orator,he had reaped none of the rewardswhich his splendid abilities entitledhim to possess.In 1802, he was returned for Appleby,and he continued to be its representativefor many succeeding years, withoutopposition or expence. India was stillthe theme of his eloquent discourse ;THE SENATE.he could not forget, and frequently advertedto, the years he had passed inthe east; but all his exertions in behalfof the native princes were fruitless ;he was listened to and admired as theQuixote of the Brahmins, by whoseeloquence it was in good taste to bedelighted, but impolitic, visionary andabsurd to be convinced. " I passed sixyears," said he, in his abortive attackon the Marquess of Wellesley, " in perpetualmisery and contest in Bengal,at the hazard of my life : then awretched voyage of ten months, andtwo-and-twenty years of labour in thesame course, unsupported, and alone.By so long endeavouring to maintainright against wrong, I have sacrificedmy repose, and forfeited all hopes ofreward or personal advantage ; but nowI have taken my resolution, and willdo so no more: I shall never again assumean active part, much less a lead,in any discussion of Indian affairs. Asto future personal proceedings againstany man, I am resolved to take no partin them. The impeachment of Mr.Hastings cured me of that folly. I, infact, was tried, and Mr. Hastings acquitted.My spirits are exhausted, andmy mind subdued by along, unthankful,and most invidious application to onepursuit, in which I have never beenable to do any good."Francis was a zealous advocate forthe abolition of negro slavery. It isrelated of him, that during the earlydiscussions on this subject, one of hisrelatives, who possessed large propertyin the West Indies, held out such atemptation to him, to hold his peace onthe subject, as would have proved irresistibleto most men. But without a moment'shesitation, and although arrivedat a time of life when that degree ofopulence, which he did not possess,had become exceedingly desirable, hedeclared himself to be a staunch andincorruptible supporter of the views ofWilberforce.When Fox went into office it was generally,but. as it appeared, erroneously,supposed that Francis would have beenappointed governor-general of India;and no doubt exists, but that had itbeen offered to him, the latter wouldhave accepted the office; for he observed,not long before, to a friend,that he earnestly wished to concludehis career in that remote part of theglobe, where he had received his firstdisgrace. At the recommendation ofLord Grenville, he was invested withthe insignia of the Bath, on the 29th ofOctober, 1806; an empty honour, whichconsidering his irritable temper, it issurprising that he did not reject withcontempt On this occasion, it is relatedthat the heralds offered to prove, by anexact pedigree, that the new knightwas descended from a man bearing thesame name and arms as himself, onwhom a similar honour had been conferred,just before the accession ofRichard the Second; provided always,that they were paid the sum of 200for their pains ; but Francis, it appears,very properly declined purchasing genealogicalhonours at so dear a price.Wearied with his fruitless exertions, in1814 he relinquished his seat in parliament,and retired to a comparative seclusion,from which he rarely afterwardsemerged. His most eminent effort,subsequently to his secession from thehouse of commons, was at a meeting ofthe Middlesex freeholders, on the 22ndof June, 1817, when he most energeticallysupported a petition against thesuspension of the habeas corpus act.He was twice married; first, aboutthe year 1770, to a lady, doubtless ofhumble origin, and of whose name weareignorant, by whom he had a sonand two daughters ; and, secondly, in1811, when he was almost a septuagenarian,to the daughter of a clergymannamed Watkins, who was youngenough to have been his grandchild.For some months before his death, hebecame the victim of a painful andtruly distressing complaint, which precludedhim from mixing in generalsociety, and materially increased hisnatural irritability. He died at hishouse in St. James's-square, on the22nd of December, 1818.In person he was tall, thin, and elegant,even in old age. His voice wassonorous, his eye piercing, and his lookdiscriminative. In youth, and even atan advanced period of life, he was extremelyactive ; his spirits were wonderfullybuoyant; and in speaking ofhimself, he used to say, " that thesword would wear out the scabbard."His conversation is said to have beenredundant with brilliant imagery, andSIR PHILIP FRANCIS.witty illustrations. As an orator, he wasneither copious nor fluent in debate, andunless fully warmed by his subject, deliveredhis sentiments with a degree ofawkwardness, which often diminishedthe effect of his arguments. On subjects,however, which thoroughly aroused hisreally commanding intellect, he declaimedso energetically, and threw somuch authority into his tones, that hemight be said to have compelled theattention of his auditors.Burke often declared that he wasthe best pamphlet writer of his age.His style is nervous yet elegant;plain without being vulgar, and argumentativewithout being obscure. Heseems to have been fond of compositionfor its own sake, and to have feltall the pleasure of a professed author,in embodying his views of men andthings. When more than seventy, hestill continued indefatigable in hisdarling employment, and usually publishedtwo or three pamphlets withinthe year. It is believed, that he onceacted as a reporter of the debates inparliament ; and he is said to have editedsome of Lord Chatham's orations, inWright's Parliamentary History. " Heenjoyed," says an anonymous writer,the happy art of being able to communicatehis own impressions to others,without circumlocution, and withoutdifficulty. Whatever appeared intricatehe could explain, whatever was difficulthe rendered facile. He possessed strongpassions, and, consequently, strong feelings: this, perhaps, contributed to hisexcellence. He was always of opinion,that with a callous heart, there can be nogenius, no imagination, no mind,no wisdom. ' Resolute thoughts,' observedhe ' find words for themselves,and make their own vehicle ; impressionand expression are relative ideas. Hewho feels deeply, will express strongly:the language of slight sensations isnaturally feeble and superficial.' "In his old age, he was almost morbidlyanxious to avoid the charge ofgarrulity; and in a letter to LordHolland, published only two years beforehis death, he says, " Time has notyet made me garrulous, whatever itmay do hereafter. My recital concerningmyself shall be inflicted upon you,as if it were an operation, with compassionfor the patient, with the brevityof impatience, and the rapidity ofyouth, for I feel or fancy that I amgradually growing young again, in myway back again to infancy. The taperthat burns in the socket, flashes morethan once before it dies: I would notlong outlive myself, if I could help it;like some of my old friends, who, pretendto be alive, when, to my certainknowledge, they have been dead theseseven years !"He was passionately fond of music,and possessed a decided taste for thefine arts ; regarding the old masters,both in painting and sculpture, witha kind of religious reverence. Onbeing informed that the cartoons hadbeen cut and shortened, that theymight fit the panels of a palace, heexclaimed, with much energy, " Theperson who has advised such a sacrilegeought to be crucified!" Alludingto the debates in parliamenton the propriety of purchasing theElgin marbles for the nation, he saidI confess, that my temper is so impatient,and my judgment so infirm,that 1 could not endure to listen to amoney debate, whether England shallkeep and preserve the sublime remainsof Phidias, and of all the wonderfulartists of his time, as if it were about atax upon lobsters, or the toll of a turnpike."He spoke Italian and French asfluently as his native language, and hisknowledge of the Greek and Latintongues was profound. On the whole,few men of his own, or any age, haveexcelled or even equalled him in varietyof knowledge, or brilliancy of talent ;and his want of success can only beattributed to the impetuosity of histemper.The celebrated letters of Junius werefor some time generally ascribed to SirPhilip Francis; it becomes necessary,in a sketch of the life of this eminentman, therefore, to state a few particularsrelative to the mighty political shadowof the last century ; and briefly to noticeon what grounds the honour of havingbeen identical with that mysteriousmaster-spirit of his age, has been attributednot only to Sir Philip, but tovarious other individuals.Junius, it is scarcely necessary to observe,was the writer of a series of themost powerful, caustic, fearless, andTHE SENATE.eloquent political Philippics, that everappeared in this or any other country.He was a perfect master of the art ofcomposition ; nothing could exceed thebeauty of his style but the terrible virulenceof his abuse. His learning, hisexperience, and his information as topassing events, were equally great. Theinfluence which he acquired over thepublic mind was unexampled : gloryingin the loftiness of his intellect, hisamazing powers of language, and theimpenetrable cloud with which he hadartfully, but perhaps meanly, envelopedhimself, no station, however exalted,was secure from his attacks. He assumedall the stern dignity of justiceand the remorseless severity of fate.Nobility afforded no protection againsthis shafts, to which even royaltyitself was vulnerable* He drew tearsfrom the eyes of a monarch remarkablefor firmness, and consigned a primeminister to scorn and infamy enduringas the language in which he wrote.The letters of Junius were first printedin the Public Advertiser. His earlycommunications to Woodfall, the proprietor,were signed Menon, Attics,Lucius, Brutus, Poplicola, Domitian,Vindex, &c. Stimulated by the applausewith which his comparativelyhasty productions were received, he atlength commenced a series of papers,written with the utmost possible care,to which he uniformly attached thesignature of Junius. The first of thesewas published in the Public Advertiser,on the 21st of January, 1769 ; and it issaid to have produced as great a sensationas any political production thatever issued from the press. He subsequentlyaddressed various communicationsto the printer, signed withdifferent names, to explain or supporthis more laboured productions underthe signature of Junius. Those subscribedPhilo-Junius, he always intendedeventually to acknowledge.There can be no doubt that Juniuswas a man of fine talents, and finishededucation, who had carefully studiedthe language, the law, the constitution,and history of his native country. Itseems equally clear that he was a manof independent fortune, that he hadaccess to the court, and was intimatelyacquainted, from its first conception,with almost every public measure, everyministerial intrigue, and every domesticincident. That he was in easy circumstancesappears from the fact, that hewould never receive any remunerationfor his writings from Woodfall, notwithstandingthe immense sale to which, inconsequenceof their popularity, thePublic Advertiser attained. When thefirst genuine edition of his letters wasready for publication, Woodfall urgedhim to accept half its profits, or to pointout some public charity to which themoney might be presented. Junius replied," What you say about the profitsis very handsome : I like to deal withsuch men. As for myself, be assuredthat I am far above all pecuniary views,and no other person, I think, has anyclaim to share with you. Make themost of it, therefore, and let all yourviews in life he directed to a solid, howevermoderate, independence ; withoutit no man can be happy, nor even honest!"An additional proof of his affluenceoccurs in the following passageof one of his private letters: " For thematter of assistance, be assured that, ifa question should arise upon any writingsof mine, you shall not want it; inpoint of money, you shall never suffer."That Junius was a person of rank,may be reasonably inferred from manyof his own expressions, as for instance :It is true I have refused offers, whicha more prudent or a more interestedman would have accepted. Whetherit be simplicity or virtue in me, I canonly affirm that I am in earnest, becauseI am convinced, as far as myunderstanding is capable of judging,that the present ministry are drivingthis country to destruction ; and you, Ithink, sir, may be satisfied that myrank and fortune place me above acommon bribe."That he had access to court, and wasconfidentially connected with government,appears from his immediateknowledge of the designs and his intimateacquaintance with the acts of thosein power. " You may assure the public,"said he, in a private letter to Woodfall,dated January 17, 1771, " that a squadronof four ships of the line is orderedto be got ready with all possible expeditionfor the East Indies. It is to becommanded by Commodore Spry.Without regarding the language ofignorant or interested people, dependSIR PHILIP FRANCIS.upon the assurance I give you, thatevery man in administration looks uponwar as inevitable." When the Duke ofGrafton's friends were extolling his patriotismin refusing to sell a situationto Mr. Vaughan, Junius instantly denouncedhis grace as the shamelessvender of another patent office : atransaction which was thought by theparties concerned, to have been impenetrablysecret.In his letter to the Duke of Bedford,he narrated facts which couldbe known only to persons intimatelyacquainted with the Russell family : andwhen Woodfall was threatened with aprosecution for publishing that letter,he received a private communicationfrom Junius to the following effect:It is clearly my opinion that you havenothing to fear from the Duke of Bedford.I reserve something expressly toawe him. I am sure I can threaten himprivately with such a storm, as wouldmake him tremble even in his grave !"In another note to Woodfall, he wrotethus of a man named Swinney : " He isa wretched but dangerous fool ; he hadthe impudence to go to Lord G. Sackville,whom he had never spoken to, andto ask him, whether or no he was theauthor of Junius take care of him."How Junius, unless he had been LordSackville himself, should have beenacquainted with this circumstance, as itappears he was, immediately after itoccurred, baffles all conjecture.Whenever he alluded to the personalhazard he incurred by the disclosureand castigation of political delinquency,he evidently wrote with a full sense ofhis own importance. " It is by no meansnecessary," he observed in his last letterto Sir W. Draper, " that I should beexposed to the resentment of the worstand most powerful men in this country,though I may be indifferent aboutyours. Though you would fight, thereare others who would assassinate."The following passage occurs in oneof his confidential notes to Woodfall :I must be more cautious than ever:I am sure I should not survive a discoverythree days ; or if I did, theywould attaint me by bill."In his correspondence with Woodfall,every precaution that ingenuity coulddevise, or apprehension could suggest,was employed to baffle the attemptsof those who attempted to trace himout. His own parcels were sent directto the printing-office ; but he obtainedthe replies of Woodfall by stratagem :they were addressed to him in suchfictitious names, and left at such coffeehousesas he, from time to time, appointed.In one of his notes to Wood-fall,he said, " Change to the Somersetcoffee-house, and let no mortal knowthe alteration. I am persuaded youare too honest a man to contribute inany way to my destruction : act honourablyby me, and, at the propertime, you shall know me."When there was a parcel waiting forhim, the fact was announced in thePublic Advertiser, among the notices tocorrespondents, by some preconceivedsignal ; as N. E. C. A letter C. inthe usual place or a line from a Latinpoet. It does not appear in what mannerhe procured his letters from the coffeehousesto which they were sent. As hetwice declared that he was the sole depositoryof his own secret, and that itshould die with him, it might be supposedthat he uniformly went for themhimself: but, in one of his privatenotes, he says to Woodfall, " The gentlemanwho conducts the conveyancingpart of our correspondence, tells methere was much difficulty last night."It is most likely that he employedsome trust-worthy messenger, who,however, might not have been fullyaware of the nature of his agency. Atall gentleman, dressed in a light coat,with bag and sword, once threw aletter, from Junius, into the office doorof the Public Advertiser, in Ivy Lane.He was immediately followed, by agentleman who happened to be quittingWoodfall's office, into St. Paul'schurch-yard, where he got into a hackneycoach, and drove off. Was thisJunius himself? Or the gentleman whoconducted "the conveyancing part" ofhis correspondence with Woodfall?In general, he appears to have beensatisfied that the obstacles which hethrew in the way of those who soughtto discover him, were insurmountable.Be assured," said he, in one of hisconfidential notes to Woodfall, " thatit is not in the nature of things thatthey, (the Cavendish family,) or you, oranybody else, should ever know me,unless I make myself known : all arts,THE SENATE.or inquiries, or rewards, would beequally ineffectual." And again, inhis letter to Wilkes, he observed, " Atpresent, there is something oracular inthe delivery of my opinions : I speakfrom a recess which no human curiositycan penetrate, and darkness, we aretold, is one source of the sublime. Themystery of Junius increases his importance."But, occasionally, he seems to havebeen under considerable apprehensionsof being detected. " Upon no account,"said he, in one of his private notes toWoodfall, " nor for any reason whatever,are you to write to me until Igive you notice !" During a period ofthree weeks, he never addressed Wood-fallwithout warning him to beware ofGarrick. Woodfall, however, imprudentlytold Garrick, in confidence, thatJunius would, probably, soon cease towrite. Garrick immediately hurriedwith this intelligence to Ramus, oneof the royal pages ; and Ramus, withouta moment's delay, conveyed it tothe king, who was then residing atRichmond. Within twelve hours, Wood-fallreceived a note from Junius, withthe following postscript: "Bewareof David Garrick. He was sent topump you, and went directly to Richmond,to tell the king I should writeno more." Shortly afterwards, (November10th, 1771,) he penned the followingextraordinary epistle to Garrick ;which, however, was never forwarded :I am very exactly informed of yourimpertinent inquiries, and of the informationyou so busily sent to Richmond,and with what triumph andexultation it was received. I knewevery particular of it the next day.Now, mark me, vagabond ! keep toyour pantomimes ; or, be assured, YOUshall near of it. Meddle no more, thoubusy informer. It is in my power tomake you curse the hour in which youdared to interfere with JUNIUS."The king is said to have made thefollowing observation to Desaguiliers,about this period : " We know whoJunius is, and he will write no more."But it has not been satisfactorily shewnthat he ever made use of these expressions: he might possibly have repeatedthe intelligence he receivedthrough Ramus, from Garrick ; but, asit is not at all probable that he wasacquainted with the secret of Junius'sidentity, his utterance of a positiveassertion to the contrary, is scarcelycredible.It appears from the following expressionsin his correspondence withWoodfall, that Junius was unsparing oftoil, to achieve excellence as a writer.Of his first letter to Lord Mansfield, hesays, " The inclosed, though begunwithin these few days, has been greatlylaboured." Of his concluding and mostfamous letter, he observes, " At last Ihave concluded my great work, and Iassure you, with no small labour." Onanother occasion, after expressing muchanxiety that the dedication and prefaceto the genuine edition of his lettersmight be correct, he thus continues,Look to it, if you take it uponyourself, I will not forgive your sufferingit to be spoiled. I weigh everyword ; and every alteration, in my eyesat least, is a blemish."His last public letter was printed onthe 21st of January, 1772. Twelvemonthsafterwards, (January 19, 1773,)he sent the following note to Woodfall,who never heard from his extraordinarycorrespondent again : " I have seen,"says he, " the signals thrown out foryour old friend and correspondent. Beassured that I have good reason for notcomplying with them. In the presentstate of things, if I were to write again,I must be as silly as any of the hornedcattle that run mad through the city,or as any of your wise aldermen. Imeant the cause and the public; bothare given up. I feel for the honour ofthis country, when I see that there arenot ten men in it who will unite andstand together upon any one question.But it is all alike vile and contemptible."Among the persons, exclusive of SirPhilip Francis, to whom the splendidcompositions of Junius have, with varyingdegrees of probability or absurdity,been attributed, are the following:Charles Lloyd, a clerk in the treasury;John Roberts, private secretary to Mr.Pelham ; Samuel Dyer, a man of sometalent, who was on terms of intimacywith Johnson and Burke ; WilliamGerard Hamilton; Edmund Burke;Lord George Germain ; Dr. Butler ;the Rev. Philip Rosenhagen ; GeneralLee; Hugh Macaulay Boyd ; JohnWilkes; Lord Ashburton; Flood, theSIR PHILIP FRANCIS.famous Irish orator ; Lord GeorgeSackville, and the great Earl of Chatham.Lloyd was expiring at the timeJunius wrote his last private letter toWoodfall, and Roberts and Dyer hadactually been dead many months before.Hamilton known by the nicknameof Single-Speech Hamilton, wassuspected of having written the lettersin question, because he frequently used,or perhaps adopted, many of the phrasesemployed by Junius; a circumstancewhich appears to be conclusive againstthe pretensions put forward on his behalf; for the cautious Junius wouldscarcely have betrayed himself, by talkingthe language of his political compositions.It is true that Hamiltononce told the Duke of Richmond thesubstance of one of the letters, beforeit was published : but he had, mostprobably, been allowed to read theepistle in proof, or manuscript, byWoodfall, with whom he was on intimateterms. Besides, Hamilton wasnot only too vain a man to have keptthe secret of his own importance, hadhe been Junius; but he actually denied,on his death-bed, all claim to thehonour of having written the letterspublished under that signature.Burke was for many years generallyidentified with Junius ; but no twoeminent writers in the whole range ofEnglish literature, are more dissimilarin style. Burke's talents in the celebratedletters, are rather severely handled,a sin against self, in which hewould scarcely have indulged ; and hesolemnly denied having had aught todowith them, when interrogated onthe subject by Sir William Draper.That Lord George Germain was notthe author, is tolerably well proved bythe contemptuous expressions relativeto his military conduct, contained inthe private correspondence of Juniuswith Woodfall.Dr. Butler, Bishop of Hereford, anoccasional writer of political pamphlets,was for some time supposed to havebeen Junius; but with little probability,for his literary talents were scarcelyabove mediocrity. One of the bishop'sfriends writes thus on the subject :Wilkes had strong reasons for consideringDr. Butler Junius, and Iconjectured as much. Yet, if mysuspicions were stronger, I should requiremore substantial proofs, for 1 thinkhe was incapable of discovering or feelingthe rancorous sentiments which theletters display. Nor do I think thathis being the sole depositary of hisown secret, which, as Junius says,would be, and I fancy was, buried ineverlasting oblivion when he was entombed,would have encouraged himto have used such opprobrious language."The Rev. Philip Rosenhagen, inorder to obtain a pension, declared toLord North, that he was the author ofthe letters : but Woodfall, who knewhim intimately, felt satisfied that hehad had no share in their production.The autograph of Junius was bold,firm, and precise, without any appearanceof disguise ; Rosenhagen's was afeeble, half illegible scrawl.The following communication relativeto the claims of General Lee tothe authorship of the letters, appearedin an American periodical, called TheWilmington Mirror. " In the fall of1773, not long after General Lee hadarrived in America, I happened to bewith him alone. Our conversation wason politics. Junius was mentioned,and General Lee asked me, who wasthought to be the author of the letterswhich bore his name ? I replied, that Ibelieved Lord Chatham wrote them.General Lee answered with great animation,that to his certain knowledge,Lord Chatham was not the author ;neither did he know who the authorwas, any more than I did ; and thatthere was not a man in the world, no,not even Woodfall, the publisher, thatknew who the author was ; that thesecret rested solely with himself, andfor ever would remain with him. Surprisedat this, I answered, ' No,General Lee, if you certainly know allthis, it can no longer remain solelywith him, for no one could know whatyou have affirmed, but the author himself.'He replied, ' I have committedmyself, and it would be but folly todeny to you that 1 am the author ; butI must request that you will not revealit during my life ; for it never was, norever will be revealed by me to anyother.' "Lee, however, it is quite clear, couldnot have been the author of the letters :THE SENATE.he was abroad at the time of their publication; whereas Junius must necessarilyhave been in London or its immediateneighbourhood, during nearly thewhole period, as he often sent explanationsand answers to Woodfall, withina few hours after they were required;and was in possession of political facts,long before they transpired to the public,or could possibly have been communicatedto the General, who, it isproper to add, submitted to an outlawry,for the avowal of sentimentswhich Junius most energetically condemned.Hugh Macaulay Boyd, another claimantto the authorship of the letters, wasan Irishman of respectable family, whohad deserted the law for politics, andwho constantly endeavoured to imitatethe masterly style of Junius. " Boyd,"says Chalmers, " was in the habit offrequenting the shop of Almon, thebookseller, who detected him, as thewriter of Junius, as early as the autumnof 1769. At a meeting of the trade,Woodfall read a letter of Junius, whichhe had just received, because it containeda passage, relative to the businessof the meeting ; Almon had therebyan opportunity of seeing the handwritingof the manuscript. The nexttime Boyd called on him in Piccadilly,Almon said to him, ' I have seen apart of one of Junius's letters, in manuscript,which I believe is your handwriting.'Boyd instantly changed colour; and after a short pause, he said,The similitude of handwriting is not aconclusive proof.' From the epoch ofthis detection, it was the practice ofAlmon, when asked who was thewriter of Junius, to say, that he suspectedJunius was a broken gentleman,without a guinea in his pocket." Wood-fall,however, declared, that the handwritingof Junius and Boyd were totallydifferent ; and that Almon hadseen the manuscript of the former tooimperfectly to form any judgment onthe subject.The abuse inflicted on Wilkes in theletters, has been adduced as a proofthat he was not, as the public at onetime suspected, the author of them. Aslight comparison of his works withthose of Junius, will shew, that theycould scarcely have emanated from thesame source. When a friend oncetaxed him with the authorship of theletters, he replied, " I wish I hadwritten them.Dunning, Lord Ashburton, the celebratedlawyer, to whom the lettershave, by many, been attributed, was,perhaps, a man of sufficient learning,wit, and political information to havewritten them : but Junius not onlysolemnly affirmed that he was no lawyer,but committed various legal blunders,of which Dunning could neverhave been guilty.Flood, who has also been named asthe probable writer of the letters, wasin Ireland, when Junius must, in consequenceof his almost daily correspondencewith Woodfall, have been,at the utmost, but a few miles distantfrom London.The private note sent by Junius toWoodfall relative to Swinney's interviewwith Lord George Sackville, appearsto have induced a suspicion thatLord George himself was Junius. How,it has been asked, did Junius obtainimmediate information of Swinney'svisit to Lord George ? How did he becomeacquainted with what passed onthat occasion ? And how could he knowthat Swinney had never spoken to LordGeorge before ? Lord Sackville, however,although a man of considerable talent,never at all approximated, in what heis admitted to have written, to thecommanding eloquence of Junius; andhe is stated to have said, " I should beproud to be capable of writing as Anniushas done ; but there are manypassages in his letters I should be verysorry to have written."No public man of the period was,perhaps, more capable than Chatham,of writing the letters in question ; but,the earl, although secure against detection,would not, it may be presumedfrom his general conduct, have appliedthose terms of eulogy to himself withwhich he was deservedly honoured bythe pen of Junius.In a pamphlet entitled Junius Identified,published some years ago, theauthor (a Mr. Busby) endeavoured toprove that he had found " the corporealsubstance of the mighty politicalshade," in Sir Philip Francis ; and thepublic were, apparently, for some timesatisfied that his arguments were almost,if not quite, conclusive : but theyCHARLES JAMES FOX.prove nothing, in fact, but that SirPhilip might have been Junius; thepositive identity not being at all satisfactorilymade out. In a note to theeditor of the Monthly Magazine, on thesubject of Busby's pamphlet, of whicha review was about to appear in thatperiodical, Sir Philip said, " whetheryou will assist in giving currency to asilly malignant falsehood, is a questionfor your own discretion." So lately asDecember, 1817, he positively deniedthat he was the author of the letters inquestion ; and in a conversation with afriend, at a period when an avowal ofhaving written them would not havebeen attended with the least danger,he stated, that he had denied beingJunius until he was weary, and wouldanswer no more questions on thesubjectThus, notwithstanding great researchhas been employed on the subject, thehonours of Junius are still unappropriated; posterity, perhaps, will discoverto whom they belong, by accident.CHARLES JAMES FOX.CHARLES JAMES, the secondson of Henry Fox, first Lord Holland,and Lady Georgian Carolina Lenox,daughter of the Duke of Richmond,was born on the 13th of January, 1749.Whatever were the errors of LordHolland's political life, no man everdischarged the duties of a father withmore tenderness. It was an invariablemaxim with him to assist and follow,but in no case to restrain, the perfectexercise of free-will in his children.He would advise, and even importune,but never venture to command them.From childhood, Charles James wasencouraged to deliver his sentiments,with freedom, on all subjects, and inall companies. Such an absurd degreeof indulgence, while it tended on theone hand to make him a precociouslybold thinker, had, on the other, thepernicious effect of rendering him occasionallyforward and impertinent.Lady Holland happening to make aremark, one day, in his presence, onRoman history, which he knew to beerroneous, he asked her, with greatcontempt, what she knew about theRomans; and, with more knowledgeand force of argument, than filial reverence,proceeded to demonstrate hererror.One night, while his father, thensecretary of state, was occupied in thepreparation of some important papers,Charles James walked into the study,and, with great coolness, perused, criticised,and burnt a despatch whichhad just been set apart for sealing.Lord Holland did not even reprimandthe boy for his impertinence, but, withoutbeing in the least ruffled, prepareda second copy of the document from hisofficial draught.Lord Holland having resolved totake down the wall before Holland-house,and to have an iron railing putup in its stead, it was necessary to usegunpowder to facilitate the work. Hehad promised Charles James that heshould be present whenever the explosiontook place. Finding that thelabourers had blasted the brick-work inhis absence, he ordered the wall to berebuilt ; and, when it was thoroughlycemented, had it blown up again, forthe gratification of his favourite boy ;at the same time advising those abouthim, never, on any account, to breaka promise with children.The unhappy passion for gaming,which Mr. Fox could never conquer,is said to have originated in the followingcircumstance : At the age of fourteen,he accompanied his father toSpa, at that time a place of fashionableresort; and here his passion for playwas excited, by receiving a nightlyallowance of five guineas, to be spentin games of hazard.For a short period, young Fox studiedat a private seminary at Hackney ; butLord Holland considering a publicschool more suitable to his future prospects,he was sent first to Westminster,and afterwards to Eton : at the lattercelebrated seat of learning, his progresswas so amazingly rapid, that the provostoften recommended him as an exampleto his companions. Ardent in theTHE SENATE.extreme, he was never satisfied by reachingmediocrity in any of his undertakings:the pursuit of pleasure did notappear in the least to retard his scholasticadvance; nor did his studies, byany means, deter him from indulgingin extravagant dissipation.On quitting Eton, he was enteredof Hertford college, Oxford ; where hedistinguished himself, as he had doneat Eton, by being pre-eminently dissolute,and excessively studious. He wasextremely partial to the Greek writers,of whom Longinus and Homer werehis favourites : his familiar acquaintancewith the works of the latter, is strikinglydisplayed in the following anecdote: " A clergyman, eminent for hisknowledge of Greek, was endeavouringto prove that a verse in the Iliadwas spurious, because it contained measuresnot used by Homer. Fox instantlyrecited twenty other verses ofthe same measure, to shew that thedeviation from the usual feet was noevidence of interpolation. He was,indeed, capable of conversing with aLonginus, on the beauty, sublimity,and pathos of Homer ; with an Aristotle,on his delineations of man ; andwith a pedagogue, on his dactyls,spondees, and anapaests."After a short residence at Oxford,he made a tour on the continent, thecost of which is said to have beenenormous. He contracted vast debtsin every capital which he visited ; atNaples alone, his liabilities amountedto 16.000. Alarmed at his boundlessprodigality, Lord Holland at lengthsummoned him home, and he returnedone of the most egregious coxcombs inEurope.At the general election in 1768, notwithstandinghis nonage, he took hisseat in the house of commons as memberfor Midhurst, in Sussex. On enteringparliament, he became a strenuousadvocate of Lord North's unpopularadministration. He spoke, for the firsttime, on the presentment of Wilkes'spetition, from the king's bench ; and,on that occasion, defended the conductof ministers with considerable energy.AH the measures which subsequentlytook place, relative to the Middlesexelection, received his decided support :he contended, that general warrantswere not illegal ; and stigmatised theproceedings of the association, calledThe l-'riends of the People, as beingactually treasonable. He soon becamea great favourite with the premier, forwhom, at this period, he appears tohave entertained a very high opinion ;and early in February, 1772, he wasnominated one of the lords of the admiralty.He proved, however, to be byno means a tractable subordinate : differencesarose between him and theminister, which eventually led to hisindignant resignation of office. But thedisputes between Lord North and theyoung statesman were soon adjusted,and Fox again joined the administration,by accepting the post of commissionerof the treasury. His connexionwith government now appearedto be permanent. But the admirationwhich he had formerly evinced towardsLord North, appears to have graduallyabated ; and Lord North, on the otherhand, at length, began to feel less fearthan formerly of Fox, as a political antagonist.Being refused a trifling appointment,the disposal of which he hadsolicited, Fox voted against the minister,in a discussion relative to a breachof privilege ; he subsequently becamea member of Dr. Johnson's literaryclub, and excited the displeasure of hiscolleagues, by associating with Burke.In 1774, the death of his father lefthim altogether free with regard to hispolitical conduct; and at the same time,removed, perhaps, the great impediment,in Lord North's estimation, tohis ejection from office. Fox, it is said,had determined to retire, but LordNorth anticipated his resignation by adismissal, which Fox received in thefollowing laconic epistle :Sir, His majesty has thought properto order a new commission of thetreasury to be made out, in which I donot perceive your name. NORTH."This note was handed to Fox, whileseated in his place on the treasury bench,by one of the door-keepers. For somereason, which it would be difficult todivine, he continued to vote with ministers,although he seldom spoke in theirfavour, for a considerable period afterhis cavalier dismissal. At length hetook his seat on the opposition benches,and soon became one of Lord Northmostformidable antagonists. He hadalways disapproved of the measures ofCHARLES JAMES FOX.government, with regard to America,and he now boldly attacked them withallhis splendid oratorical powers.In 1776, he again visited Paris, andentered into the amusements of thatcapital, with great ardour. In 1777,when the minister declared that neitherFrance nor Spain would interfere inthe contest between England and thecolonies, Fox vehemently asserted thatboth nations only waited for a favourableopportunity to advocate the causeof America; and in the session of 1778,when, on a plan of conciliation beingbrought forward by ministers, he affirmed,that a treaty of alliance hadalready been concluded betweenFrance and America, which renderedthe proposed pacification out of thequestion. Lord North, on being questionedas to the correctness of thisstatement, reluctantly admitted theprobability of such a treaty being inagitation, though he had no authorityto say it was signed. The circumstanceof a member of the house ofcommons, who held no office, beingbetter informed than the head of thegovernment, on so important a subject,excited much surprise and animadversion: the accuracy of Fox was,however, soon demonstrated, by thepublication of the treaty.Towards the close of 1779, he wasengaged in a duel with Mr. Adam, aScotch gentleman, representing anEnglish borough, who had suddenlyseceded from the ranks of opposition.In vindicating the purity of his motivesin this change, Adam took occasion todeclare, that as none of the oppositionleaders were more fit to serve thestate than the individuals in power, hethought it wiser to submit to a knownevil, than to venture on an untried one.Fox replied in a strain of such bitterinvective, that Adam demanded anexplanation, and a hostile meeting ensued,the particulars of which were thusgiven by the seconds : " The partiesmet, according to agreement, at eighto'clock in the morning. After theground was measured out, at the distanceof fourteen paces, Mr. Adamdesired Mr. Fox to fire; to which Mr.Fox replied, ' Sir, I have no quarrelwith you ; do you fire." Mr. Adamthen fired, and wounded Mr. Fox ;which, we believe, was not at all perceivedby Mr. Adam, as it was notdistinctly seen by either of ourselves.Mr. Fox fired without effect. Wethen interfered, asking Mr. Adam ifhe was satisfied? Mr. Adam, replied,Will Mr. Fox declare he meant nopersonal attack upon my character?"Upon which Mr. Fox said, this was noplace for apologies, and desired him togo on. Mr. Adam fired his second pistolwithout effect Mr. Fox then fired hisremaining pistol into the air ; and then,saying, as the affair was ended, he hadno difficulty in declaring he meant nomore personal affront to Mr. Adamthan he did to either of the gentlemenpresent; Mr. Adam replied, 'Sir, younave behaved like a man of honour.'Mr. Fox then mentioned that he believedhimself wounded; and, uponopening his waistcoat, it was found hewas so, but to all appearance, slightly.The parties then separated, and Mr.Fox's wound was, on examination,found not likely to produce any dangerousconsequence."In another account of this affair, itis stated, that in allusion to the clamourwhich had existed since the period ofByron's engagement in the West Indies,about the badness of ammunition, Fox,on receiving his adversary's ball, andfinding it had made but little impression,exclaimed, " Egad, Adam, itwould have been all over with me, ifyou had not charged with governmentpowder!"On the re-appearance of Fox in parliament,his antagonist took occasion todeclare, that he had found in him, allthat manliness, generosity and spirit,of which the world supposed himpossessed, and which were by no meansinferior to those superlative abilitieswhich had justly excited the admirationof mankind. Fox treated thiseulogium with dignified silence; butRigby, one of the ministers, observing,that he hoped what had occurredwould have the effect of keeping gentlemenwithin proper limits, and, at least,teach them better manners, Fox roseand said, that as Mr. Rigby was aptto speak in a loose and careless way, hemight, perhaps, have had no particularmeaning in what he said ; but as thewords seemed pointed at him, hebegged, for one, to say, that what hadhappened to him had not taught himTHE SENATE.better manners, nor should it ever restrainhim within any other limits thanthose which he had chalked out forhimself.At the dissolution of parliament, in1780, his ambition prompted him, incompliancewith a requisition from alarge body of the electors, to offer himselfas a candidate for the representationof Westminster. Admiral Rodney, andthe Earl of Lincoln, eldest son of theDuke of Newcastle, were his competitorson this occasion ; but the electionof the former being certain, the contestrested entirely between Fox and LordLincoln, who was supported by thewhole influence of the crown, as wellas the wealth and interest of his verypowerful family. After a severe andprotracted struggle, Fox, however, waselected by a large majority.At this period, although only thirtyyears of age, he had attained an almostunexampled degree of popularity;but it is lamentable to find, that hestood unrivalled in dissipation, as intalent. Gaming had become an indomitablepassion with him. He wasso admirable a player at whist andpiquet, that had he restricted himselfto those games, he might, it is said,have derived a clear income of 4000a year from his card-purse. But, unfortunately,he delighted in games ofchance, from which he rose almost invariablya loser. On one occasion, hehad the luck to win 5000 at a sitting,part of which he paid to his creditors,and soon lost the remainder in the companyof those from whom he had receivedit. At his father's death, hehad succeeded to an annual income ofnot less than 4000 ; and subsequentlytother clerkship of the pells in Ireland,worth about 3000 per annum. Butbefore he attained his thirtieth year,says Wraxall, he had dissipated everyshilling that he could either command,or procure by the most ruinous expedients; he had even undergone manyof the severest privations annexed tothe vicissitudes that mark a gamester'sprogress, frequently wanting money todefray his common diurnal expenses;and after losing his last guinea at thefaro table, he had been reduced, forseveral days, to such distress, as tobe under the necessity of having recourseto the waiters at Brookes's, tolend him assistance ; the very chairmen,whom he was unable to pay, usedto dun him for their arrears. TophamBeauclerk left him one morning, at sixo'clock, (after having passed the wholepreceding night with him at the gamingtable,) in a frame of mind approachingto desperation, occasioned by his heavylosses. Beauclerk's anxiety impelledhim to call early in the day at thelodgings of his friend, whom, to hisastonishment, he found intently occupiedin reading Herodotus. '"' Whatwould you have me do?" said Fox, " Ihave lost my last shilling !"Had it not been for his privilege as amember of the house of commons, hewould scarcely ever have been in theenjoyment of his personal liberty. Oneday, shortly after a dissolution of parliament,while in the company of hisfriend," the witty but dissipated Hare,"who, like himself, was in hourly expectationof being arrested, a couple ofbailiffs suddenly made their appearance.Well, gentlemen," said Fox to them,are you face-hunting or .Fox-hunting,to-day ?" It is worthy of remark,that notwithstanding his devotion tothe senate, the table, the dice-box, andthe toilet, he found time to cultivate theacquaintance of such men as Johnsonand Gibbon ; to increase his knowledgeof the Greek writers; and even to indulge,occasionally, in poetical composition.His vivacity often exposed him toanimadversion ; for there was sometimesa recklessness in his gaiety, whichseemed unseasonable and unfeeling.Thus, when his brother's house was inflames,he offered to bet the nobleowner, which beam, which partition,or which chimney would first give way.Although exceedingly popular, he hadnumerous enemies. In 1779, Dr. Price,in a fast sermon, thus powerfully reflectedupon his conduct: "Can youimagine that a spendthrift in his ownconcerns, will make an economist inmanaging the concerns of others ? thata wild gamester will take due care ofthe state of a kingdom ? Treachery,venality, and corruption, must be theeffects of dissipation, voluptuousness,and impiety. These sap the foundationsof virtue; they render men necessitousand supple ; and ready at anytimeto sacrifice their consciences, orto fly to a court, in order to repair aCHARLES JAMES FOX.shattered fortune, and procure suppliesfor prodigality."On the meeting of the new parliament,in October, 1780, Fox renewedhis opposition to ministers with greatvehemence, and the triumph of hiseloquence, in their expulsion fromoffice, seemed fast approaching. Duringthe session he brought forward abill to remove the necessity of publishingbanns of marriage, or of having alicense, when the parties were arrivedat the age of eighteen in the male sex,and sixteen in the female ; and to preventany union being declared null,after the parties had cohabited for ayear. He reprobated the idea of givingauthority to the parent, with regard tothe marriage of the child; contendingthat the most inexperienced were morecompetent to know what constitutedtheir own happiness, than any othermortal could possibly be ; and thatwhere the passions were concerned,the heart of youth was wiser than thehoary head of age. The bill passed inthe lower house, but was very properlyrejected by the lords. The argumentsof Fox, on this occasion, must, in thepresent constitution of society, appearabsurd ; and few reasonable men wouldnow contend, that the happiness of thewedded state might be increased, bygiving mere boys and girls unrestrainedliberty to contract marriage.Lord North and his adherents were,at length, compelled to resign. TheMarquess of Rockingham became nominallythe premier, and Fox wasappointed secretary of state for foreignaffairs, with, as it was supposed, paramountinfluence in the cabinet. Greatexpectations were formed of the newministers; it was confidently expectedthat the calamities of the country wereat an end, and that its interests wouldbe properly maintained in all quartersof the globe. Considering the shortduration of their power, it is admittedon all sides, that Lord Rockinghamand his friends justified the hopesof the nation, in their abilities andhonesty. A steady system of reform,retrenchment, and liberal policy, wasadopted ; officers in the customs andexcise were disqualified from voting atelections ; the doors of the house ofcommons were closed against contractors; the unpopular proceedings withregard to the Middlesex election, wererescinded ; the troubles of Irelandwere appeased ; the restoration of peacewas seriously meditated ; and America,which could not be retrieved, it wasresolved, if possible, to conciliate. Butthe promising career of the administrationwas suddenly terminated by thedeath of its nominal leader.On the nomination of the Earl ofShelburne, a few days afterwards, to thepremiership, Fox, it is said, attendedthe king, and requested leave to namethe new secretary; but finding that hehad been anticipated, he said, "ThenI trust your majesty can dispense withmy services." " Certainly, sir," repliedthe king, " if you feel them the leastirksome." The next day he deliveredup the seals of his office. With regardto his resignation, he afterwardsobserved, that he was by no means insensibleto the convenience, he mightalmost say, the necessity, of the emolumentsattached to his situation (hehad previously parted with his sinecureof the pells for a very inadequatesum) ; but in a case where honouror profit must be sacrificed, he couldnot be long in resolving what to do."I would never," added he, " conniveat plans in private, which I could notpublicly avow: my principles I knewwould not be pursued by the new minister,and therefore I could not remainin office with him." The new premier,however, in the teeth of these observations,positively denied that anychange of measures was intended : anda strong opinion seems to have prevailedthat Fox had resigned in meredisgust at not having been placed atthe head of affairs.Lord Shelburne and his friendswere soon exposed to the violent attacksof an overwhelming opposition,consisting of the two parties headedby Fox and Lord North, who effecteda disgraceful coalition for the purposeof ejecting their mutual opponents fromthe administration. Fox had long beenin the habit of expressing himself withthe greatest contempt, and even rancorousviolence, towards Lord North :he had called him the great criminal ofthe state, whose blood ought to expiatethe calamities which he hadbrought upon his country ; he haddesignated him as the object of a futureTHE SENATE.impeachment, whom an indignant nationwould compel to make some atonementfor his offences on the scaffold ;he had protested that he could nottrust himself in the same room withhim; and when, in 1782, it was evidentthat some change of ministerswould soon take place, he had declared,that he would consent to be for everafterwards deemed infamous, if heformed any connexion with the weak,wicked, and incapable advisers of thecrown. The coalition of Fox and LordNorth, with these expressions not merelyon record, but fresh in their memory,in utter disregard of private feeling andpublic principle, with the base view ofsharing together that power, of whichit had long been the object of each torepresent the other as altogether unworthy,not only rendered them unpopularat the time, but fixed an indeliblestigma on their public characters. "Thisalliance," said a cotemporary, "seemedso much beyond the usual pliancy evenof politicians, the personal violence oftheir former hostility seemed so repugnantto every idea of junction, thatthe natural integrity of the people feltthe coalition as one of those public violationsof consistency, one of thosepublic derelictions of principle, whichdestroy all future confidence, and forfeitall future esteem."The ministers being at length outvotedby the coalition, resigned theirseals ; and after a lapse of several weeks,during which the nation was left withouta government, from the reluctanceof George the Third to accept Foxand Lord North, as his ministers, anew administration was formed earlyin April, 1783. Fox, and his oldenemy, were the principal secretariesof state ; the Duke of Portland becamethe nominal premier; and Pitt tookthe lead in opposition. All the first measuresof government were triumphantlycarried; and on the 18th of November,Fox brought forward his India bill ;which, in spite of the persevering oppositionof Pitt, was passed through itsvarious stages in the commons by largemajorities. Meantime, it became generallyknown, that the most exalted personagein the kingdom was decidedlyopposed to the measure, and EarlTemple received a written authorityfrom the sovereign, to declare, that hismajesty would deem those peers whovoted for the bill, not only not hisfriends, but his enemies. When it wassent up to the lords, on the 9th of December,Lord Thurlow said, that if theking consented to such an act he wouldthereby take the diadem from his ownhead, and place it on that of Mr. Fox ;and Lord Abingdon insisted, that thenew secretary was really animated bythe same criminal ambition as Cromwell,and actually aimed at sovereignpower.The bill was lost in the house ofpeers, by a majority of nineteen, andits rejection proved fatal to the ministry.Late in the evening on which it hadbeen thrown out, Lord North and Mr.Fox received messages, intimating thatthe king had no longer any occasionfor their services, and requiring that theseals of office should be delivered to himby the under secretaries of state ; a circumstancestrongly expressive of theroyal displeasure.Pitt now accepted the premiership,although he had not the means of carryinga single measure in the house ofcommons, and Fox was recognized asthe leader of the most formidable opposition,in numerical force, as well astalent, which had appeared in parliamentsince the reign of Charles I.Being persuaded that the new ministrycould not exist, without an immediatedissolution of parliament, he was particularlyanxious to delay that measure,and seemed to contemplate withholdingthe supplies necessary for thepayment of the dividends. A motionwas carried, declaring the ministersutterly incompetent to conduct thepublic business; and it was thoughttheir immediate resignation would betheresult But the premier was asfirm as the opposition was formidable,and bore this parliamentary sentenceof condemnation with great calmness.The king was subsequently addressed,on three several occasions, by the commons,to dismiss the persons in office,which his majesty as often peremptorilyrefused to do. Fox now found thathis adherents gradually dropped off;he had lost his popularity out of doors,and foresaw the speedy unsuccessfultermination of the unexampled contestin which he and his partisansformed one party, and the king, theCHARLES JAMES FOX.lords, the administration, and the majorityof the people, the other. But beforerelinquishing the hopeless conflict,he determined to inflict a parting blowof unequalled severity on his triumphantantagonists; and, accordingly, on the8th of March, he moved a daring remonstranceto the king, for perseveringin opposition to the declared wishes ofhis faithful commons, which was carriedby a majority of one.This was his last effort during the session.Parliament was dissolved on the25th of the month, and in the ensuingelection, Fox lost above seventy of hispartisans. His own return for Westminsterwas powerfully contested byLord Hood and Sir Cecil Way, whohad formed a coalition against him. Thepoll, which was kept open for forty-sevendays, terminated in favour of Fox ;but Sir Cecil Way having demanded ascrutiny, the high bailiff refused to returnFox as one of the elected members; for which an action was broughtagainst him by the latter, who obtaineda verdict with 2,000 damages. In themeantime, he took his seat for a Scotchborough ; and, after a tedious scrutiny,the cost of which was defrayed by hisfriends, he was declared duly electedfor Westminster. During the contest,the Duchess of Devonshire, and otherwomen of exalted rank, personally solicitedvotes in his favour, even fromthe poorest of the electors. The beautifuland condescending duchess, whilethus engaged, bought a butcher's votewith a kiss ; and the following lines, inpraise of her charms, were extensivelycirculated :Array'd in matchless beauty Devon' fair,In Fox's favour takes a zealous part :But, uh ! where'er the pilferer comes, beware '.She supplicates a vote, and steals a heart.Although, in the new parliament, thepremier had a decided majority, Foxwas still at the head of a very formidableopposition, and strenuously opposedthe measures of government. On thequestion of legislative reform, he, however,supported the views of Pitt withequal zeal, honesty, and talent. Inthe summer of 1785, he visited the Earlof Derby, in Lancashire ; and havingregained his popularity, partly by opposingthe shop tax, he was receivedin the places through which he passedwith great enthusiasm. Receiving aninvitation to Manchester, he went therewithhis friends in a sort of civictriumph, being met on the road by thevarious trades in procession, with bandsof music, and vast numbers of personson horseback. His carriage wasdrawn by the people amid loud acclamations,to the town hall; and hereceived equal honours on his visitingLiverpool.During the discussion of the Indiabill, the conduct of Hastings, the ,had been much censured;and, on the 17th of February,Burke brought forward various chargesagainst him, which were supported byFox, with his usual eloquence. Animpeachment was, soon after, voted bythe commons; and Fox, Burke, andSheridan, were appointed the chief managers.Fox, however, appears to havetaken no very active part in the business,and passed the summer, and generallyspeaking, the whole of the nextyear, in comparative tranquillity, at St.Anne's hill.In 1787, he supported a motion forthe repeal of the test act, with greatwarmth and ability. Alluding, on thisoccasion, to the political proceedings ofthe dissenters against his own measures,he observed, that, although theyhad lost sight of the principles of theconstitution, he should not, upon anyoccasion, lose sight of the principles oftoleration. Early in 1788, he was electedrecorder of Bridgewater; and, in thecourse of the year, made a tour on thecontinent, accompanied by Mrs. Arm-stead,(a widow, it was believed), who,for some time before, had resided in hishouse at St. Anne's hill ; and whom,after a lapse of nearly ten years, heacknowledged as his wife. Some accountsstate that his marriage with hertook place in 1794, while, according toothers, it did not occur until 1802.The ceremony was privately performedby special license ; and, whatever werehis reasons, Fox was evidently very reluctantto the alliance being made public,although she was handsome, accomplished,and evidently attached tohim. Fox, on his part, seems to haveloved her sincerely. On the 24th ofJanuary, 1799, his birth day, and thecompletion of his fiftieth year, he presentedher, while at the breakfastTHE SENATE.table, with the following lines, written,as it is said, extemporaneously :Of years I have now half a century put,And none of the fifty so blest as the last.[low it happens my troubles thus daily should cease,And my happiness thus with myjeaw should in-This defiance of Nature's more general laws,You alone can explain, who alone are the cause !While on the continent, Fox visitedthe historian of The Decline and Fallof the Roman Empire, at Lausanne.In his tour of Switzerland," saysGibbon, " Mr. Fox gave me two daysof free and private conversation. Heseemed to feel and envy the happinessof my situation, while I admired thepowers of a superior man, as they areblended in his attractive character withthe softness and simplicity of a child.Perhaps no human being was ever moreperfectly exempt from the taint of malevolence,vanity, or falsehood."From Switzerland, Fox proceeded toItaly, and had arrived at Bologna, onhis way to Rome, when, in the middleof November, a messenger overtookhim, with an account of the king's insanity.He instantly commenced hisreturn, and travelled with such fatiguingrapidity, that on his arrival in London,he became severely indisposed. Hefound the parliament deliberating onthe necessity of appointing a regentforthwith, the king being no longerable to exercise the royal functions. Onthis memorable occasion, Fox and hisgreat rival appeared to have exchangedsystems : Pitt contending for the constitutionalmeasure of a bill of limitations,while Fox was equally strenuous forplacing the regency in the hands of theheir-apparent, without any restrictionswhatever. Powerful as he and his partywere, at this time, and perhaps theynever shone more in debate, they failedto achieve their object, and by their exertionslost their^jopularity. The ministerwas triumphant in every stage ofthe bill ; which, however, was rendereduseless by the sudden recovery of theking.Great and continued exertions hadnow so much impaired the health ofFox, as to alarm his friends, and he wasadvised to try the air of Bath, whereinthe course of a month, he happily recovered,and returned to his parliamentaryduties like " a giant refreshed." I nthe course of ] 789, he was mainly instrumentalin preventing a war with Russia ;and during the same year, broughtforward a bill to invest juries, in casesof libel, with the power of judging ofthe law as well as the fact. These andsome other popular measures, completelyrestored him to public favour.In 1791, a rupture occurred betweenFox and Burke, who had for manyyears regarded each other with morethan brotherly affection. They differedin their views of the French revolution ;Fox eulogized, and Burke most bitterlycondemned it : the consequence was thatthey began to regard each other withcoolness ; and, at length, on the 6th ofMay, Burke made some severe allusionsto the opinions of Fox, who had, a fewevenings before, descanted with greatfreedom on Burke's Reflections. Foxsaid in reply, that no occurrence of hislife had ever so severely affected bothhis feelings and his principles, as triecharges directly and indirectly madeagainst him by Mr. Burke. He feltthem the more, as coming from theman whom he had ever flattered his-understandingand his pride, with believingto be the fiend and patron ofhis knowledge, actions, sentiments,opinions, and principles. He was distressedto find that five-and-twentyyears had been so ill employed, as, attheir close, to be forced to own, that themost poignant mental pain he had enduredwas that which he suffered fromthe man who first and best taught himwhat it was to feel. Yet he could notretract what he had said as to the Frenchrevolution, which he thought, on thewhole, one of the greatest events in thehistory of mankind. Differences ofopinion need not cause a breach offriendship. It could never happen, thathis master (for so he should ever callMr. Burke) could forget the maximswhich he had himself inculcated; namely,that a difference of sentiment upona public matter, which was one part ofthe rights of man, should never be acause for the dismemberment of privatefriendship among individuals.Burke, in rejoinder, stated that itwould be indiscretion at any period, butmuch greater at his age, to provoke enemies,or give his friends cause to deserthim; yet, if that were to be the case byadhering to the British constitution, heCHARLES JAMES FOX.would risk all ; and as public duty andas public prudence taught him, with hislast breath, exclaim, " Fly from theFrench constitution !" " There is noloss of friendship, I hope," said Fox.There is," replied Burke; " I havemade a great sacrifice : I have done myduty, though I have lost my friend."Fox then rose, under evident emotion,and while tears rolled down his cheek,pathetically conjured Burke to remembertheir past lives, to recollect their union,their unalterable attachment, their unalienablefriendship, their reciprocalaffection ; to believe that there existedbetween them the ties of nature, asnear and dear as the relative situationof father and son could be ; that theyhad improved them by social love, eachstill flattering the other that his intrinsicworth was the magnet of attraction, andeach still enjoying the substantial ideain ecstasy of happiness : he conjuredhim, not to renounce in a moment, andfor a trifle, too, the opinion mutuallyestablished for years ; not to reject thefabric of many years' construction, forthe visionary shade of an ideal habitation,and break through all those bondswhich alone can make life happy, toenjoy a liberty of thought which couldonly tend to make it miserable, andthus violently sever him for ever fromhis regard. In spite of all the cruel expressionsof his friend, he would stillcall him by that endearing appellation,his friendship was not to be affectedby the circumstances of one day'sdebate; it was planted in his heartwhen a child, it had grown and ripenedwith his knowledge. It was a friendshipimproved and rivetted by the intercourseof three-and-twenty years ; andit could not be weakened, much lessextinguished in his bosom, by the heator intemperance of a day.Burke was inexorable ; he repeatedthat the friendship which had so longsubsisted between them was at an end ;and, it is painful to add, they were neverafterwards reconciled; Burke havinginvariably objected to a re-union, whichwas most ardently desired and repeatedlysolicited by Fox, unless the latterwould sign a solemn renunciation ofwhat were termed French principles,and a promise not to advocate parliamentaryreform, or the abolition of thetest act. Notwithstanding the severetreatment he had experienced from hisformer friend, with whom, when at thepoint of death, he was even denied aninterview, the affection of Fox forBurke appears scarcely to have diminished.On hearing of Burke's decease,he is said to have wept most bitterly.In 1792, in consequence of somestrong measures of government, particularlythe calling out the militia, andhastily summoning parliament, Foxmade several motions which did notmeet with the approbation of the house ;a majority of which thought that thereexisted a danger of insurrection i andin order that his own opinions on thesubject might be better understood, in1793 he wrote his famous letter to theelectors of Westminster. During thesame year, a meeting of noblemen andgentlemen took place at the Crown andAnchor, in the Strand, for the purposeof offering to Mr. Fox some effectivetestimony of gratitude for his long andunwearied political exertions. On thisoccasion, Serjeant Adair, the chairman,observed, that, whatever difference ofopinion there might be as to the measuressupported or opposed by Mr.Fox, in his long political career, therewas one point to which all mankindwould agree, and which even his mostinveterate enemies had not dared toquestion ; namely, that if the wonderfultalents of his rind, instead of beingexerted for his country, had been directedto objects of private interest andpersonal ambition, they would long agohave placed their possessor in a situationof opulence and power equal to hisfame. That this had not been the case,was equally notorious ; and it must,therefore, be the wish of every man ofliberal feelings, that he who had conductedhimself so nobly, should beplaced in an independent situation. Acommittee being appointed to forwardthe plan, Serjeant Adair communicatedthe proceedings to Fox, from whom hereceived the following letter :St. Anne's Hill, June 6th, 1793.Dear Sir, you will easily believethat it is not a mere form of words,when I say, that I am wholly at a losshow to express my feelings upon theevent which you have in so kind amanner communicated to me. In difficultcases it is not unusual to inquirewhat others have said or done, in likeTHE SENATE.circumstances; but, in my situation, thisresource is denied me ; for where am Ito look for an instance of such a proofof public esteem, as that which is offeredto me ? To receive at once from the publicsuch a testimony of the disinterestednessof my conduct, and such a rewardas the most interested would think theirlives well spent in obtaining, is a rareinstance of felicity which seems to havebeen reserved for me. It would begross affectation, if, in my circumstances,I were to pretend that what isintended me is not m itself of the highestvalue. But it is with perfect sinceritythat I declare, that no manner inwhich a fortune could have come to me,would have been so gratifying to thefeelings of my heart. I accept, therefore,with the most sincere gratitude,the kindness of the public ; and considerit as an additional obligation uponme, if any were wanting, to continuesteady to the principles which I haveuniformly professed; and to perseverein the honest and independent line ofconduct, to which alone 1 am consciousthat I am indebted for this, as well asfor every other mark of public approbation.I hope I need not add, mydear Sir, that I could not have receivedthis honourable message through amore acceptable channel. I am, &c."This letter was submitted to a secondmeeting on the llth, at which the committeeannounced that the plan hadbeen seconded with such spirit, as toenable them to present Mr. Fox withan annuity neither unworthy of himnor themselves. While we cannot butregret the necessity for such a transaction,it is impossible not to admire thedelicacy with which it was conducted.Still it must ever be viewed as degradingto its object, who thus, after havingdissipated an ample patrimony in themost ridiculous excesses (it would havebeen very different had he expendedhis fortune in the public service,) wascompelled, in the decline of life, to owethe means of existence to the charity ofhis friends : for it would be absurd tosuppose that the subscription was national; it being, beyond all doubt, thebounty of a party, who felt themselvesdisgraced by the distresses of theirleader, but who were yet wise enoughto dole out their aid in the shape of anannuity; well knowing that had thegross collection been handed over toFox, instead of placing him above wantfor the rest of his days, it would havebeen wasted in a single year.In his subsequent parliamentarycareer, Fox energetically opposed theminister and the war with France. In1796, he was again elected for Westminster.In 1797, he obtained, as a privy-counsellor,an audience of the king, inthe closet, and represented, in glowingterms, the alarming state of the kingdom.Soon after, finding himself invariablyin a minority, he declared hisintention to forbear prosecuting an uselessattendance in parliament ; and accordinglyretired to St. Anne's hill.At a dinner given on the anniversaryof his birth-day, in 1798, the Duke ofNorfolk (who was in the chair) proposedfor a toast, " The sovereign majestyof the people," for which he was deprivedof the lord-lieutenancy of Yorkshire; and Fox, having soon afteroffended in a similar manner, whilepresiding at a meeting of the Whigclub, his name was struck out of thelist of privy-counsellors.In the year 1800, he was calledfrom his retirement, to discuss thepropriety of receiving overtures forpeace from the first Consul of France.He warmly opposed the union withIreland, and gave Addington, who tookoffice during the temporary retirementof Pitt, his support in concluding thepeace of Amiens. After the generalelection, at which he was again returnedfor Westminster, having a desireto examine the Stuart papers, inthe Scots college, at Paris, for the purposeof assisting him in the compositionof a history of the reign of Jamesthe Second, he set out for France onthe 29th of July, 1802. On his arrivalat Pans, various public and learnedbodies visited him, and he received invitationsfrom the most distinguishedindividuals. Being recognized at thetheatre, the whole audience stood up,and greeted him with enthusiastic acclamations: he would not, however,acknowledge the tribute of applause,thus evidently paid to him, by a singleword, or even a gesture of thanks.On the 3d of September, he wasintroduced, by the British ambassador,to Buonaparte, who said to him, withgreat rapidity, " Ah, Mr. Fox ! I haveCHARLES JAMES FOX.heard with pleasure of your arrival.I have desired much to see you ; Ihave long admired in you the oratorand friend, of his country ; who, inconstantlyraising his voice for peace,consulted that country's best intereststhose of Europe and those of thehuman race. The two great nationsof Europe require peace; they havenothing to fear, they ought to understandand value one another. In you,Mr. Fox, I see, with much satisfaction,that great statesman who recommendedpeace because there was nojust object of war ; who saw Europedesolated to no purpose, and whostruggled for its relief." He afterwardsdined with the first consul, withwhom he conversed for several hours.To ape Mr. Fox," says a late writer,was now the fashion at Paris : hisdress, his mode of speaking, nay, hisvery dinners, were imitated. It wasthe fashion to be a thinking man, tothink like Fox. At the opera, he attractedevery 'eye, and was followed asaspectacle through the streets. Hispicture was exhibited in every window;and no medallions had such a readysale, as those which bore the head ofFox. The artists alone were displeased,as he refused to sit for his portrait.A famous statuary sent his respects tohim, saying, that being anxious topartake of his immortality, he wishedto execute a statue of him, and wouldcall the next day, when he flatteredhimself Mr. Fox would have no objectionto sit half an hour in his shirt,while he took the exact contour of hisbody. Among the fashionables of Paris,who were particularly attentive to him,was Madame Readier : she called forhim one day in her carriage ; but Fox,hesitating to accompany her, ' Come,'said the lady, ' I must keep my promise,and shew you on the promenade.Before you came, I was the fashion ;it is a point of honour, therefore, thatI should not seem jealous of you.'Soon after, an ode appeared, in whichFox and Madame Readier weretransformed into Jupiter and Venus."He returned to England in November;and on a new war with Francebeing entered upon, he secluded himselfat St. Anne's hill ; but resumedhis public labours when the Addingtoncabinet was dismissed, and Pitt returnedto the premiership. In April,1805, he greatly distinguished himselfon the discussion on the chargesbrought against Lord Melville : andmost eloquently supported a petitionfrom the Irish catholics, praying foremancipation.On the death of Pitt, in January.1806, Fox, having coalesced with LordGrenville, was appointed secretary ofstate for foreign affairs. This unionof parties appears to have been by nomeans palatable to the publie: andthe admission of the lord chief justice,Ellenborough, to a seat in the cabinet,and some other measures of the newministry, met with considerable disapprobation.It was particularly objectedagainst Fox, that, warmly as hehad advocated the peace of Amiens,and firmly as he had deprecated therenewal of hostilities, yet, when inoffice, he appeared to acquiesce in thepropriety of the war. Trotter, however,says, that peace was still hisgrand object ; but it had now becomedifficult of attainment.His ministerial duties, and the oppositionhe experienced from the spiritedadherents of his departed rival, rapidlyundermined his constitution. He seemsto have been fully aware of the decayof his bodily powers: " Pitt," said he,died in January ; perhaps I maygo off before June !" A gentleman,who was in company with him, havingmade some observation in reply, " Nay,"said he, " I begin to think my complaintnot unlike Pitt's : my stomachhas been long discomposed ; I feelmy constitution dissolving !" Trotter,whose account of Fox's last days weshall abridge, states, that he found him,in the beginning of June, melancholy,and filled with gloomy presentiments.In a short time, his illness becamealarming : he suffered dreadful pains ;but his temper was still serene. Mrs.Fox and Trotter frequently read tohim : Crabbe's poems in manuscriptpleased him much, particularly thestory of Phoebe Dawson. Sheridanpaid him a short and unsatisfactoryvisit, at which Fox spoke but a fewwords, and those very coldly. Sheridan,on his part, was embarrassed, andequally taciturn. Soon after, Fox hada warm and friendly interview withGrattan. His disease being evidentlyTHE SENATE.dropsy, on the 7th of August he underwentthe operation of tapping, bywhich five gallons of fluid were taken'rom him. An alarming degree ofweakness succeeded ; he was speechlessfor some time, and it was not untilthe 10th, that he began to recoverstrength. Shortly after, he was removedto the Duke of Devonshire'shouse, at Chadwick. He now ceasedentirely to hear the newspapers read ;but listened, with pleasure, to passagesfrom Dryden, Johnson's Lives of thePoets, the aeneid, and Swift's poems.Preparations were making for his returnto St Anne's hill, when an alarmingdrowsiness crept upon him ; and heincreased so much in size, that it againbecame necessary for him to undergoanother operation ; from which, however,he derived but little benefit Herapidly grew worse j but manifested aninvincible fortitude and resignationunder his sufferings. At length his dissolutionevidently approached : " I diehappy," said he, fixing, again and again,his eyes upon Mrs. Fox. He endeavouredto speak further, but could onlyarticulate, "Trotter will tell you." Thenraising his arms to meet Mrs. Fox'sembrace, he expired without eitherstruggle or distortion. At the time ofhis death, which took place on the 13thof September, 1806, Fox was in thefifty-eighth year of his age. His remainswere interred, with great funeralpomp, in Westminster abbey, within afew feet of those of his great rival,Pitt, on the 10th of October, the anniversaryof his first election for Westminster.His property was soon after sold byauction ; and it is related that amongthe books, was Gibbon's first volume olthe Roman History, which seemed tobe a presentation copy to Fox, who hadinserted, on the blank leaf, this anecdote:" The author at Brookes's, saidthere was no salvation for the countryuntil six heads of the principal personsin administration were laid on the tableEleven days after, the same gentlemanaccepted a place of lord of trade, underthose very ministers, and has actewith them ever since!" Such was theavidity of bidders for the smallest memorialof Fox. that on account of thimemorandum, the book fetched threeguineas.Nollekens executed no less than thirtylusts of Fox, and portraits of him werealmost innumerable. He was of middlestature, and though in youth, remarkablyactive, became in the latter part oflis life, corpulent and unwieldy. Hiscountenance was manly, bold, andopen ; his complexion very dark, hisnose well formed, and his mouth, expressiveof great good nature. His eyebrowswere thick, black, and peculiarlyshaped ; not being arched, but risingupward, at a considerable angle fromthe temples, towards the middle of theforehead.It would be difficult to convey a justidea of the eloquence of Fox. Herejected everything that had the appearanceof art ; and it was a sayingof his that, " If a speech read well, itwas a bad speech. He had no setstyle, no monotony of round or studiedperiods. His illustrations were drawnfrom history or common life. He reasonedfrom facts and obvious principles,and made his hearers think and feelwith him, because he appeared to speakwhat he thought, and to feel like one ofthemselves.His speeches," said Sheridan, "wereamong the finest examples of argumentation; abounding in pointed observationsand just conclusions, clothed inforcible expression, and delivered withmanly boldness. The leading characteristicof his oratory was a ready, andas it were, intuitive power of analysis,which he possessed beyond any mannow living ; and it would not exceed thetruth, perhaps, if it were added, equalto any man that has ever lived." " Fox,as an orator," says Godwin, " seemedto come immediately from the forminghand of Nature. H e spoke well, becausehe felt strongly and earnestly. His eloquencewas impetuous as the current ofthe river Rhone nothing could arrestits course. His voice would insensiblyrise to too high a key ; he would runhimself out of breath. Every thingshewed how little artifice there was inhis oratory. Though on all great occasionshe was throughout energetic,yet it was by sudden flashes and emanations,that he electrified the heartand shot through the blood of his hearer.I have seen his countenance brightenup with more than mortal ardour andgoodness ; I have been present whenCHARLES JAMES FOX.his voice has been suffocated with thesudden bursting forth of a flood oftears !"Sir James Mackintosh says of him,When he began to speak, a commonobserver might have thought himawkward, and even a consummatejudge, could only have been struck withthe exquisite justness of his ideas, andthe transparent simplicity of his manners; for he carried into public much ofthe negligent exterior, which belongedto him in private. But no sooner hadhe spoken for some time, than he waschanged into another being : he forgothimself, and every thing around him;he thought only of his subject; hisgenius warmed and kindled as he wenton ; he darted fire into his audience ;torrents of impetuous and irresistibleeloquence swept along their feelingsand convictions. He certainly possessed,above all moderns, that unionof reason, simplicity, and vehemence,which formed the prince of orators. Hewas the most Demosthenes speakersince Demosthenes."The following passage occurs in theelaborate character of Fox, by Dr. Parr :If you had been called upon to selecta friend from the whole human race,where could you have found one endowedas he was, with the guilelessplayfulness of a child, and the most correctand comprehensive knowledge ofthe world ; or distinguished as he was,by profound erudition, by well-foundedreverence for the constitution of hiscountry, and the keenest penetrationinto the consequences, near and remote,of all public measures? Where could youhave found a statesman with such extensiveand noble views ? Where couldyou have found an orator, gifted withproperties of eloquence so many and sogreat? always exciting attention by hisardour, and rewarding it by his goodsense ; always adapting his matter to thesubject, and his diction to the matter;never misrepresenting, where he undertookonly to confute, nor insulting becausehe had vanquished; instructivewithout a wish to deceive, and persuasivewithout an attempt to domineer :manfully disdaining petty controversy ;eager for victory only as the price oftruth ; holding up the most abstruseprinciples in the most glowing colours ;and dignifying the most common bynew combinations ; at one moment incorporatingit with argument, and atthe next ascending from historical detailsto philosophical generalization ; irresistiblefrom effort, captivating withoutit ; and by turns, concise andcopious, easy and energetic, familiarand sublime !"In manners, Fox was a high-bredgentleman. What his opinions were,as to religion, is uncertain ; but in essentialshe was undoubtedly a Christian.Dr. Parr, adverting to this subject, says,I have often remarked that uponreligious topics, he did not talk irreverently,and generally appeared unwillingto talk at all. He was certainlynot deeply versed in theological lore :yet from my conversation with him, Iam induced to think, that according tothe views he had taken of Christianity,he did not find any decisive evidencefor several doctrines, which many ofthe wisest men have sincerely believed.Yet he occasionally professed, and fromhis known veracity, we may be surethat he inwardly felt, the highest approbationof its pure and benevolent precepts."His conversation was inexhaustiblyrich : he was never dogmatic, but onthe contrary, eminently conciliating.His wit inflicted no wounds ; his humourwas always innocent. " His memory,"says Parr, " seems never to have beenoppressed by the number, or distractedby the variety, of the materials whichit gradually accumulated ; and his companionscan never forget the readiness,correctness, and glowing enthusiasm,with which he repeated the noblestpassages in the best English, French,and Italian poets, and in the best epicand dramatic writers of antiquity."I myself," says Hazlitt, "have heardCharles Fox engaged in familiar conversation: it was in the Louvre ; hewas describing the pictures to two personsthat were with him. He spokerapidly, but very unaffectedly : I rememberhis saying, ' All these bluesand greens, and reds, are the Guercinos ;you may know them by the colours.'He set Opie right as to Diminishing'sSt. Jerome. ' You will find,' said he,though you may not be struck withit at first, that there is a great deal oftruth and good sense in that picture.'There was a person, at one time, withTHE SENATE.Mr. Fox, who, when the opinion of thelatter was asked on any subject, veryfrequently interposed to give the answer.This sort of tantalizing disappointmentwas ingeniously enoughcompared, by some one, to walking upLudgate-hill, and having the spire ofSt. Martin's constantly getting in yourway, when you wished to see the domeof St. Paul's."Friends and foes have concurred inpraising the extreme kindness of hisdisposition, his almost morbid dread ofgiving offence in private life, and hisenthusiastic humanity. He, who by histowering eloquence, earnestly soughtto break the chains of the enslavedAfrican, would carefully turn aside toavoid bruising a worm. When a friendaccidentally mentioned some amiabletrait of Fox to Burke, the latter exclaimed," To be sure, he is a man madeto be loved !"Booth, who had been on very intimateterms with Fox, once sketched hischaracter in the following manner :Charles Fox is, unquestionably, aman of first-rate talents ; but so deficientin judgment, as never to havesucceeded in any object during hiswhole life. He loved only three things :women, play, and politics. Yet, atno period did he ever form a creditableconnexion with a woman ; he lost hiswhole fortune at the gaming table ; andwith the exception of about elevenmonths, he has always remained in opposition."To the love of power may be attributedthe various blots in his publiclife : it made him, consecutively, LordNorth's political dangler, his bitterenemy, and his associate in power andopposition : it prompted him to becomethe advocate of unconstitutional principleson the discussion of the regencybill, and finally produced his unionwith the Grenville. Of sordid views hewas incapable; money weighed againstintegrity would have been to him asdust in the balance; and it is morethan probable that, in the pursuit ofhis favourite object, power, he deludedeven himself, and was quite unconsciousof his political errors. Men of strongimagination are frequently deficient injudgment ; and the mighty genius ofFox, before which the mountain ofdifficulty dwindled into a mole-hill,may have sometimes diverged from itsglorious aims, for want of the guidinghand of prudence. A different cause,however, operated strongly against hissuccess as a politician : he flung awaythe jewel, independence, with recklessprodigality, before he could appreciateits value, and through the remainderof his life, he continued to pay the penaltyof his rashness. Gratitude forpecuniary favours rendered him theslave, if not the tool of a party ; andwrung from him a thousand compliances,which, under other circumstances, hewould have disdained.But while we admit his errors, wecannot but admire his great merits.His views, always noble, were oftensublime. His love of country was apassion rather than a principle, but hisphilanthropy extended to the wholehuman race. He was at once the advocateof the oppressed Catholic, thesuffering Hindoo, and the enslavedAfrican. Peace was the goddess of hisidolatry, he sighed with benevolentardour for her advent, and wroughtardently for the universal diffusion offreedom, knowledge and happiness.At one period, Fox appears to havehad various literary projects in view.Among others, are mentioned an editionof Dry den, a Defence of the FrenchStage, and an Essay on the Beauties ofEuripides. Of the latter author, as wellas of Virgil, he was a most devotedadmirer. In the latter part of his life,according to Lord Holland, he spokewith delight and complacency of wholedays devoted to the perusal of theirworks. To Racine he also appears tohave been particularly partial. In aletter to his noble nephew, in 1803,after remarking that some modernwriters did not sufficiently appreciatethe beauties of the French dramatist,he says, "It puts me quite in a passion :Je veuxcontreeuxfaire un jour un groslivre,' as Voltaire says. Even Dryden,who speaks with proper respect of Corneille,vilipends Racine. If ever I publishmy edition of his works, I will giveit him for it, you may depend. Oh !how I wish that I could make up mymind to think it right to devote theremaining part of my life to such subjects,and such only !For some time before his death hewas engaged on an historical workCHARLES JAMES FOX.which he did not live to complete. Itwas published after; his death, by hisnephew, Lord Holland, under the titleof A History of the early part of theReign of King James the Second, withan introductory Chapter. It is doubtfulat what precise period he began this,which was his principal literary composition,but it appears, that early in 1800,in one of his letters to Lord Lauderdale,he stated, that he was seriouslythinking of writing history, and had,indeed, begun ; but even his introductorychapter was not then completed ;and not only had he consulted no importantmanuscripts, relative to the subjecthe proposed treating, but franklyadmitted that he did not know whereany such existed : " therefore," headded, " any information on that headwould be very welcome." Lord Lauderdale,it seems, transmitted him manyvaluable hints in reply, and introducedhim to Laing, the author of a History ofScotland, to whom Fox was greatlyindebted, as well for references to authorities,as, perhaps, for suggestionsof consequence, in the progress of hiswork. He went to Paris, as we havealready stated, principally for the purposeof examining papers relative tothe reign of James the Second, whichwere supposed to be deposited in theScots college in that capital. In theDepot des Affaires Extraordinaires, hediscovered documents so illustrative ofmany obscure transactions, which hehad already narrated in his intendedhistory, that, on his return, he wasobliged to make numerous insertionsin the manuscript ; and, to use his ownexpression, " he found piecing in thebits from his Parisian materials a troublesomejob." Indeed, literary composition,altogether, appears to have beenso laborious to him, that it is a matterof wonder he should ever have engagedin so extensive a work as his contemplatedhistory. Although bold and fluentas a speaker, he was timid and slow asawriter. His letter to the electorsof Westminster, in 1793, was the produceof many days' toil ; " and even thepublication on the late Duke of Bedford,"says Lord Holland, " occupieda greater portion of time than couldpossibly be imagined by those who wereunacquainted with his scrupulous attentionto all the niceties of language."His mode of writing was truly singularfor a man of such gigantic powers.Every sentence appears to have costhim a mental throe. It was his customto set down, on the backs of letters,passages which, says Lord Holland, hehad, in all probability, turned in hismind, and, in some degree, formed inhis walks, or during his hours of leisure;and, at intervals, he read hisscraps to Mrs. Fox, who copied themneatly into the manuscript book fromwhich the work was printed. Theoriginal papers he usually destroyed :a few of them have, however, been preserved,and in these are found erasures,interlineations, and other marks oflaborious revision. Even while dictatingfrom his corrected manuscript,to his beloved amanuensis, he is said,not only to have altered words, but tohave frequently changed the constructionof sentences. The object of somuch toil was to attain an unadornedsimplicity of style ; to reject any wordfor which he had not the authority ofDryden ; to preserve a constant perspicuity; to incorporate, as much as possible,such matter as is usually conveyedby means of notes, into his text;and to avoid writing as he would havespoken in public. His apprehensionlest his pages should display any tracesof that art in which he was so great amaster, induced him, it is said, to expungemany vivid passages, which hemight, perhaps, have advantageouslyretained. His fastidiousness, in thisrespect, was so great, that in a letter toone of his correspondents, he says, " Ihave at last finished my introduction ;but, after all, it looks more like a speechthan it should be."The fragment certainly possesses considerablemerits : it contains many admirablesentiments and philosophicalremarks ; the events are sometimesrelated with majestic and appropriatesimplicity ; but the language is frequentlyrugged or mean, occasionallysomewhat ambiguous ; and often so coldas to freeze all interest for the facts.Fox," says a late talented writer,is not to be blamed for having writtenan indifferent history of James theSecond, but for having written a historyat all. It was not his business towrite a history his business was notto have made any more coalitions.THE SENATE.But he found writing so dull, he thoughtit better to be a colleague of LordGrenville! He did not want style; (tosay that, was nonsense, because the styleof his speeches was just and fine ;) hewanted a sounding board in the ear ofposterity to try his periods upon. Ifhe had gone to the house of commonsin the morning, and tried to have madea speech fasting, when there was nobodyto hear him, he might have been equallydisconcerted at his want of style."WILLIAM Bingham.THIS remarkable man was the sonof Colonel Windham, of Felbrigge, inNorfolk ; he \vai born in London, onthe 3rd of May, 1750. While yet achild, he displayed a strange restlessnessof temper, which frequently ledhim into pranks of a mischievous character.In his seventh year he wasE laced at Eton, where he renderedhimself conspicuous among his companionsby his talents and intrepidity.In 1766, he went to the university ofGlasgow, and, while there, evinced astrong inclination for the mathematics.In 1767, he was entered a gentlemancommoner of University college, Oxford.It is remarkable that, at thisperiod of his life, he took so littlemerest in public affairs, that it wasoften jocularly said of him, " He willnever know who is prime minister."He was likewise so diffident or unambitious,that he refused the office ofsecretary to Lord Townshend, on thatnobleman's appointment to the lord-lieutenancyof Ireland. He quittedOxford in 1771, and, two years afterwards,embarked with an intention ofaccompanying Lord Margrave on hisintended voyage towards the NorthPole, but sea sickness compelled himto abandon the enterprise.He first appeared as a public speakerat a political meeting In Norwich ; atwhich he opposed, with great vehemence,a subscription then in progressfor carrying on the war with America.His speech, on this occasion, was notwithout vigour, but gave little promiseof his future celebrity. He had previouslydistinguished himself, whileserving as an officer in the Norfolkmilitia, in quelling a mutiny by hisintrepid conduct. Few men, indeed,could entertain a greater contempt ofdanger than Windham ; he was alwayscareless of his own comfort, and, onthis occasion, remained for so considerablea time in wet clothes, that hewas seized with a fever, from whichhe narrowly escaped with his life.With a view to the restoration of hishealth, he proceeded to the continent,where he remained for two years.In 17.82, he was returned to parliamentas member for Norwich ; andsoon attained distinction as much byhis spirit as his talents. He was appointedchief secretary to the lord-lieutenantof Ireland, in 1783 : onthis occasion, Windham lamented tohis friend, Dr. Johnson, of whoseliterary club he was a member, that inhis new office he must sanction practiceswhich he could not approve.Don't be afraid, sir," said the doctor,smiling, " you will soon make a verypretty rascal." The young statesman'sconscientious scruples were not, however,so easily quieted ; for, accordingto Amyot, they were the principalcause of his early resignation.Although for many years recognisedas an oppositionist, Windham wasnever a thorough party man, but wouldreadily vote with the minister of theday, when he esteemed his measureslaudable. On the schism occurringamong the Whigs, in 1793, he followedthe lead of Burke. In 1794, he wasappointed secretary at war, with theunusual distinction of a seat in thecabinet. In the same year he took hisdegree of LL. D., and, it is related,that when he entered the theatre onthis occasion, the whole assembly rose,and greeted him with loud acclamations.When Pitt resigned, in 1801, Wind-hamretired from office, and, soonafterwards, delivered his celebratedspeech on the government of France.WILLIAM WIND HAM.On the decease of Pitt, in 1806, heagain took office, as secretary of warand colonies, with Fox and Lord Grenville; and, on their dismissal, returnedto the ranks of opposition, which henever afterwards quitted.His death, which occurred in thesummer of 1810, was occasioned by thefollowing circumstance : On the 8th ofJuly, in the preceding year, whilepassing by the end of Conduit-street,he saw a house on fire, and, with hisusual spirit, proceeded towards thespot, in order to render the sufferersall the assistance in his power. Hefound the flames rapidly advancing towardsthe residence of the HonourableMr. North, whose valuable library, hedetermined, if possible, to save from thedestruction with which it was threatened.He laboured at the task whichhe had thus imposed on himself, for aperiod of four hours, during a heavyrain, and amid the playing of numerousfire-engines. His efforts were so successful,that most of the books weresaved. Unfortunately, he fell, andinjured his hip, while lifting some ofthe heaviest volumes ; but he took nonotice of the accident, until an indolentencysted tumour had been formed ;when, on consulting his surgical advisers,he found that it was necessaryfor him to submit to a most painfuland dangerous operation. The tumourwas removed with success, on the 17thof May, 1810, but unfavourable symptomssoon afterwards appeared, and heexpired on the 4th of the following month.Windham generally acted as thoughhe cared for no opinion but his own.He dealt largely in paradoxes, wasoften false in his philosophy, and occasionallyadvocated nonsense ; yet hehad the credit of being an enlightenedman, and of always speaking as hethought. A Quixote against what hedeemed the prejudices of the great, hefrequently startled the dull ear of somestately associate, by asserting that it wasessential for the support of our nationalintrepidity, to encourage cock-fighting,bull-baiting, and pugilism. The forciblebut uncouth barbarisms which hewas in the habit of weaving into theweb of his parliamentary orations,shocked the learned, who knew him tobe " deep-read and scholarly" as themselves;and, as he differed in opinionwith the graver part of his caste, as tothe sports of the people, he was deemeda talented eccentric ; but he appears tohave been above the low ambition ofappearing singular, and supported noprinciples of which he did not conscientiouslyapprove. It was his ambitionto realize, and embody in himself,the popular idea of a thoroughEnglishman : his speeches were boldand forcible ; his opinions masculine,generous and tolerant. He had a mostfervid affection for the pastimes of ourancestors; and declaimed with equalzeal and eloquence, to prove the necessityof their perpetuation. His popularpredilections were so nicely balancedby his loyalty, that he enjoyed the rarefelicity, as a public man, of being inhigh favour with the people, withoutrendering himself at all odious to thesovereign.He was much beloved in private life,his character being amiable, and hisconversation varied, sportive, intelligent,and conciliating. So decidedlyhigh did he rank in public estimation,that the immediate neighbourhood ofhis residence, during his illness, wasthronged with carriages, containinganxious inquirers as to the state of hishealth ; his house was crowded withfriends during the consultations, whichtook place twice a day, of his medicalattendants ; all classes exhibited themost lively sympathy for his sufferings ;and the king himself repeatedly desiredto be informed of the progress of hismalady, emphatically declaring thatthe expiring senator was a genuinepatriot, and a truly honest man.HENRY GRATTAN.HENRY GRATTAN was born inDublin, towards the close of the year1750. His father was a respectablebarrister; and his mother, a sister ofthe witty Dean Morley. After havingreceived the rudiments of education at3G2THE SENATE.a common day school, young Grattanwas entered, in 1765, a fellow-commonerat the university of Dublin ;where he studied with such successfuldiligence, as to obtain a premium atevery exhibition. On quitting the university,he entered himself of the MiddleTemple. He was so straitened formoney at this time, that, in order toafford himself the means of increasinghis library, he was compelled, not onlyto refrain from even the least expensiveamusements, but frequently to contenthimself with a scanty allowanceof food. He was indefatigably industrious;and so anxious not to losea moment in sleep, which, in his opinionought to be devoted to study,that he contrived a singular apparatusto rouse him regularly at day-break.A small barrel, filled with water, wasplaced over a basin, which stood on ashelf immediately above his pillow,and the cock of it was sufficientlyturned to fill the basin by daylight ; sothat, if he did not then rise, the waterflowed upon his person and bedding.In 1772, he was called to the Irishbar; and shortly afterwards, althoughhe could scarcely earn the means ofsubsistence by his profession, he marriedan accomplished, but portionlessbeauty, of the name of Fitzgerald. Bythis lady, with whom he enjoyed muchdomestic happiness for a number ofyears, Grattan had no less than thirteenchildren. In 1775, he procured a seatin the Irish parliament, for the boroughof Charlemont, through the kindnessof its patron. He joined the oppositionparty in the house, and soon obtainedextraordinary celebrity by procuringa repeal of the statute by whichit had been declared, that Ireland wasinseparably annexed to the crown ofGreat Britain, and bound by Britishacts of parliament, if named ; thatthe Irish house of lords had no jurisdictionin matters of appeal ; and thatthe dernier resort, in all cases of lawand equity, was to the peers of GreatBritain. For his instrumentality inprocuring this great concession, thegentlemen of the bar proposed to erectastatue of Grattan in some conspicuousplace, but he modestly declinedthe honour. Addresses were presentedto him from various public bodies ; hewas styled the saviour of his country ;and the Irish parliament voted 50,000to purchase a house and lands for himand his heirs for ever.But Grattan was not permitted toenjoy the honours and rewards of hispatriotism in peace. Flood, a memberof the Irish house of commons, withvirulent eloquence, insisted that Grattanhad done little for the benefit ofIreland : for that the statute being onlydeclaratory of a previous right, its repealwas not any renunciation of the claim,which England might resume at pleasure.The Irish people eagerly adoptedthis opinion, and Grattan soon foundthat his popularity was on the wane.The rival orators, during the politicalcontest, mutually descended to the mostdebasing scurrility and abuse. WhileGrattan animadverted, with disgracefulbitterness, on the broken beak and disastrouscountenance of his opponent,Flood broadly insinuated, that Grattanhad betrayed his country for gold, andfor prompt payment had sold himself tothe minister. Lord chancellor Claredenounced him as an infernal democrat ;the corporation of Dublin tore downhis portrait, with which they had previouslyadorned their hall, and indignantlyexpelled him from their body ;he was, at length, by common consent,stigmatized as a traitor to liberty ; and,to complete the climax, the corporationof Cork directed, " that the street, whichhad been named Grattan-street, should,in future, be called Duncan-street !"In 1785, Grattan successfully opposedthe propositions of a Mr. Ord, that theIrish legislature should, from time totime, adopt all such acts of the Britishparliament as related to commerce ; and,in 1790, he had so far regained hispopularity, that, notwithstanding hisadvocacy of concession to the catholicswas exceedingly offensive to the corporation,he was elected, by acclamation,member for Dublin, in that very councillors,from the walls of which hisportrait had been so recently stripped.During the unhappy state of affairsjust before the union, Grattan advisedconciliatory measures ; but his counselwas rejected ; the ministry resorted toseverity and coercion, which soon led tomartial law, and Grattan seceded fromparliament, to weep over the desolationof his country in retirement. No sooner,however, was the union question broughtHENRY G RAT TAX.3(53forward, than he again appeared in thehouse of commons, and terminated hisparliamentary career in Ireland, by afervid, but unsuccessful, opposition tothat measure, which he stigmatized asadeath blow to the prosperity of theunhappy land of his birth.Grattan took his seat in the Britishparliament as member for Malton, in1805 ; and he subsequently becameone of the representatives of Dublin.He advocated the war policy of theministers ; and, although his eloquencehad lost much of its vigour, he becamethe most powerful supporter in thehouse of the catholic claims. His zeal foremancipation increased with his years ;and only a few months before his death,he undertook to present the petition ofthe Irish catholics, and to support it inparliament, although it was stronglyurged by his friends, that the necessaryexertion would be incompatible withhis age and declining health. " Ishould be happy," he exclaimed, onthis occasion, " to die in the dischargeof my duty !" He had scarcely arrivedin London with the petition, when hisdebility increased, and he expired athis house in Baker-street, Portman-square,on the 14th of May, 1820. Hisremains were interred in Westminsterabbey.In person, Grattan was short andmeagre; his chin remarkably long, andhis face slightly marked with the smallpox.His walk was singularly ungraceful;he never put his heels to theground, and, when at college, on accountof his gait, obtained the nicknameof The Elastic Body. Sir JonahBarrington gives an amusing account ofGrattan's appearance at an advancedperiod of his life. It appears that aColonel Burr and Mr. Randolph, fromAmerica, anxious to behold the greatIrish orator, were taken, one morning,by Sir Jonah, to Grattan's house. Ontheir arrival he was occupied, but theservant stated that he would soon beatleisure to receive them. Burr andRandolph expected, it seems, that Grattanwas as great a prodigy in appearanceas in parts. " At length," saysSir Jonah, " the door opened, and inhopped a small, bent figure, meagre,yellow, and ordinary ; with one slipperand one shoe, his breeches' knees loose,his cravat hanging down, his shirt andcoat sleeves tucked up high, and anold hat upon his head. The strangershad no idea that the odd-lookingperson they beheld was the greatGrattan ; and Sir Jonah did not thinkproper, for some time, to undeceivethem, but maliciously enjoyed theiramazement at the familiarity withwhich " the small, bent figure" addressedthem.Grattan's voice was sharp, but notpowerful ; neither was his managementof it by any means skilful. Hewould sometimes elevate it to a pitchof discordant shrillness, and then sufferit to drop so low that its deep murmuringwere almost unintelligible. Hislanguage was powerful, attractive, andcopious ; occasionally dignified, but oftenmeretriciously alliterative, and laboriouslyantithetical. He excelled inanswering an opponent whom hehated ; but his invectives were, for themost part, too coarse to be severe. Hisaction was generally forcible, but neverelegant, and sometimes ludicrous. Amodern periodical writer says, withmuch truth, that Grattan's motions oncatholic emancipation were the mostextraordinary exhibitions, both bodilyand mental, that could possibly bewitnessed: "you saw a little, oddly-compactedfigure of a man, with a largehead and features, such as they give topasteboard masks, or stick upon theshoulders of Punch in the puppet-show,rolling about like a mandarin,sawing the air with his whole bodyfrom head to foot, sweeping the floorwith a roll of parchment which he heldin one hand, and throwing his legs andarms about like the branches of treestossed by the wind ; every now andthen striking the table with impatientvehemence, and, in a sharp, slow,nasal, guttural tone, drawling forthwithdue emphasis and discretion, a setof little, smart, antithetical sentences,all ready cut and dry, polished andpointed, that seemed as if they wouldlengthen out in succession to the crackof doom. Alliterations were tacked toalliterations ; inference was dove-tailedinto inference ; and the whole derivednew brilliancy and piquancy from thecontrast it presented to the uncouthnessof the speaker and the monotonyof his delivery."Grattan was a warm friend, and, inTHE SENATE.early life, a bitter enemy; but years,which did not bereave him of his bestaffections, at length mellowed andsoftened down his animosities. Of hisPrivate life little is known, becausetitle occurred in it to attract attention.It is said, that his economybordered upon penuriousness ; andthat, although he received from theliberality of his country so handsome aprovision, he never displayed a munificentspirit. It must be remembered,however, that he did not continue topractise in his profession ; that he procuredno place, and had a large family.Nor was he always parsimonious ; as wehave reason to believe that he liberallypatronized a young artist of great expectations,who had no other claims onany man's generosity than his meritand his poverty. He possessed but littlewit, and his mind was too lofty forhumour. In conversation, he was gentle,unassuming, good-humoured, and sofelicitous in his expressions, that he conveyedhis meaning in the most conciseand expressive mode imaginable.He is generally admitted to havebeen an ardent lover of his country ;yet it is difficult to view him otherwisethan as a political adventurer, who,in return for a few vehement speeches,which gave direction to public feelingat an important crisis, was willing to receivefrom Ireland, impoverished andmiserable as he declared her to be, thatfortune, which would have been morehonourably gained by the professionalexertion of his talents. In answer,however, to this, it may be pleaded thatthe man had no clients, and that hischildren must have been brought upin genteel misery, had he not prudentlyaccepted the price of his patriotism.RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN.THIS distinguished orator, dramatist,and wit, was born in Dorset street,Dublin, in the month of September,1751. His father was an actor andteacher of elocution, and his mother wasthe author of Sidney Biddulph, a novel ;of Nourjahad, an oriental tale ; and twocomedies. At seven years of age, hewas placed under the tuition of SamuelWhite ; by whom, and also by hisfather, he was pronounced to be " amost impenetrable dunce." In 1762,his parents having removed to England,he was sent to Harrow ; where he acquiredthe love of his schoolfellows byhis sprightliness, but exposed himselfto the censure of his tutors by his indolence.Sumner and Parr, the headand second masters, however, appear tohave suspected that " the player boy,"as he was tauntingly termed by hiscompanions, possessed abilities which,by cultivation, might be rendered splendid.But young Sheridan was destituteof emulation, and infinitely preferredrobbing an orchard to translating aclassic. He is, however, said to haveread English poetry with avidity ; and,at the age of eighteen, when he quittedHarrow, to have acquired a competentknowledge of Horace, Virgil, Cicero,and four orations of Demosthenes. Hehad, also, according to Parr, " readHomer's Iliad, now and then ; not as aprofessed scholar would do, critically,but with all the strong sympathies of apoet reading a poet." The scanty fortunesof-his father prevented his removalto college ; but, with his brother,he received further instruction in Latinand the mathematics, from Mr. LewisKerr ; and, at the same time, wastaught fencing and riding, by the celebratedAngelo.In 1770, he formed a sort of literarypartnership with his old schoolfellow,Nathaniel Halhed, afterwards an Indianjudge; and their joint production wasan unfinished farce, called Jupiter,written in imitation of Midas. Halhedaccomplished his share of the project,and then forwarded it to Sheridan, whoset about fulfilling the part he hadundertaken, but never brought it to aconclusion. They then projected aweekly paper, to be entitled Human'sMiscellany; the first number of whichwas written, but never printed. Theirnext attempt was a translation into verseof the prose Epistles of Aristaenetus ;RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN.which, although on its publication itwas attributed, by some, to Johnson,and by others to Armstrong, quicklysunk into oblivion.About this period, Sheridan alsowrote several copies of verses on localtopics, which were inserted in the BathChronicle ; and some amatory addressesto the beautiful Miss Linley, the Ceciliaof her day, whose family lived on termsof intimacy with his own. Halhed,Sheridan, and his elder brother Charles,all entertained, at the same time, apassion for this young lady : but Halhedsoon went to India ; Charles wiselyovercame his desires for an union whichprudence forbade ; and Richard wasleft undisputed possessor of a heart,which maintained its purity and freshnessamid temptations of no ordinarykind. The infamous solicitations ofone Captain Matthews, a married manand a fashionable scoundrel, were themeans of ripening this love affair into amarriage. The unprincipled Matthews,having fruitlessly employed the commonartifices of villany, resorted tomore refined enormities : he threatened,at one time, to destroy himself, unlesshis desires were gratified ; and, atanother, to blacken, by report, the reputationwhich he could not sully indeed.Harassed by these cruel importunities,Miss Linley quitted herfather's roof, and surrendered herselfto the protection of Sheridan. Accompaniedby a respectable woman,whose presence obviated the imputationof impropriety, they fled to France ;and, after a series of petty adventures,slightly tinged with the romantic andtheatrical, were married at a littlevillage near Calais, in the latter end ofMarch, 1772. A convent, and, subsequently,the house of an English physician,received the bride, whose marriage,it was arranged, should not beacknowledged until her husband couldcommand sufficient means for her support.Linley, the young lady's father,soon overtook them, and, after someexplanatory statements, they returnedwith him to England. Sheridan soonafterwards fought two duels withMatthews; in the latter of which, hereceived such severe wounds, that hislife was, for some time, considered indanger.Linley's reluctance to the union beingat length overcome, the youthful pairwere married in England, in April,1773. Their only fortune was onemoiety of a sum of 3,000, whichhad been settled upon Miss Linley byan old gentleman of fortune, namedLong ; who, in addition to this proof ofhis esteem, had desisted from urging amarriage with Miss Linley, which herfather had approved, but which shehad earnestly deprecated : the othermoiety, Linley retained as a compensationfor the valuable services of histalented daughter. Sheridan, who, notlong before his marriage, had enteredhimself a student of the Middle Temple,would not allow his wife to accept severallucrative professional offers which shereceived, although he possessed no propertybesides the l,5QQ which he hadreceived out of Long's settlement : hispride, apparently, revolting at the ideaof seeing her a servant of the public.They retired to a cottage at East Burnham,where they passed the happiestdays of their life; and, in after times,often looked back with a fond regret onthis the golden age of their existence.Wedded love stimulated Sheridan tounwonted industry. In 1774, thecomedy of The Rivals was finished;and, during some visits, in the ensuingsummer, to Lord Coventry and Mr.Canning, he nearly completed a workwhich Mr. Moore conjectures to havebeen an Essay on the Letters of LordChesterfield. On the 15th of January,1775, his comedy was produced atCovent Garden theatre. Extraordinaryas it may appear to those who havewitnessed a performance of this excellentpiece, it was, at first, decidedlyunsuccessful. Sheridan's admirers attributedits failure entirely to the badacting of Lee, who played the part ofSir Lucius Outrigger. Clinch, on thesecond representation, undertook thatcharacter, and performed it admirably;Sheridan, also, made some judiciousalterations, and the comedy soon wonits way into public approbation. Atthis time, he was little more than twenty-threeyears of age.Shortly afterwards, St Patrick's Daywas brought out, with considerable success,on the night of Clinch's benefit,for whom it had been expressly writtenby Sheridan, as a return for the advantageshe had derived from thatTHE SENATE.actor's clever performance of Sir LuciusOutrigger. Amid the fascinations ofsociety into which he was drawn byhis sudden fame, he found time to devotehimself to the weightier matters ofpolitics, and contemplated the preparationof an answer, which, however, henever finished, to a pamphlet, entitled,Taxation no Tyranny, written by Dr.Johnson, who, soon afterwards, introducedhim to the literary club.Towards the end of the year 1775,Sheridan brought out his comic operaof The Duenna ; for which his father-in-law,Linley, composed the music.It was performed seventy-five timesduring the season of its production ;and, while it advanced the reputationof the dramatist, added materially tohis pecuniary means. The circle ofhis acquaintance, however, increasedwith his income, and his expensesgreatly outran his receipts. But, notwithstandingthe miserable state of hisfinances, and although his extravaganceand volatility were notorious, he contrived,in 1776, by some mysteriousmeans, in conjunction with Linley andDr. Ford, to obtain Garrick's share ofthe patent for Drury lane theatre ; inwhich, two years afterwards, he purchasedthe whole of Lacy's interest forupwards of 45,000.In February, 1777, his alteration ofVanbrugh's Relapse was produced,underthe title of A Trip to Scarborough ; and,in the following May, appeared hismaster-piece, The School for Scandal.This comedy, was a work of infinitelabour : of the greater part of it, numeroustranscripts were found among hispapers, each of them much altered andinterlined. Only one draught was metwith of the last few scenes, which wereevidently done in great haste ; in fact,the piece was announced for representationbefore the actors received theconclusion of their parts. At the endof the manuscript, Sheridan wroteFinished at last, thank God! R. B.Sheridan;" to which, Hopkins, theprompter, added, "Amen ! W . Hopkins."Having effected a reconciliation withhis father, to whom his union with MissLinley had given great offence, Sheridanprocured for him, in 1778, the appointmentof manager to Drury lane theatre.In 1779, he produced The Critic; andduring the same year, he officiated aschief mourner at the funeral of Garrick,on whose death he wrote a monody,which was spoken, with much pathos,by Mrs. Yates, in the character of theTragic Muse.Satiated with dramatic fame, he nowturned his attention to politics, and endeavouredto form such connexions asmight be conducive to his views ofgetting into parliament. By means ofMr., subsequently Lord, John Townshend,he became acquainted with Fox.I made the first dinner party," sayshis lordship, " at which they met ;having told Fox that all the notions hemight have conceived of Sheridan'stalents and genius, from the comedyof The Rivals, &c. would fall infinitelyshort of the admiration of his astonishingpowers, which, I was sure, he wouldentertain at the first interview. Thefirst interview between them (therewere very few present, only Tickelland myself, and one or two more) Ishall never forget. Fox told me, afterbreaking up from dinner, that he hadalways thought Hare, after my uncle,Charles Townshend, the wittiest manhe had ever met with, but that Sheridansurpassed them both infinitely." Sheridan'sadmiration of Fox was equallygreat; and the congeniality of theirminds soon produced a close friendship.With Windham he had been previouslyintimate ; and his acquaintance withBurke speedily followed.Having thus become attached to theleaders of opposition, he endeavouredto signalize himself as a partisan, byabusing the ministers, in a periodicalpublication, called The Englishman ;which was, however, soon discontinued,either on account of its unpopularity, orhis own habitual negligence. Early in1780, he signed the report of a society,termed the Westminster Sub-committee,by which it was insisted that theEnglish people had a positive right toannual parliaments. Shortly afterwards,he became representative of Stafford, forwhich he secured his seat, during thenext five or six years, at the expense ofonly 2,000. His first speech was relativeto a petition presented against hisreturn : the house heard him with particularattention, but his success does notappear to have equalled the expectationj of his friends. After he had spoken.I he went into the gallery, and askedRICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN.Woodfall, the reporter, with greatanxiety, what he thought of his firstessay. Woodfall replied, " Oratory isnot in your line, you had better cleaveto your literary pursuits." Sheridanwas dumb-foundered for a few moments,and then exclaimed, with great energy,It is in me, however, Woodfall ; and,by heaven, I'll have it out !"The employment of the militaryduring the riots, and Fox's bill for therepeal of the marriage act, were theearliest topics of general interest, onwhich he spoke. At this period, althoughfirmly attached to his party,he did not often join in the debates.His modesty or supineness, during thenumberless stormy discussions on thatinexhaustible subject, the Americanwar, is, of itself, perhaps, sufficient torebut the assertion, although " coming,"as Moore states, " from an authority,worthy in every respect of the mostimplicit belief," that towards the closeof her struggle with the mother country,government of America, offered hima sum of 20,000 as a tribute of esteemfor his services in the cause of liberty.Sheridan is said to have declined theoffer ; and his elegant biographer pertinentlyremarks that, " with respectto the credibility of the transaction altogether,it is far less easy to believethat the Americans had so much moneyto give, than that Mr. Sheridan shouldhave been sufficiently high-minded torefuse it."In 1782, on the downfal of LordNorth, and the accession to power ofthe Marquess of Rockingham and hisfriends, Sheridan was appointed one ofthe under secretaries of state. Whilein office, he spoke indignantly againstthe measures pursued by Englandtowards the sister kingdom, and supportedPitt's motion for an inquiryas to the state of the representation.The new ministry was speedily dissolved,by the sudden death 'of itsleader, and the elevation of Lord Shellto the premiership. Sheridanresigned with his friends, with whomhe continued to act, although he highlydisapproved of the coalition betweenFox and Lord North ; and, graduallyincreasing in power as a speaker, atlength became one of the most formidablemembers on the opposition sideof the house. He bore a conspicuouspart in the attacks of his party on Pitt,then chancellor of the exchequer, who,in return, took occasion to reflect, withsome severity, on Sheridan's theatricalpursuits. " No man," said Pitt, " admiresmore than I do the abilities ofthat right honourable gentleman f theelegant sallies of his thought, the gayeffusions of his fancy, his dramaticturns, and his epigrammatic point; andif they were reserved for the properstage, they would, no doubt, receive theplaudits of the audience ; and it wouldbe the fortune of the right honourablegentleman, ' suiplausugaudere theatre.'But parliament was not the proper scenefor the exhibition of those elegancies."Sheridan, in reply, said, " On the particularsort of personality which theright honourable gentleman has thoughtproper to make use of, I need not makeany comment. The propriety, the taste,the gentlemanly point of it must havebeen obvious to the house. But letme assure the right honourable gentleman,that I do now, and will, at anytimehe chooses to repeat this sort ofallusion, meet it with the most sinceregood humour. Nay, I will say moreflattered and encouraged by the righthonourable gentleman's panegyric onmy talents, if ever I again engage inthe composition he alludes to, I may betempted to an act of presumption toattempt an improvement on one of BenJonson's best characters, the characterof the angry boy in the Alchymist."The coalition having gained an ascendancy,at length entered into administration,and Sheridan became secretaryto the treasury; but the' failureof Fox's India bill, in the house oflords, was immediately followed by theabrupt dismissal of his party ; and Pittwas recalled to office as first lord ofthe treasury, and chancellor of the exchequer.The opposition, having a majorityin the house of commons, for sometimeimpeded the progress of publicbusiness ; but, after a severe contest,which was equally discreditable to Foxand his friends, and honourable to thetalent and firmness of Pitt, the latterachieved a complete triumph. Sheridan,during this celebrated session, opposedthe minister's scheme for the redemptionof the national debt, as well as hismore ordinary measures of finance; toqualify himself for the discussion ofTHE SENATE.which, he had, it is said, imposed uponhimself the task of studying arithmeticfor more than a fortnight ! He also tookan opportunity to contradict the rumour,that he had written part of the Rolledand Probationary Odes ; warmly advocatedwhat he conceived to be thedearest interests of his mother country,during a debate on the Irish commercialpropositions; and severely ridiculed theDuke of Richmond's plan for the fortificationof dock-yards.On the 7th of February, 1787, in acommittee of the whole house, he presentedthe charge against Warren Hastings,relative to the Begum Princessesof Ode, in so powerful a speech, that,at its conclusion, the whole assemblyjoined in a loud and continued tumultof applause. Of this astonishing oration,Pitt said that it surpassed all the eloquenceof ancient and modern times,that it possessed every thing whichgenius or art could furnish, to agitateand controul the human mind ; Foxdeclared, that all he had ever heard, allhe had ever read, when compared withit, dwindled into nothing, and vanishedlike vapour before the sun ; and Burkepronounced it to be the most astonishingeffort of eloquence, argument, and wit,of which there was any record or tradition.Sir William Dolben, as theAnnual Register states, immediatelymoved an adjournment of the debate,acknowledging, that in the state ofmind in which Sheridan's speech hadleft him, it was impossible for him togive a determinate opinion. Mr. Stanhope,who seconded the motion, observed,that, when he had entered thehouse, his opinion was inclined tothe side of Mr. Hastings ; but suchhad been the wonderful efficacy ofSheridan's convincing detail of facts,and irresistible eloquence, that he couldnot but say that his sentiments werematerially changed : nothing, indeed,but information almost equal to a miracle,could determine him not to votefor the charge ; but he had must felt theinfluence of such a miracle, and hecould not but ardently desire to avoid animmediate decision. Others admittedthat they had experienced a similarrevolution of sentiment. Bisset, in hishistory of the reign of George theThird, states, that " the late Mr. Logan,well known for his literary efforts, andauthor of a most masterly defence ofMr. Hastings, went that day to thehouse of commons, prepossessed for theaccused and against the accuser. Atthe expiration of the first hour, he saidto a friend, ' All this is declamatoryassertion without proof;' when thesecond was finished, ' This is a mostwonderful oration !' at the close of thethird, ' Mr. Hastings has acted veryunjustifiably!' the fourth, 'Mr. Hastingsis a most atrocious criminal !' andat last, ' Of all monsters of iniquity, themost enormous is Warren Hastings 1" "Nicholls, however, a member of parliament,was not convinced of the guiltof Hastings, by Sheridan's speech,which, notwithstanding the applause ithad elicited from the first orators in thehouse, he frankly acknowledges thathe did not admire. Many years afterwards,on being told that Lord Byronhad pronounced it to be the best orationever conceived or heard in this country,Sheridan is said to have been so overpoweredby delight, that he burst intotears.During the same year (1787) he tookan animated part in the discussions relativeto the pecuniary embarrassmentsof the Prince of Wales, of whom he hadno w become the frequent associate andprincipal adviser. On the 10th of June,1788, ne supported the Begum charge,in Westminster hall, in a speech, onwhich Burke pronounced this glowingeulogy : " Of all the various species oforatory, of every kind of eloquence,that had been heard, either in ancient ormodern times ; whatever the acutenessof the bar, the dignity of the senate, orthe morality of the pulpit could furnish,had not been equal to what that househad that day heard in Westminsterhall. No holy religionist, no man ofany description, as a literary character,could have come up, in the one instance,to the pure sentiments of morality, orinthe other, to the variety of knowledge,force of imagination, proprietyand vivacity of allusion, beauty andelegance of diction, and strength of expression,to which they had that daylistened. From poetry up to eloquence,there was not a species of compositionof which a complete and perfect specimenmight not have been culled, fromone part or other of the speech to whichhe had alluded."RICHARD Brindled SHERIDAN.During the king's temporary derangement,at the latter end of 1788,Sheridan zealously advocated the heir-apparent'sclaims to an unrestricted regency; and he was generally supposedto have been the author of the celebratedletter, sent by his royal highness, onthe 1st of January, 1789, to Mr. Pitt.It appears, however, to have been writtenby Burke, and altered a little, asLord Minto states, but not improved,by Sheridan and other critics. Thesudden recovery of the king, marredthe flattering prospects of the Whigs,who had fully relied on being called tooffice by the prince, as soon as theregency bill, then in progress, shouldhave passed. In the following year, aschism took place among them, relativeto the French revolution, which Burkeand others of the party regarded withabhorrence ; while Fox, Sheridan, andthe residue, maintained it to be as necessary,just, and glorious, as thatwhich had taken place in this country,in 1688. For the avowal of these andsimilar opinions, Burke declared, thatthe union which had long subsistedbetween Sheridan and himself, was foreverat an end.At the election for Westminster, in1790, Sheridan, who had been returnedagain for Stafford, having assistedFox on the hustings, HomeTooke termed him a merry-andrew,who attempted to cajole the mob, whenthe quack doctor, Fox, had left theplatform. The interference of Englandbetween Russia and the Porte, and thestate of the Scotch representation, werethe main topics on which Sheridanspoke during the next session. In 1792,he was visited with a heavy domesticcalamity : Mrs. Sheridan died in thatyear, at Bristol, of a decline, at the earlyage of thirty-eight. In her was unitedextraordinary talent to surpassingbeauty, and the most intense perceptionof the enjoyments of home. Fordomestic privacy, she gladly abandonedthe feverish but flattering excitementsof a splendid professional career; preferringthe love and approbation of herhusband to the applause and admirationof thousands. In all the employmentsof private life she displayed a romantic,yet exquisite taste ; as a mother and awife, she has never been surpassed ; andit may safely be said of her, that inmanners, virtues, temper, accomplishments,and loveliness, but few haveapproached so near to the ideal standardof feminine perfection. It was happy forher that she did not live to witness thedecline and distresses of her belovedand admired, but imprudent husband.In May, 1794, Sheridan had to makehis reply on the Begum charge. Itis related of him, that, previously toits delivery, he passed two or threedays alone at Wanted, so occupied,in writing, and reading papers, as tocomplain that he had motes before hiseyes. This mixture of real labour,observes Mr. Moore, with apparentcarelessness, was one of the most curiousfeatures of his life and character. Oneach of the four days of his reply,Sheridan was assisted, as is the customon such occasions, by one of his brothermanagers of the impeachment, whosebusiness it was to read whatever papersmight be necessary. Mr. MichaelAngelo Taylor, who undertook thisoffice, asked Sheridan, one morning,for the bag containing the documents.Sheridan replied, that he had neitherbag nor papers, and that they must contrive,by management and effrontery,to do without them. He had not proceededfar in his speech, when the lordchancellor requested that the minutesof the evidence, to which Sheridan hadjust referred, might be read. Mr.Taylor, on this, pretended to send forthe bag ; and the undaunted oratorcontinued his address, in order, as hesaid, not to waste time. In a fewminutes, the papers were again calledfor, and messengers were despatched inall directions for the bag, which Sheridanaffected to suppose had been mislaid.In the midst of the outcry, Foxran up to Taylor, and anxiously inquiredwhat had become of the bag:Sir," replied Taylor, in a whisper, " theman has no bag!" In the meantime,Sheridan proceeded triumphantly withhis speech ; and, at length, in answer toanother interruption, accompanied byrather a severe expostulation on hisinattention and irregularity, from thechancellor, he indignantly observed,that as manager of the impeachment,on behalf of the house of commons heshould conduct his case as he thoughtfit ; that it was his most ardent desireto be perfectly correct in what he stated ;THE SENATE.and that, should he fall into error, theprinted minutes of evidence would correcthim."In 1795, he married Miss Ogle,daughter of the Dean of Winchester :the lady's fortune was ,5,000, to whichhe contrived to add thrice that amount ;and the entire sum being vested intrustees, they laid it out in purchasingthe estate of Poseidon, in Surrey. Atthis period, during the debates on thetreason and sedition bills, Sheridan,following the example of Fox, whopreached popular resistance to the measuresof government, was betrayed intothe utterance of much violent and unconstitutionallanguage. The suspensionof the habeas corpus act, and theinvestigation of the prince's debts, werethe next events of consequence in whichhe stood conspicuously forward. Hisconduct during the mutiny at the Morewas eminently patriotic : discardingall party feelings, and private views,he zealously supported ministers ; andnobly declared, that the time had arrived,when the king had an undoubtedright to call on all classes of his subjectsto maintain the laws, and giveeffect to the measures of government.Immediately after Mr. Grey's motionfor reform had been rejected by thehouse, he seceded, with Fox and hisadherents, from parliament ; but hadthe mortification to perceive, that thismanoeuvre created no sensation, andwas productive of no benefit. TheIrish rebellion, in 1798, furnished an"inexhaustible topic for his eloquence,and he repeatedly imputed to thecriminal misgovernment of the " wickedministers," all the horrors which werethen raging in his unhappy country.On the appearance of the fictitiousShakespeare papers, published in 1796,he had been duped into a conviction oftheir authenticity, and had purchased,for 300, from Ireland, who, subsequentlyavowed himself to be its author,the play of Northern, which he forthwithset about producing. In 1798, headapted from the German, and broughtforward, the drama of The Stranger; theextraordinary success of which inducedhim to concoct, from a production ofthe same author (Kotzebue) the dramaof Pizarro. This piece was got upwith great splendour, and attained suchpopularity, that it attracted a successionof vast audiences to the theatre,even in the middle of summer. LordThurlow attended one of its representations,but sunk into a profound sleepduring Holla's celebrated address to thePeruvians. " Poor fellow!" said Sheridan,on being informed of the circumstance," I suppose he fancied he wason the bench.Sheridan continued to adhere pertinaciouslyto his party; refusing a lucrativeoffice offered by government tohis son, and meeting with coldness amessage from the king, " expressive ofthe approbation with which he regardedhis public conduct, and of thepleasure he should feel in conferringupon him some mark of his royalfavour." In 1804, he received a welcomeaccession to his income, by agrant, from the Prince of Wales, of thereceivership of the duchy of Cornwall,as a trifling proof of that sincere friendshiphis royal highness had always professedand felt for him through a longseries of years." The wishes of theprince deterred Sheridan from unitinghimself to the Addington administration,although he supported it, with a viewto prevent the return of Pitt to thehelm of state. The latter, however,was soon recalled to office, in which hecontinued until his death, which tookplace in 1806. The Fox and Grenvilleparties then coalesced, and succeededto power. Sheridan, sharing in thetriumph of his friends, obtained thetreasurership of the navy ; which, however,he considered totally inadequateto his merits, although his necessities,the result of constant imprudence, renderedit highly acceptable. On thedeath of Fox, which soon afterwardsoccurred, Sheridan felt anxious to offerhimself as a candidate to the electors ofWestminster; but was deterred, by anintimation from Lord Grenville, who issaid to have looked with no favourableeye upon the treasurer of the navy,that government had promised its influenceto Earl Percy. Parliamentbeing soon afterwards dissolved, andEarl Percy having declined to offerhimself again for Westminster, Sheridanwas proposed as one of the candidates,and, after a tumultuous contest,was triumphantly elected. With bitterregret, he beheld his colleagues rushinto those measures, which drove him,RICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN.with them, from office ; and, stripped ofemolument and power, he once morereturned to the ranks of opposition, adisappointed man, but an unchangedand unchangeable Whig. On the suddendissolution of parliament, in 1807, heagain became a candidate for Westminster,but, on this occasion, met witha defeat ; and sat, in the two followingparliaments as member for Rochester.On the 24th of February, 1809, a firebroke out in Drury lane theatre, whileSheridan was in the house of commons,which, as Moore states, was suddenlyilluminated by the blaze of light.Some of the members, immediately,out of respect to the sufferer, proposedan adjournment ; but, though he wasevidently much affected, Sheridan calmlysaid that he did not think the misfortune,however heavy it might be to himself,was of so much consequence that theproceedings of the legislature should bethereby suspended. He soon afterwardsquitted the house, and proceededtowards the theatre. Finding, on hisarrival, that all exertions were useless,he retired to the Piazza coffee-house,where he is said to have displayed greatfortitude in his remarks upon the event,and to have expressed particular satisfaction,that so far as he had beenable to ascertain, no lives were lost.A friend having remarked, that he borehis misfortune with all the calmness ofa philosopher, Sheridan, who was takingsome refreshment, replied, " A manmay surely drink a glass of wine by hisown fireside."The proposed erection of a third greattheatre, threatened to complete the destruction,which mismanagement and accidenthad brought on that of Drury lane.Sheridan, elastic under the pressure ofmisfortune, still buoyed himself up withhope : he defeated the plan for erectinga new theatre, and exerted himself tofind means for rebuilding his own. Inthe month of July, during the sameyear, he attended at the installation ofLord Grenville as chancellor of Oxford ;and it was expected that he would havebeen one of those who obtained, onthat occasion, honorary degrees. Twomasters, however, objected to his nomination,and all attempts to win themover proved fruitless. On his appearancein the theatre, he was, in somemeasure, consoled for his rejection, byan unanimous cry of" Sheridan amongthe doctors !" in compliance withwhich, says Moore, he was passed tothe seat occupied by the honorary graduates,and sat, in unmoved distinctionamong them, during the whole of theceremonial.On the passing of the regency bill, in1811, he attended a council, at whichhe was the only person not of the blood-royalpresent, for the purpose of determiningwhat course the prince, onassuming the reins of government,should adopt. He is also sat to havebeen the chief, and almost the onlyspeaker, relative to the arrangementsthat ensued. Out of respect to the king,it was determined that no immediatechange of measures should take place ;and, to the disappointment of LordsGrey and Grenville, who are stated tohave felt highly indignant at' Sheridan'sconduct in this affair, the Tories continuedin office. On the assassination ofPerceval, in 1812, it was proposed thatthose distinguished noblemen should becalled to office ; but Sheridan, who appears,by this time, to have entertained arooted dislike for the heads of the Whigpeerage, threw several obstacles in theirway, and at length contrived, by peruse,to get the treaty abruptly broken off.Moore considers his conduct in thistransaction as the only indefensible actof his public life.In the same year, (1812,) Sheridanuttered his last words in the house ofcommons. They were to the followingeffect: " Yet, after the general subjugationand ruin of Europe, should thereever exist an independent historian torecord the awful events that producedthis universal calamity, let that historianhave to say, ' Great Britain fell, andwith her fell all the best securities forthe charities of human life ; for thepower and honour, the fame, the glory,and the liberties not only of herself, butof the whole civilized world.' " Parliamentwas dissolved at the latter end ofthe year, and he again became a candidatefor the representation of Stafford,but without success. The affairs ofthe theatre had, by this time, beenplaced in the hands of a committee, bywhom Sheridan was allotted a liberalsum for his interest in the concern, which,however, proved insufficient to dischargethe liabilities with which he hadTHE SENATE.previously encumbered it. Althoughoverwhelmed with debt, and no longerexempt from arrest, he declined an offerfrom the prince to procure him a seat forone of the government boroughs ; and,for some time, lurked at different coffeehouses,to avoid falling into the handsof sheriffs' officers. His propensity forthe bottle, which had long been notorious,deplorably increased ; until, atlength, he was almost always intoxicated.One morning, at day-break, heleft a tavern, in such a state of inebriety,that after having proceeded a few steps,he fell, and all his attempts to get upagain were ineffectual. Some personsassisted him to rive, and requested hisname and address. He begged them,in reply, to take him to a neighbouringcoffee-house, adding, " I am Mr. Wilberforce."He was soon compelled to part withevery article of comfort or luxury for hisimmediate wants. The splendid copiesof works which had been presented tohim, were sent, volume after volume,to the pawnbroker. He disposed ofsome choice and favourite pictures, byNorland and Gainsborough ; and, atlength, the beloved portrait of his firstwife, painted by Reynolds, also disappeared.In 1815, he was arrested. Hisfortunes were now at the lowest ebb ;but Whitbread, on visiting the spunginghouse where he was confined, foundhim buoying himself up with the vainhope of obtaining a seat in parliamentfor Westminster. A violent reaction,however, took place, after his liberation; and he is said to have wept mostpassionately at the idea of his personhaving been profaned by the touch of abailiff.In the spring of 1816, it became evidentthat ne was bankrupt in health,as well as in fortune. The partial reliefhe experienced from a few friends, andthe loan, (in other words, the gift,) ofjBlOO from Mr. Canning, afforded himbut a momentary respite from distress.Writs and executions, out of number,were issued against him, and he had thegreatest difficulty to avoid capture. Atlength, a sheriff's officer obtained accessto his chamber, and, but for the interferenceof Dr. Bain, would have carriedoff the dying orator in his blankets. Hadhe been removed, he would, in allprobability, as Dr. Bain told the officer,have expired before they reached thespunging-house. Lord Holland, the poetMoore, Peter Moore, Rogers, and a fewothers of his private friends, did not deserthim : but the great mass of thosewith whom he had been on the mostintimate terms when in the zenith ofhis fortune and fame, neither consoledhim with their presence, nor assisted himwith their purses, although it was knownthat he lay dying and almost destitute.Still, his sanguine disposition did notdesert him ; the phantom, hope, hoveredround his couch, and cheered his departingspirit. Moore, the poet, relatesthat one morning, when he took Sheridana cheque for 150 from Rogers,he found him in good spirits, though hishour was then almost at hand. He spokeof the price he expected for his dramaticworks, and said that he felt certain ofbeing able to get out of his difficulties,if he only had the power to leave hisbed. The prince proposed, throughone of his agents, to present him withl200 ; but this tardy, and, as it wasdeemed, paltry offer, appears to havebeen rather indignantly declined.At length, a noble-minded individual,who, though by no means on goodterms with Sheridan, forgot in his fallenstate that he had ever offended, arousedthe public sympathy in his favour, by apowerful appeal, in the Morning Post,which contained this animated passage :Oh ! delay not to draw aside thecurtain, within which that proud spirithides its sufferings ! Prefer ministeringin the chamber of sickness, to musteringat ' the splendid sorrows that adorn thehearse.' I say, life and succour, againstWestminster abbey and a funeral!"Royal and noble visitors, now called athis door. The Bishop of London readprayers by his bed-side, and a generaldisposition was exhibited to afford himrelief; but no assistance could nowavail him. On the 7th of July, 1816,he breathed his last. His remains weredeposited, with great solemnity, in theonly unoccupied spot of Poet's corner,in Westminster abbey. His secondwife, and two sons, by his first, survivedhim.In early life, Sheridan had been generallyaccounted handsome: he wasrather above the middle size, and wellproportioned. He excelled in severalmanly exercises : he was a proficient inRICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN.horsemanship, and danced with greatelegance. His eyes were black, brilliant,and always particularly expressive. SirJoshua Reynolds, who painted his portrait,is said to have affirmed, that theirpupils were larger than those of anyhuman being he had ever met with.They retained their beauty to the last;but the lower parts of his face exhibited,in his latter years, the usual effects ofintemperance. His arms were strong,although by no means large ; and hishands small and delicate. On a cast ofone of them, the following appropriatecouplet is stated, by Moore, to havebeen written :Good at a fight, but better at a play ;Godlike in giving ; but the devil to pay 1The source of Sheridan's misfortuneswas ambition, or an insatiable appetitefor display. At the outset of hiscareer, he adopted a style of living, theexpenses of which far exceeded hislimited means ; and he plunged headlonginto debt to keep up an appearanceequal to that of his opulent associates.His pride, and increasing desire to shinein superior society, prevented himfrom attempting to retrieve his independence,by abandoning the coursewhich he had thus rashly adopted :had he done so, when he began to discoverits manifold inconveniences, hisfuture progress in life would, perhaps,have been more happy and morehonourable, but, in all probability, muchless brilliant ; "for the same vice whichultimately led to his ruin, was also thecause of his celebrity. His ruling passionprompted him, by dint of intenseapplication, to aim at achieving extraordinaryreputation as a dramatist; hesucceeded, but was not satisfied. Thesupreme controul of one of the greattheatres then became the pinnacle ofhis aspiring views : by some miraculousmeans he attained it; but, cloyed withpossession, and eager to distinguishhimself in a more important station, heformed expensive political connexions,with the view of obtaining a seat inparliament. His wish was again gratified: he became a member of the houseof commons; and, at length, one of theleaders of his party. But his success asan orator tended to accelerate his ruin.To maintain his political eminence, hedevoted his attention to public affairs;his private concerns were consequentlyneglected. The emoluments which hemight, perhaps, have acquired, by asedulous attention to his business, as astage-proprietor, were considered asdust in the balance, against the congenialsociety, the entertainment, andflattering applause which he met withinparliament. Intoxicated by his reputationfor eloquence, he beheld, withindifference, his respectability vanish,his pecuniary resources diminish, and hisliabilities enormously increase. Privilegedfrom arrest, and gifted with an extraordinarypower of appeasing the mostclamorous creditor, debt, in his opinion,appeared to be no disgrace, and scarcelyan inconvenience. He frequently soinfatuated his victims, that, many whocalled upon him for payment, werecajoled to lend him more money, or furnishhim with more goods. Selfishnesswas a predominant quality in his character.With an apathy, evincing a lamentablewant of principle, he borrowedand squandered away what he had noprospect of repaying; and thus reducedto beggary, several who had the strongestclaims on his gratitude. Although affectedeven to the shedding of tears, atthe profanation of his person by the touchof a bailiff, he appears to have beencontemptibly callous to the distresses ofthose on whom he had entailed misery,and, in some cases, absolute want, byhis carelessness and extravagance.Amid the struggles of party, and allthe feverish, but, to him, delectable excitementsof political life, the drama stillpossessed some of its original fascination.He shamefully neglected, but would not,until absolutely compelled by circumstances,altogether abandon his theatricalpursuits, incompatible as theywere with his political avocations. Hisfinances were suffered to fall into ruinousconfusion ; while, in return for thedevotion of his talents and time topublic affairs, he obtained little butfame; his party, though able and energetic,having but rarely and briefly enjoyedthe sweets of office. His debtsrapidly accumulated ; his intellectualpowers gradually diminished ; and themore nearly he approached towards poverty,the more grossly did he abandonhimself to sensual indulgences. In thecourse of his career, he had made numerousenemies, many admirers, butTHE SENATE.few friends ; and, at length, he foundhimself, not only destitute of health,but, partly, it must be confessed, bycalamity, but principally through hisown imprudence, of credit, influence,reputation, and almost the means ofexistence.Although patriotism, as a public character,may be no atonement for theinjuries he inflicted on many of hisfellow-countrymen, by his reckless profligacy,as an individual, it is due to hisreputation to state, that he was, eminently,to the best of his judgment, thefriend of his country. His conduct inparliament appears to have been, invariably,conscientious. Few politicianshave been assailed by stronger temptations;yet it has been justly said ofhim, that he never would sacrifice hisprinciples to his pocket, and that whenmost embarrassed he was most incorruptible.At a period, fertile beyondprecedent, in eloquence, he rivalled asan orator, the most exalted of his contemporaries.His figure was manly ; hiscountenance expressive ; and his voicesingularly flexible, rich and sonorous.His style was generally pure; his sentimentsliberal ; and his embellishmentsexquisite.No man of his day possessed so muchtact in appropriating and adorning thewit of others. He pillaged his predecessorsof their ideas, with as much skilland effrontery as he did his contemporariesof their money. It was his ambitionto appear indolent; but he was, in fact,particularly, though not regularly, laborious.The most striking parts ofhis best speeches were written and rewritten,on separate slips of paper, and,in many cases, laid by for years, beforethey were spoken. He not only elaboratelypolished his good ideas, but, whenthey were finished, waited patiently,until an opportunity occurred of utteringthem with the best effect. Moorestates, that the only time he could havehad for the pre-arrangement of hisconceptions, must have been duringthe many hours of the day which hepassed in bed ; when, frequently, whilethe world gave him credit for beingasleep, he was employed in laying theframe-work of his wit and eloquencefor the evening.Like that of his great political rival,Pitt, his eloquence required the stimulusof the bottle. Port was his favouritewine: it quickened, he said, the circulationand the fancy together ; adding, thathe seldom spoke to his satisfaction untilafter he had taken a couple of bottles.Arthur O' Leary used to remark, that, likea porter, he never was steady unless hehad a load on his head. Watkins relates,that, one evening, a person whowas sitting in the Exchequer coffeehouse,observed, with surprise, a gentleman,who had a number of papers beforehim, after taking tea, empty a decanterof brandy into a large glass, and swallowthe contents, without dilution, ata draught. He then gathered up hispapers, and hurried away. The spectatorsoon afterwards went into thegallery of the house of commons,where, to his amazement, he heard thebrandy-drinker, who was Sheridan,deliver a long and remarkably brilliantoration. He also needed the excitementof wine when engaged in composition." If an idea be reluctant," hewould sometimes say, " a glass of portripens it, and it bursts forth ; if it comefreely, a glass of port is a gloriousreward for it." He usually wrote atnight, with several candles burningaround him.Although diligent as a politician, hewas careless, almost beyond credence,with regard to his private affairs. It hasbeen said of him, that he never kept a receiptor a key. He frequently commenceda journey without possessing the meansto complete it, and remained midwayand " money-bound," to use his ownphrase, at an inn, until he could procurea remittance. On occasions whenhe was not in immediate want of cash,he threw aside notes containing money,without even breaking their seals.Unopened letters, enclosing cheques,were repeatedly found on his table bythe treasurer of the theatre, by whomthey had been, long before, remittedto Sheridan, at his own urgent entreaty.To account for this, it is supposedthat, prior to his receiving them,he had obtained a supply from someother source. He was so ignorant ofthe state of his finances, that he oncesolicited a trifling loan from his bankers,when, as they had stated, several daysbefore, by a letter, which he had received,but not read, they held abalance to his credit, amounting toRICHARD BRINSLEY SHERIDAN.several hundred pounds. Having someimportant favour, relative to the theatre,to solicit from the king, he begged theprince to procure him an interview withhis majesty. The prince promised todoso ; and appointed Sheridan to be atCarlton house, prepared to start forWindsor, where the king then resided,at a certain hour on the following day.Sheridan afterwards went, with two orthree friends, to the residence of MichaelKelly, who was absent from town, ransackedthe cellar, passed the night incarousal, and, when the time fixed forhis waiting on the prince arrived, hewas in bed and asleep. Several messengers,it is said, were despatched tohim from Carlton house, who, however,could not prevail on him to getup.The most serious appointmentswere, to him, matters of no importance.After promising to attend the funeralof his friend Richardson, he arrivedat the church after the conclusion ofthe burial service ; which, however, totheir mutual disgrace, he prevailed onthe clergyman to repeat. But, notwithstandinghis liability to the chargeof desecration, even in more than oneinstance, he professed, and it is butcharitable to presume that he felt, inhis better moments, a deep sense of theworth of piety. He had ever considered,he said, a deliberate dispositionto make proselytes in infidelity, as anunaccountable depravity, a brutal outrage,the motive for which he hadnever been able to trace or conceive.Sheridan enjoyed a distinguished reputationfor colloquial wit. From amongthe best of the occasional dicta, &c.attributed to him, the following areselected :Entering a committee-room, onemorning, he found the members aboutto commence business, and every seatoccupied ; casting a humorous lookabout him, he archly inquired, if anygentleman would move that he mighttake the chair.An elderly maiden lady, an inmateof a country house, at which Sheridanwas passing a few days, expressed aninclination to take a stroll with him, buthe excused himself, on account of thebadness of the weather. Shortly afterwards,she met him sneaking out alone.So, Mr. Sheridan," said she, " it hascleared up." " Yes, madam," was thereply ; " it certainly has cleared upenough for one, but not enough fortwo ;" and off he went.He jocularly observed, on one occasion,to a creditor, who peremptorilyrequired payment of the interest dueon a long-standing debt, " My dearsir, you know it is not my interest topay the principal ; nor is it my principleto pay the interest."The Prince of Wales, one cold day,went into Brookes's, and, complainingof the severity of the weather,called for a glass of hot brandy andwater, which he emptied at a draught,and then immediately ordered another.After drinking the whole of the second,and great part of a third glass, hepuffed out his cheeks, and exclaimed,Now I am comfortable : waiter,bring me a rump steak." Sheridan,who happened to be present, immediatelywrote the following lines, andpresented them to his royal highness:The prince came in, and said 'twas cold,Then put to his head the rummer;Till swallow after swallow came,When he pronounced it summer.On another day, the prince havingexpatiated on the beauty of Dr. Darwin'sopinion, that the reason why thebosom of a beautiful woman possessessuch a fascinating effect on man is, becausehe derived from that source thefirst pleasurable sensations of his infancy,Sheridan ridiculed the ideavery happily. " Such children, then,"said he, " as are brought up by hand,must needs be indebted for similar sensationsto a very different object j andyet, I believe, no man has ever feltany intense emotions of amatory delightat beholding a pap-spoon."Baden, the author of several theatricalpieces, having given Drury lanetheatre the title of a wilderness, Sheridan,when requested, shortly afterwards,to produce a tragedy, writtenby Baden, replied, " The wise anddiscreet author calls our house a wilderness: now, I don't mind allowing theoracle to have his opinion ; but it isreally too much for him to expect, thatI will suffer him to prove his words."Kelly having to perform an Irishcharacter, Johnstonee took great painsto instruct him in the brogue, but withso little success, that Sheridan said,on entering the green-room, at theTHE SENATE.conclusion of the piece, " Bravo, Kelly !I never heard you speak such goodEnglish in all my life 1"He delighted in practical jokes,and seems to have enjoyed a sheerpiece of mischief, with all the gusto ofa school-boy. At this kind of sport,Tickell and Sheridan were often playfellows: and the tricks" which they inflictedon each other, were frequentlyattended with rather unpleasant consequences.One night, he inducedTickell to follow him down a dark passage,on the floor of which he hadplaced all the plates and dishes he couldmuster, in such a manner, that whilea clear path was left open for his ownescape, it would have been a miracleif Tickell did not smash two-thirds ofthem. The result was as Sheridanhad anticipated : Tickell fell amongthe crockery, which so severely cuthim in many places, that Lord JohnTownshend found him, the next day,in bed, and covered with patches.Sheridan has behaved atrociouslytowards me," said he, " and I am resolvedto be revenged on him. But,"added he, his admiration at the trickentirely subduing his indignation, " howamazingly well it was managed!"He once took advantage of the singularappetite of Richardson for argument, toevade payment of a heavy coach-fare.Sheridan had occupied a hackney-chariotfor several hours, and had notapenny in his pocket to pay the coachman.While in this dilemma, Richardsonpassed, and he immediately proposedto take the disputant up, as they appearedto be going in the same direction.The offer was accepted, and Sheridanadroitly started a subject on which hiscompanion was usually very vehementand obstinate. The argument wasmaintained with great warmth on bothsides, until at length Sheridan affectedto lose his temper, and pulling thecheck-string, commanded the coachmanto let him out instantly, protesting thathe would not ride another yard with aman who held such opinions, and supportedthem in such a manner. Sosaying, he descended and walked off,leaving Richardson to enjoy his fanciedtriumph, and to pay the whole fare.Richardson, it is said, in a paroxysmof delight at Sheridan's apparentdefeat, put his head out of the windowand vociferated his arguments until hewas out of sight.Among the dramatists of this country,Sheridan deservedly occupies a veryexalted rank : still, in pronouncing TheSchool for Scandal the best comedy,The Duenna the best opera, and TheCritic the best farce, in the Englishlanguage, Lord Byron was unjust tothe author's predecessors. The viscomic is, doubtless, powerfully displayedin his comedies; but it is, invariably,second-hand, for he originatednothing. The sources of all his incidents,characters, and wit, might, withoutmuch difficulty, be discovered inthe works of others. His pieces maybedesignated so many brilliant masqueradesof the thoughts of all authors,selected and dressed, with inimitableskill, by himself. He had a nice perceptionof humour, and a masterly talent ofadorning the witty ideas of men, whoseminds were more fertile than his own.His apparent sensitiveness was merelysuperficial ; of the deeper workings of thehuman heart, he was ignorant ; and hispilfered appeals to the sympathies of theaudience, if occasionally successful, onaccount of his taste as a plagiarist, werealways artificial. He was blind, even tothe external beauties of nature, and didnot appreciate Shakspeare. By exaggeratingthe characters which he found inthe productions of those who precededhim, he rendered them unnatural, but,perhaps, much more amusing. Hisscenes, if superficial, are admirablyadapted to produce stage effect; his wit,if stolen, has received an elaboratepolish, which gives it a sparkle, it didnot possess in its original state ; if thelanguage of his valets be equal inelegantpersiflage, to that of their masters,his audience are content, becausehis violation of propriety increasestheir enjoyment; and even the mostsevere critic, fascinated by the borrowedpungency of his dialogue, honours hispieces on representation with unqualifiedapplause. In addition to his morecelebrated dramatic productions alreadymentioned, he wrote The Camp, a farce ;and Robinson Crusoe, or HarlequinFriday, a pantomime.VISCOUNT SIDMOUTH.HENRY ADDINGTON, VISCOUNT SIDMOUTH.HENRY ADDINGTON was born atReading, in the year 1755. He receivedthe rudiments of his educationat Cheap, Winchester, and Ealing, andfinished his studies at Brazen-nose college,Oxford. The following anecdoteof his boyhood has been preserved : Dr.Wharton, the head master of Winchesterschool, one day, while taking a littleexcursion on horseback, perceived, at adistance, several of his pupils in the actof robbing an orchard. The young delinquentsmade their escape, before hecould approach near enough to identifyany of them : one, however, had the misfortuneto leave his hat in the orchard ;the doctor secured it, and on his return,was proceeding to inflict severe punishmenton a lad, with whose name, theinitials, H. A. written on the lining ofthe hat, corresponded; when youngAddington stepped forward, and saidto the doctor, " Pray, sir, do not beathim ; he is not guilty j the initials aremine, so is the hat."In 1780, Addington took his first degree: soon afterwards he entered himselfa student of Lincoln's inn, and wascalled to the bar about the same timeas Pitt. A great intimacy existed betweenthese young men, who becameacquainted with each other at an earlyage, through the circumstance of Addington'sfather, a physician, addicted topolitical pursuits, having been the medicaladviser of Pitt's celebrated parent,the great Earl of Chatham. Addingtonhad not been long at the bar, when hisfriend, Pitt, who had become premier,induced him to abandon the law, anddevote himself to public affairs. He wasaccordingly brought into parliament, asan adherent of the minister, for theborough of Devises: and soon renderedhimself conspicuous as an indiscriminatesupporter of his young patron'smeasures.In 1789, he was elected, by a majorityof seventy-four, over Sir Gilbert Elliot,to the speaker's chair, in the house ofcommons. Meagre as his qualificationswere for so important an office, he contrivedto give considerable satisfaction,by his gentlemanly manners and inoffensiveconduct. He also displayedgreat assiduity in searching for precedents; and maintained the dignity ofthe house, by zealously insisting on allits rights and privileges. In 1791, thepeers having made an alteration in abill, as to the amount of a reward to begiven on the conviction of felons, hecaused it to be thrown out, when it wassent back to the commons, because theamendment affected the revenue. Norwas this all ; for one of his biographersgravely states that in his official seat"he displayed great powers of voice andattention !"On the resignation of Pitt, in 1802,he was placed, apparently as a puppet,at the head of an administration which,when it had fulfilled its vocation, waswithout much trouble displaced, andPitt again returned to the premiership.In 1805, Addington was appointed lordpresident of the council, which officehe soon afterwards resigned. In thesame year the king created him ViscountSidmouth, for the patience withwhich he had endured the attacks ofnearly all the wits and politicians of theday, during his brief and imbecile administration,the only great event ofwhich was the peace of Amiens. Whileat the head of affairs he had madesome provision for his family, having,inter alia, procured a patent for life tohis eldest son of the lucrative office ofclerk of the pells.On the accession of the Grenvilleparty to power, in 1806, he was madelord privy seal ; in the following yearhe regained his former post of presidentof the council ; but soon quitted officewith his new allies. During the administrationsof the Duke of Portlandand Mr. Perceval, he had no share inthe government; but when Lord Liverpoolbecame minister, he was chosensecretary of state for the home department.Although exceedingly unpopular,he retained this post for severalyears; but at length resigned in favourof Mr. Peel ; and subsequently interferedbut little in public affairs.THE SENATE.It is impossible to accord any highdegree of merit to Lord Sidmouth asastatesman. It has been justly observed,that had he not been dragged,as it were, into notice, by a chain ofcircumstances, over which he had nocontrol, the world would never haveheard of an Addington cabinet. " Noadministration," says a writer in theAnti-Jacobin, apparently with muchtruth, " perhaps possessed a greaterportion of good personal qualities, ofpublic integrity, and fairness of intention; nor was it in its subordinateparts destitute of talent : but he whoought to have instilled life, spirit, andvigour into the whole body, was, unfortunately,himself devoid of those endowmentsand qualifications, which areat all times essential in a prime minister,and were, at so critical a period, indispensablynecessary."GEORGE Tierce.GEORGE Tierce was born inthe year 1756. His father, a highlyrespectable London merchant, havingdestined him for the legal profession, hebecame a student in one of the inns ofcourt, and was called to the bar, butsoon abandoned the law for politics.In 1787, he published a tract respectingthe privileges claimed by the East Indiacompany. This production, and hisknown opinions in favour of the Whigs,attracted the attention of an influentialnobleman, by whose advice Tierceoffered himself as candidate for Colchester; the election was contested,and terminated in his defeat, after hehad incurred expenses to the amountof 12,000, which his noble friend andadviser refused to defray.In 1796, on the invitation of severalindependent electors of Southwark,who undertook to bear all the necessarycharges, he put up for that borough,but was defeated on the poll. By petitioningthe house of commons, he,however, removed his opponent, andbecame the sitting member. His firstattempts at oratory were undeservingof much applause; but he graduallyobtained importance, and at length becameone of the best speakers in thehouse. During the summer of 1798,some personal expressions, uttered inthe heat of debate, were the occasion ofa duel between him and Mr. Pitt. Therencontre took place on Wimbledoncommon; but the parties, after dischargingtheir pistols with a luckyperversity of aim, shook hands in theharmless smoke which they had raised.Tierney was treasurer of the navyduring the Addington administration;and president of the board of control,in that of All the Talents. While inoffice, he procured a pension of 4000per annum for his wile, payable only incaseshe should survive him.At one period of his life, Tierneybecame unpopular, and lost his seat forSouthwark; he was afterwards member,in succession, for Alone, Bainbridge,Appleby, and, lastly, for Snares; which he represented at thetime of his death. Age neither dimmedhis intellect nor enfeebled his oratory.Until within two or three years of hisdecease, he assiduously fulfilled hissenatorial duties, and there were fewimportant debates in which he did nottake a prominent part. In the monthof March, 1830, he was found, apparentlyasleep, but in reality dead, inhis library chair.As a parliamentary speaker, Tierneydistinguished himself for neatness ofcomposition, acute argument, keen sarcasm,and a subdued humour, whichwas often highly effective. His tolerablynumerous pamphlets, on publicquestions, procured him the reputationof being one of the best political writersof his time. He enjoyed an unusualshare of domestic happiness; and hisprivate life is said to have been amiableas his public conduct was, on the whole,meritorious.SAMUEL Whitehead.SAMUEL Whitehead.SAMUEL Whitehead, a conspicuousmember of the house of commons,was the son and successor in business,of the eminent brewer of the samename. He was born in the year 1758,and at a proper age was sent to Eton,whence, after having matriculated atChrist-church, Oxford, he was removedto St. John's college, Cambridge, wherehe concluded his studies, and obtainedhis degree of bachelor of arts. He remainedat college until 1785, when hewas sent abroad for improvement ; andsoon after his return he married thedaughter of Sir Charles Grey, whosubsequently became Lady ElizabethWhitbread, on account of the elevationof her father to an earldom.In 1790, Whitbread offered himselfas a candidate for the representation ofBedford. The election was contested,but he obtained a majority of twenty-sevenover his opponent, and for manysucceeding parliaments, was returnedfor the same place without opposition.On entering the house of commons, hefound two very powerful parties dividingthe attention and the applause of thepublic: the one headed by Fox, theranks of which had lately in somedegree been thinned, by a schism, withregard to the French revolution ; andthe other, which was in power, governedby Pitt. Whitbread joined theopposition, to whom he soon became avaluable ally. He opposed the attackprojected by Pitt on the Russians ; andon the 29th of February, 1792, in aremarkably bold and manly speech,moved for a committee of the wholehouse to make inquiry into the subject.He opposed the French war in1793; and when Buonaparte addresseda letter to the King of England, expressingan inclination to make peace,Whitbread strenuously contended thatEngland ought not to reject the overtures.On the resignation of the Addingtoncabinet, Whitbread was selected, by hisparty, as the most proper person tobring forward the accusations againstLord Melville, for his alleged malversations,while treasurer of the navy. Atthis period, Whitbread was highlyesteemed by the leading members ofopposition, but he had not previouslyattained sufficient consequence to beentrusted with the conduct of any veryimportant measure. On this occasionhe was, however, deemed more efficientthan either Fox, Sheridan, orGrey : because the first might not haveappeared a sufficiently impartial accuser; the second might have been toowitty and brilliant for so grave anoffice ; and the third too precipitate forsuccessfully carrying the charge tomaturity. Whitbread, on the contrary,was scarcely obnoxious to the suspicionof partiality ; he was not likely to beled away from the point-blank accusation,by the temptations of wit, becauseit was a quality which he did not possess;and his habits were too sedate,and too business-like, to be entrappedby his feelings into any rash proceedingthat might endanger the success of theaccusation. For these reasons, therefore,the opposition members, who howeverblind they may have been to theirindividual faults, were feelingly aliveto each other's deficiencies or frailties,resolved on putting Whitbread forwardas the supporter of the charges ; andaccordingly, on the 6th of April, 1805,he moved a series of resolutions, alltending to criminate Lord Melville,while treasurer of the navy. To thismotion Pitt moved an unsuccessfulamendment, it being negatived by thecasting vote of the speaker ; and LordMelville was afterwards impeached,but obtained an acquittal. Whitbread,however, incurred no obloquy duringthe trial, or in consequence of the accusation.While his brother-in-law (Grey,)was in power, Whitbread generally supportedthe administration ; but on occasion,he appears to have honestly andhonourably differed from and opposedit, so as to have, at length, acquired thecharacter of an intractable man. Hecontinued to take an active part in theparliamentary debates for a considerableperiod. He endeavoured to effectan alteration in the poor laws ; and,THE SENATE.whenever an occasion offered, strenuouslyopposed the continuance of thewar with France. He distinguishedhimself during the important discussionsin 1809, relative to the orders incouncil ; and acted in a very spiritedmanner, during the inquiry into theconduct of the Duke of York. On thedownfall of Napoleon, he strongly censuredthe proceedings of congress, andemphatically expressed his indignationat the declaration of the allies, whenBuonaparte returned from Elba. Heopposed a new war, and protestedagainst dictating a government toFrance, or forcing the Bourbons uponthe French people by foreign bayonets.On the splendid success of the Britisharms at Waterloo, he concurred in atribute "of national gratitude to theDuke of Wellington, although he declaredthat his opinions as to the impolicyand injustice of the contest werestill unshaken.The latter part of W hi thread's lifewas melancholy, and its close awful.Although a considerable portion of histime was absorbed by his parliamentaryduties, the management of theimmense brewery in Chigwell-street,which he had conducted from theperiod of his father's decease, and thesettlement of large and intricate accounts,relative to his extensive landedproperty, Whitbread found sufficientleisure to arrange the chaotic concernsof Drury-lane theatre ! Under his auspicesthe house, which had been recentlyburnt down, was rebuilt withastonishing rapidity. But his mind andbody both sunk under the effort. Hebecame bloated, lethargic, and irritable.At length he entertained an idea thathe had become an object of contempt ;a positive aberration of intellect ensued,and on the morning of the 6th of July,1815, he put an end to his existence.As a senator, Whitbread was distinguishedfor general information,uprightness of conduct, and a manlyexpression of his sentiments. By aconstant communion with Fox, Burke,Sheridan, &c., he caught some of thespirit of eloquence, but he was farfrom a first-rate orator. His speecheswere luminous, but not brilliant: he1 was always heard with respect, butrarely elicited admiration. In the utilitarianera of parliamentary speaking,which has succeeded the splendid epochof oratorical display that preceded it,Whitbread would have been more appreciated,than he was by the greatluminaries of his own time ; amongwhom he moved as a lesser light, andtwinkled rather than shone. It isasserted that he once so far mistook hisown powers, as to attempt the compositionof an address for the openingof Drury-lane theatre. In commonwith all the other addresses proposedfor the occasion, it described the theatreas rising from its ashes like the Phoenix.But Whitbread," said Sheridan, inaparty consisting of Byron, Moore,Rogers, and himself, " made more ofthe bird than either of his rivals : heentered into particulars about its wings,back, head, tail in short, he gave usapoulterer's description of a Phoenix."He was an advocate for moderatereform, the abolition of the slave-trade,retrenchment in the public expenditure,and the education of the poor.Although he opposed the war withFrance, yet, when it was decided on,he not only supported the measureswhich were taken for the defence of hiscountry, but raised and commanded abody of yeomanry himself. He encouragedtrade, agriculture, and the finearts ; he extricated one of the greatnational theatres from difficulties, underwhich, but for his talent and exertions,it would probably have sunk intoutter ruin ; and, on the whole, bothas a private individual and a publiccharacter, he appears to have been entitledto the applause and gratitude ofhis country.WILLIAM PITT.WILLIAM PITT.William, the second son of WilliamPitt, first Earl of Chatham, was born atHayes, in the county of Kent, on the28th of May, 1759. He received therudiments of education under the parentalroof; and, notwithstanding hisdelicate health prevented him from devotingmore than half the usual time tostudy, his progress was so rapid, thatLord Chatham, who assisted the Rev.Edward Wilson in instructing him, frequentlyexpressed his firm conviction,that the boy would one day increasethe glory of the name of Pitt ; for thathe would be the first man in the senate,whether in administration or not, andif a minister at all, that he would be premier.One evening, a member of parliamentproposed taking the earl's sonsto hear an important debate in thehouse of commons ; but Lord Chathamwould only suffer the elder, John, togo; "for, said he, "if William hearsany arguments of which he does notapprove, he will rise to controvert them ;and young as he is, he has not, even inthat able assembly, many equals inknowledge, reasoning, and eloquence !"At the early age of fourteen, he wassent to Pembroke hall, Cambridge. Evenat this time his acquirements are statedto have been extraordinary : in Latinauthors he rarely met with an obstacle,and he was capable of translating sixor seven pages of Thucydides, whichhe had never before seen, withoutmaking more than two or three mistakes.He had also read Euclid, andwas familiar with the elementary partsof algebra, and plane trigonometry.Though a boy in years and appearance,his manners, his thoughts, and conversationwere those of a man. He de -livered his sentiments with ease andvivacity, but was, at the same time,neither flippant nor obtrusive.It had been the intention of LordChatham, that his son should havebecome a candidate for academicalhonours ; but young Pitt was incapacitatedby illness from keeping histerms, and, in the spring of 1776, heconsented to take the degree of M. A.in compliment to his rank, without anypublic examination as to his acquirements.His collegiate contemporariesbore an honourable testimony to hismerits, on this occasion, by interruptingthe public orator, while setting forth hisclaims to a degree, on the score ofillustrious parentage, with vehementacclamations. He appears, indeed,to have been as much beloved for hisvivacity and amiable disposition, andadmired for his great talents by hisfellow-students, as he was respected forhis diligence, regularity, and decorum,by his tutors. By the time he leftcollege there was scarcely a Latin orGreek author which he had not properlyread, and with whose beautiesand defects he was not intimately acquainted.He had even gone throughthe obscure work of Lycophron, " andwith an ease, at first sight," says Tom-line," which, if I had not witnessed it,I should have thought beyond the compassof human intellect." The samewriter declares young Pitt's knowledgeof Greek to have been so correct andextensive, that " if a play of Menanderor aeschylus, or an ode of Pindar, hadbeen suddenly found, he would haveunderstood it as soon as any professedscholar." He retained such an inclinationfor the classics, even amid thebustle of politics, in after life, that hewas seldom without having a Virgil oraHorace, a Homer or a Demosthenesat hand. He had been rather addicted,from his boyhood, to poetry, having,before he quitted home, been concernedwith his brothers and sisters in composinga play in rhyme, which theyafterwards performed before their parentsand a few friends. At college hewrote a tragedy, which, while he wasat the head of public affairs, he calmlyconsigned to the flames, in the presenceof a friend, who had just read andwarmly admired it.In May, 1778, Pitt lost his father,by whom he was ever most ardentlybeloved. The letters of Lord Chathamto his son were alike honourable toboth: to the father, for his strongTHE SENATE.parental affection, his nice discriminationand judicious advice, as to theyounger Fit, for the intense applicationwith which, as they prove, he devotedhimself to the acquirement of knowledge." How happy the task," saidthe earl, in one of them, " my noble,amiable boy, to caution you onlyagainst pursuing too much all thoseliberal and praiseworthy things, towhich less happy natures are perpetuallyto be spurred and driven. Iwill not teaze you with too long a lecturein favour of inaction, and a competentstupidity, your two best tutorsand companions at present." Pitt, atthis time, had just recovered from asevere illness. " You have time tospares continued the earl : " considerthere is but the encyclopedia ; andwhen you have mastered all that, whatwill remain? You will want, likeAlexander, another world to conquer !"Having kept the usual number ofterms at Lincoln's-inn, Pitt was calledto the bar in June, 1780, and attended,on the western circuit, the summerassizes of that year. He received hismaiden brief in a cause which aroseout of some mercantile transaction, anddisplayed such abilities on the trial,that the presiding judge, Lord Mansfield,declared, that if he continued inthe profession, he would soon becomeone of its chief ornaments. But thesenate had stronger attractions for hisaspiring mind than the bar ; in whicheminence is only to be achieved bylong suffering and excessive drudgery.Accordingly, in January, 1781, afterhaving been an unsuccessful candidatein the preceding year, to represent theuniversity of Cambridge, he procuredhis return for Appleby, a borough ofwhich Sir James Other was patron,who very honourably gave his youthfulappointee a written absolution from adheringto any particular party or politicalopinions.He delivered his maiden speech onthe 26th of February, in support ofBurke's bill for reforming the civil list;and evinced an ease and fluency in expressinghis sentiments, an accuracy oflanguage, and a perspicuity of arrangement,that would have done honour tothe most accomplished debater in thehouse. The next day, he wrote toinform his tutor at Cambridge, " thathe had heard his own voice in thehouse of commons, and had reason tobe satisfied with the success of his firstattempt at parliamentary speaking."On the 31st of May, he spoke againon a motion relative to the commissionersof public accounts ; and, forthe third and last time during the session,on the 12th of June, in a debaterespecting the American war. Hisspeech, on the last-mentioned occasion,elicited the following encomium fromDuncan, afterwards Viscount Melville :I cannot say to Mr. Pitt's face, whattruth would extort from me, were heabsent; yet even now I must declare,that I rejoice in the good fortune ofmy country, and my fellow-subjects,who are destined to derive the mostimportant services from so happy anunion of first-rate abilities, high integrity,bold and honest independencyof conduct, and the most persuasiveeloquence." At the close of the session,some one having observed thatPitt promised to be one of the firstspeakers ever heard in the house ofcommons, Fox instantly replied, " Heis so already."Notwithstanding his success in parliament,Pitt still continued at the bar :on the following circuit he held briefsin several election causes of considerableimportance at Salisbury ; and hadthe satisfaction of being spoken of inhigh terms, as well by Mr. JusticeBuller, as the famous Dunning, afterwardsLord Ashburton. In the ensuingsession he voted with Fox and theopposition ; strongly censuring the conductof ministers, Lord North and hisfriends, particularly with regard to theAmerican war. At the conclusion ofone of his speeches on this subject, theapplause was so vehement and protracted,as actually for some time tostop the debate. On another occasion,while inveighing vehemently againstthe administration, he suddenly suspendedhis Phillips, on perceiving thepremier whispering with Lord GeorgeGermaine and Wellborn Ellis, and observedin a colloquial tone, and withpeculiar felicity of allusion, " I willwait until the Nestor of the treasurybench has composed the differencesbetween its Agamemnon and Achilles."He displayed such abilities in thisdebate, that Rigby declared him aWILLIAM PITT.greater orator than his admired father ;and Fox eulogised his commandingeloquence as being irresistible, even bythe effrontery of ministers. Some timeafterwards, in allusion to a speech deliveredby Pitt in support of a motionagainst the lords of the Admiralty,Dunning confessed, " that nearly all thesentiments, which he had collected inhis own mind on the subject, had vanishedlike a dream, on the burstingforth of a torrent of eloquence fromthe greatest prodigy that ever perhapswas seen, in this or in any othercountry a gentleman, possessing thefull vigour of youth, united with thewisdom and experience of the maturestage."Lord North and his friends wereat length compelled to resign ; butPitt, as he was not offered a seat in thecabinet, declined taking office underLord Rockingham, who succeeded tothe premiership. On the 7th of May,in the same year (1782), he made anunsuccessful motion for a committee toinquire into the state of the representativesystem. It appears that he wasdesirous of transferring the electivefranchise of rotten boroughs to populousmanufacturing towns, and of thus deprivingthe aristocracy of their influencein the commons. His opinions on thisimportant subject never altered : but inthe zenith of his power, he advocatedthem rather as an individual than aminister ; and the motions brought forwardon the subject were invariably lost,the premier merely supporting themby his arguments and vote, instead ofbacking them with his political authority.On the 1st of July Lord Rockinghamdied : Lord Shelburne was appointedprime minister ; Fox retired indisgust; and Pitt, then only twenty-threeyears of age, was called to theimportant office of chancellor of theexchequer. Soon afterwards it wasdeemed expedient to strengthen thecabinet from the ranks of opposition ;and Pitt having declared, that he wouldnever become the colleague of LordNorth, he was deputed to procure theco-operation of Fox; who, however,declined joining the administrationwhile Lord Shelburne remained at itshead. " If that be your resolutionthen," observed Pitt, " our discussionmust be at an end ; for I do not comehere to betray his lordship." Theyoung statesman then terminated thelast private interview that ever tookplace between Fox and himself.The Shelburne cabinet was weakfrom its formation, and it soon fellbefore the stupendous efforts of thecoalesced opposition, under Fox andLord North ; which, although it achieveda triumph over its adversaries, was indanger of being debarred from enjoyingthe fruits of victory ; the premiershipbeing tendered to Pitt, with unlimitedpower to select his colleagues. But theyoung statesman was so conscious of theweakness of his party, that he declinedhis majesty's proposals; and the coalition,in default of a more acceptable setof politicians, went into office. Pitt wasearnestly solicited to resume his officeof chancellor of the exchequer in thenew administration ; but he declinedto lend it his valuable support. Henow repeated his attempt to becomemember for the university at which hehad been educated: but was again unsuccessful.Some of the heads of thecollege treated him, on this occasion,with mortifying contempt. While on hiscanvass, one of them almost shut thedoor in his face, and expressed greatastonishment "at the young man'simpudence in daring so to disturb thepeace of the university !"Immediately after his defeat, Pittwent to France, where he spent two orthree months, and on his return, determinedto resume his professional pursuits;but events soon occurred whichinduced him to abandon the resolution.The coalition ministry being wreckedon the decision of the house of lordswith regard to the India bill, Pitt wasagain solicited to accept the premiership; and he boldly, or rather, rashly,consented. He was now only in thetwenty-fifth year of his age ; his opponentswere powerful in connexion, as wellas talent ; the state of public affairs wasappalling ; and he had not a single cabinetcoadjutor in the house of commons,where the coalition party were absolutelyparamount. The motion for anew writ for Appleby, on his appointmentto the premiership, was receivedwith loud and general laughter by themembers of opposition, who confidentlyforetold his immediate downfal ;THE SENATE.and it is absolutely miraculous thattheir predictions were not verified.All his proposed measures were contemptuouslyrejected by large majorities;a dissolution of parliament, bywhich the minister's strength would,on account of his popularity, be muchstrengthened, was, for some time, renderedimpracticable, by delaying thesupplies necessary for payment of thedividends on the national debt; andeven when a pledge had been given,that it was not intended immediatelyto dissolve the parliament, an addressto the king, against such a measure,was carried without a division. Afterthe recess, and Pitt's re-election forAppleby, several resolutions, declaratoryof the utter incompetence of ministersto conduct the government, weretriumphantly carried ; and so perseveringwas opposition in its hostility tothe premier, that his speedy resignationappeared inevitable. The king, however,encouraged him to retain hispost, by declaring, " that he was readyto take any step that might be proposed,and to struggle to the last period of hislife, rather than submit to throw himselfinto the power of the opposition."It has also been asserted, that his majestyadded, " Rather than have my oldministers again, I would relinquish theBritish crown, and retire to my electorate."Nor was Pitt without other sourcesof encouragement: he calculated onhaving a majority in the lords ; and thevoice of the nation was decidedly inhis favour: so that the contest mightbe considered, not a mere struggle betweenthe opposition and the minister,but a fierce and vehement conflict, inwhich the parties were Fox, LordNorth, and their friends, on one side ;and the king, the lords, the people, andthe administration, with its supportersin the lower house, on the other. Emboldenedby his increasing popularity,and the king's friendship, Pitt broughtforward his India bill; but it was rejectedby a large majority, and Fox obtainedleave to bring in another bill on thesame subject. A union between theminister and his antagonists was nowsuggested ; but Fox refused to treatwith Pitt while he remained in office,and the minister declined resigning.The lords, at length, voted a loyaladdress to the king, and Pitt receivedthe thanks of the corporation of London,for his able, upright, and disinterestedconduct, accompanied with thefreedom of the city, as a mark of gratitudefor, and approbation of, his zealin supporting the legal prerogatives ofthe crown, and the constitutional rightsof the people. The king, and his ministersubsequently received addressesfrom all parts of the country, applaudingtheir firmness, and urging them to persevereagainst the faction in the houseof commons. Meantime, the coalitionmajority had gradually decreased to asingle vote ; and, at length, the conflictwas terminated by the dissolution ofparliament.No man, perhaps, had ever beenmore popular than Pitt was at thisperiod. Electors in all parts of thekingdom solicited him to recommendcandidates, and he was invited to becomemember for various great towns; buthe preferred representing the universityof Cambridge, for which he procuredhis return by a large majority.The general election was so decidedlyin his favour, that upwards of one hundredand sixty of his opponents failedto obtain seats; and, on the meeting ofthe new parliament, in May, he foundthe opposition, although still powerfulin talent, so numerically feeble, that hecould have but little to fear from its efforts.He now passed an India bill, differing,in some points, from that which he hadunsuccessfully proposed in the precedingparliament; and soon afterwards,(on the 29th of March, 1786,) in aspeech of six hours' duration, proposedhis well-known scheme for the redemptionof the national debt, bymeans of a sinking fund, which wasagreed to without a single dissentientvoice. He had passed the morning inmaking calculations on the subject, andin preparing the resolutions he intendedto bring forward ; after having takena short walk, to arrange his ideas,he dined with his sister and anotherlady, with whom he conversed withgreat gaiety and apparent unconcern,for some time ; he then went down tothe house, and delivered his elaborateand far extended speech, as Fox properly'termed it, without committinga single blunder of calculation, or omittingone necessary argument.WILLIAM PITT.During the insanity of George theThird, in 1788, several violent debatestook place with regard to the regencybill. Flushed with the prospect of beingspeedily placed at the summit of politicalpower, by the Prince of Wales, whoit was agreed unanimously should beintrusted with the royal functions, Fox,with more of ardour than sound reasoning,with great pertinacity, but littleprinciple, contended, that, under thecircumstances, the full powers of thecrown, as a matter of course, devolvedupon the heir-apparent. Pitt, on thecontrary, maintained, much more constitutionally,and with success, that thelords and commons had a right toimpose restrictions on the regent. WhenFox first stated his opinion in parliamenton this important subject, Pitt,it is said, exultingly slapped his thigh,and exclaimed, " I'll un Whig the gentlemanfor the remainder of his life !"A regency bill, framed according to theminister's views, had already been introduced,when it was rendered unnecessaryby the sudden and unexpectedrecovery of the king.In 1790, Pitt was chosen high stewardof the university of Cambridge. TheFrench revolution soon afterwards becameat once the great parliamentary,and the leading popular topic. Differenceof opinion, on this subject, produceda convulsion in the state ofparties, and an exasperation of feelingamong the leading politicians, almostwithout a parallel. Pitt joined in, orrather, led the cry against " Frenchprinciples;" the majority of the nationwas clamorous for war, and hostilitieswere at length commenced againstrevolutionized France." The contestwas unsuccessful. Great Britain maintainedher supremacy at sea; but theenemy's splendid triumphs over thecontinental powers rendered perseverancehopeless. The nation was plungedstill more deeply in debt : a suspensionof cash payments took place in 1797;and, at length, peace became generallydesirable. In the meantime, Pitt hadcarried his favourite project of an unionwith Ireland ; and, during the discussionson the subject, had held outhopes to the Irish catholics, that theirpolitical disabilities would be speedilyabolished. The king, however, wasaverse to concession, and the people, atthe same time, were anxious for peace.Finding himself, therefore, incapable ofperforming his promises to the catholics,and feeling reluctant to negotiatewith an enemy against whom his tonehad hitherto been most hostile and uncompromising,he determined on retiringfrom the administration. In 1801he accordingly resigned his post.He had previously, in 1798, fought aduel with Tierney. Pitt, it appears,had imputed factious motives to hisopponent, and, declining to retract hisexpressions, Tierney had challengedhim. The meeting took place on aSunday afternoon, on Putney heath.The parties having exchanged shotswithout effect, Pitt fired his second pistolin the air, and a reconciliation immediatelytook place.He defended the treaty of Amiens,and supported the other measures of hissuccessor in office, Mr. Addington, untilthe renewal of the war with France,when, considering the minister unequalto the vigorous prosecution of hostilities,and, doubtless, feeling desirous to resumehis post, from which, on resigning,he had, probably, contemplated only atemporary secession, he opposed theadministration, and voted with his oldantagonist, Fox. Incapable of maintaininghis ground against such formidableopponents, Addington resignedhis office ; and, on the 12th of May,1804, Pitt was again nominated firstlord of the treasury and chancellor ofthe exchequer. On resuming the reinsof government, he prosecuted the warwith all the vigour in his power. Russiaand Austria became engaged in thecontest with France; but their effortswere speedily terminated by the battleof Austerlitz, which, in its consequences,more than balanced the victory of Trafalgar.The minister's spirits and health,already impaired, were fatally affectedby the disastrous aspect of affairs onthe continent; and the impeachmentof his faithful adherent, Lord Melville,wounded his feelings even more,perhaps, than the absurd charge ofcorruption insinuated against himselfrelative to a loan upon scrip, to Messrs.Boyd and Co. in 1796. His constitution,weakened as it was by hereditarygout, had also been severely injuredby an immoderate use of wine;THE SENATE.of which, previously to an importantdebate, he would often swallow severalbottles, to relieve himself from thelanguor produced by extreme mentaland bodily exertion. Wine, at length,ceased to afford him the necessary excitement,and he had recourse to laudanum,of which, as an eminent physicianhas assured us, he sometimes tookabove two hundred drops at a dose !By the use of this destructive stimulant,his bodily powers were rapidlydebilitated. He tried the Bath waters,in December, 1805, but without effect.For some time he could not sleep ;water on the chest was at length producedby his gout; and his stomachbecame so weak, as to be incapable ofretaining food. On the 10th of January,1806, he returned to his seat at Putney.On the 19th he was able to discusssome public questions with his colleagues,and his physicians thoughtthat he might probably resume hisofficial duties in the course of the winter.His symptoms, however, soon returnedwith such aggravated violence,that all hopes of his recovery wereabandoned. He became so lethargic,that the awful intelligence of his approachingdeath had scarcely any effectupon him. On the return of consciousness,he was solicited to join with BishopTomline in devotion. " I fear," re-Relied the expiring statesman, " that Iave, like many other men, neglectedmy religious duties too much to haveany ground for hope that they can beefficacious on a death-bed. But,"added he, making an effort to rise ashespoke, " I throw myself entirely onthe mercy of God !"He then joined in prayer with calmand humble piety. Shortly afterwards,adverting to his nieces, the daughtersof Earl Stanhope by his elder sister,for whom he had long manifested thewarmest affection, he said, " I couldwish a thousand or fifteen hundred ayear to be given to them, if the publicthink my long services deserving of it."The mortal crisis was now fast approaching.His extremities becamecold, and, as a last and desperateeffort to protract existence, blisterswere applied to the soles of his feet.They restored him to consciousness,and he did not again lose his self-possessionuntil within a few momentsof his death, which took place early onthe morning of the 23d of January,1806. His last words, according to anassertion made by Mr. Rose, in thehouse of commons, were, " Oh ! mycountry!" A public funeral was decreedto his remains, and monumentshave been erected to his memory inWestminster abbey, (where he wasburied,) in the guildhall of the city ofLondon, in the great hall of the universityof Cambridge, and in many ofthe principal cities of the kingdom.So far from taking advantage of hisofficial station to acquire wealth, andnotwithstanding he was by no meansof an extravagant disposition, he diedin debt, and a sum of 40,000 wasvoted to pay his creditors. His disinterestednesswas singular : althoughhe had abandoned a lucrative professionto enter into the public service,although his patrimony was small, andhis retention of office precarious, yet,during the unexampled attacks on hisadministration by the coalesced partiesof Fox and Lord North, the clerkshipof the pells having become vacant, heneither took that lucrative situationhimself, nor did he even confer it onone of his friends, but, in a spirit of truepatriotism, gave it to Colonel Barre', oncondition that the latter should resigna pension of 3,000 a year. LordThurlow said of him, on this occasion,that he had, with notions of puritynot only very uncommon in moderndays, but scarcely paralleled in thepurest times of Greece and Rome,nobly preferred the public good to theconsideration of his own interest.In May, 1790, Pitt having solicitedthe reversion of a eldership of the exchequerfor Lord Auckland's son, theking granted it, but at the same timeobserved, that, had Pitt proposed somemeans of rendering it useful to himself,he (the king) should have been betterpleased. In 1792, when he had alreadybeen nine years a minister, the kinginsisted on conferring upon him thewardenship of the cinque ports; andPitt wisely consented to accept it, forhis private fortune was now dissipated,and he had not saved one shilling of hisofficial income. " I take the first opportunityof acquainting Mr. Pitt," saidthe king, in his letter to the premier,on this occasion, " that the wardenshipWILLIAM PITT.of the cinque ports is an office forwhich I will not receive any recommendations,having positively resolvedto confer it on him, as a mark of thathigh regard which his eminent serviceshave deserved from me. I am so bentonthis, that I shall be seriouslyoffended at any attempts to decline it.In person, Pitt was tall, slender,well-proportioned, and active. He hadblue eyes, rather a fair complexion,prominent features, and a high capaciousforehead. His aspect was severeand forbidding; his voice clear andpowerful ; his action dignified, butneither graceful nor engaging ; his toneand manners, although urbane andcomplacent in society, were lofty, andoften arrogant, in the senate. Onentering the house, it was his customto stalk sternly to his place, withouthonouring even his most favoured adherentswith a word, a nod, or even aglance of recognition. Fox, on thecontrary, strolled at leisure, and, occasionally,even meandered, to his seat,bestowing a good-humoured smile, akind inquiry, or a gay observationupon every friend whom he passed.As an orator, Pitt was remarkablycorrect, clear, and copious. His matterwas always skilfully arranged, andstated with astonishing precision andforce. He dealt comparatively butlittle in metaphor ; his sentiments wereseldom disguised by splendid imagery ;and he seemed to think that facts couldnever be so forcible, or arguments soconvincing, as when stated in a pure,unadorned, impressive style. Thoughinfinitely less rich, his eloquence wasmore effective even than that ofBurke. Some of the orators of hisday were more profound, but none ofthem so uniformly clear : it was impossibleto misunderstand him, unlesshe aimed at being unintelligible. Heexcelled in sarcasm, and, during theheat of debate, always retained themost perfect command over his temper.Pitt," says a cotemporary, alludingto one of his speeches, " surpassedhimself, and then, I need not tell youthat he surpassed Cicero and Demosthenes.What a figure would they,with their formal, laboured, cabinetorations, make vis-a-vis his manlyvivacity and dashing eloquence, at oneo'clock in the morning, after sitting inthe heat of a crowded senate for elevenhours ! He spoke above an hour and ahalf with scarcely a bad sentence." Toconclude, it has been justly said of him,that he never failed to put the bestword in the best place.As a minister, he displayed an equaldegree of patriotic zeal, but not so muchability, as his father, to maintain GreatBritain in an exalted place among thenations of Europe. But, had his politicalskill even exceeded that of the greatLord Chatham, it is questionable if thewarfare, in which he engaged the countrywould have been successful. Nogenius, however pre-eminent, perhaps,could have withstood the astonishingmarch of events by which France establishedher ascendancy on the continent.His financial measures havebeen enthusiastically praised by someand vehemently censured by others.To withstand, and eventually to conquer,as he did, the powerful partieswhich opposed him in the senate, hemust have possessed an extraordinaryshare of talent, firmness, and energy.His motives have been highly eulogized;but it is doubtful, if he did not, on manyimportant occasions, sacrifice principleto expediency. His opinions were infavour of emancipation, but he shuffledout of office, partly because he wouldnot risk his favour with the king, byboldly bringing the question forward,and thus fulfilling the expectations hehad held out to the catholics of Ireland.He was a possessed friend to parliamentaryreform and the abolition of theslave trade ; but, while in the plenitudeof his power, he suffered them both tobe negatived, because he would notmake them ministerial measures. Hisviews were not invariably tolerant ; forhe resolutely opposed the repeal of thetest act. He was ambitious of power ;but acquired it by no meanness, andused it without the least taint of corruption.He was above every little art,or low intrigue, for his sentiments werelofty as his professions were dignified.In his social circle, Pitt was urbane,generous, sportive, and convivial to afault. His only private vice was a propensityto the bottle, and he oncenearly lost his life in what may fairlybe termed a drunken frolic. One night,a gate-keeper, on the road betweenCroydon and Wimbledon, was rousedTHE SENATE.from his slumbers, by the rapid approachof three horsemen, who galloped on,the gate being open, without waiting topay toll. Numerous robberies havingrecently been committed in the neighbourhood,the honest gate-keeper, judgingfrom their extraordinary haste thatthey were highwaymen, discharged hisblunderbuss at them, but without effect.The suspicious triumvirate, who hadthus cheated the toll-taker, consisted ofPitt, Thurlow, and Duncan, the firstlord of the treasury, the lord chancellor,and the treasurer of the navy, who wereon their return to Wimbledon, fromMr. Jenkinsonon's, at Croydon, wherethey had been dining.Pitt narrowly escaped being shot onanother occasion, after having dinedwith Jenkinsonon. Returning home in apost-chaise, the boy lost the road, andbeing unable to regain it, Pitt alighted,and went towards a farm-house, for thepurpose of obtaining information. Asheapproached, the dogs began to bark ;and, in a few moments, the farmer appearedwith a gun in his hand, threateningto shoot the midnight intruder onhis premises, if he did not forthwithretire. Pitt expostulated; but his eloquencewas powerless, for the farmer atlength fired. The bullet went throughPitt's coat, but did him no injury. Anexplanation then took place, and therustic condescended to direct the premierhow to reach the main road.Pitt's affair with Tierney, on Putneyheath, has been adduced as one greatproof of that personal courage whichhe certainly possessed in an eminentdegree : but, surely, the acceptance of achallenge, which he can venture to refuse,only, under penalty of losing hiscaste, is no exalted proof of a man'sbravery. That he possessed extraordinarynerve and resolution, is much moresatisfactorily shewn by his bold anddetermined conduct in parliament, andparticularly at the early part of his firstpremiership. That he was sometimesabsurdly inconsiderate of his personalsafety, " after dining with Mr. Jenkins,at Croydon," is indisputable ; butwe can scarcely credit an assertionwhich has been made, that once,during the war, he foolishly sailed betweenDover and Calais, for sometime,in an open boat, for the purposeof obtaining information, preparatoryto bringing in a bill to protect the revenue.Pitt evinced his gratitude to his preceptorsand early political friends, byprocuring for Wilson, a canonry, forTurner, a deanery, and for Tomline, abishopric ; the lord-lieutenancy of Irelandfor the Duke of Rutland, who hadintroduced him to Sir James Other,and a peerage for the latter, underwhose auspices he had first obtained aseat in parliament. Although he nevermarried, he is said to have been fondof female society, and to have evincedgreat affection towards his sisters :on the death of one of them, LadyHarriot Elliot, he is described as havingbeen so absorbed in grief as to be incapable,for some time, of attending topublic affairs.Many witticisms have been attributedto Pitt, which are utterly unworthy ofhis great talents. The following are,however, worthy of repetition. Thelively Duchess of Gordon, who had notseen him for some time before, one dayasked him if he had lately talked asmuch nonsense as usual : " Madam, repliedhe, " I have not heard so much."Pray," said the duchess, " as youknow all that occurs in the politicalworld, tell me some news." " I amsorry, madam," said the minister, " thatI cannot oblige you, as I have not readthe papers to-day." " I wish you todine with me at ten to-night," said theduchess. " Madam, I cannot," wasPitt's answer, "for I am engaged tosup with the Bishop of Lincoln atnine." While the volunteer mania wasraging, the corporation of London offeredto raise a troop, on condition thatit should not be expected to leave thecountry. " It certainly never shall," saidPitt, " except in case of an invasion."His influence over the king's mindappears to have been very great. In1/92, Thurlow thought proper to tryhis interest at court against that of thepremier : presuming on the stability ofhis own favour with the king, he votedagainst some of the measures proposedby the minister, who no sooner appealedto his majesty, than the refractory chancellorwas dismissed.When Pitt proposed to the king, thathis tutor, Bishop Tomline, should beraised to the see of Lincoln, the followingbrief dialogue ensued : " TooWILLIAM WILBERFORCE.young, Pitt ; too young ! Can't haveit, Pitt; can't have it !" " Had it notbeen for him, sire, I should never havebeen in your service." " Shall have it,Pitt; shall have it!"During the king's temporary insanity,his majesty, 4n opposition to the wishesof his medical attendants, refused, forsome time, to remove from Windsor toKew ; but Pitt having written a note,requesting that his majesty would trythe effect of a change of air, he agreedto go to Kew immediately. The king,it is said, frequently expressed a desireto make him a knight of the Garter, butthe minister invariably declined thathonour; and at length, on his refusingit, " once more and for ever," in 1791, itwas conferred on his elder brother, theEarl of Chatham.WILLIAM WILBERFORCE.THIS gentleman, the descendant of amercantile, but ancient family, in Yorkshire,was born at Hull, in August,1759. Having received the rudimentsof education at a provincial grammarschool, he was removed, in 1774, to St.John's college, Cambridge, where hebecame warmly attached to the celebratedWilliam Pitt, with whom, andtheir friend, Dr.Milner,afterwards Deanof Carlisle, on quitting the university,he made a tour on the continent. Atthe general election in 1780, he wasunanimously returned to parliament forhis native place. He received a similarhonour in 1784; but, having, also, onthat occasion, been chosen a memberfor the county of York, he made hiselection for the latter, and continueda knight of the shire till 1812, when hetook his seat for the borough of Chamber,which he thenceforth continued to representuntil the termination of hisparliamentary career, in 1 825.Almost at the outset of Carson'shumane exertions to procure the abolitionof the slave trade, he was urgentlyrecommended to secure the co-operationof Wilberforce. On their first interview,the latter " stated frankly that the subjecthad often employed his thoughts,and that it was near his heart : heseemed earnest about it, and also verydesirous of taking the trouble of inquiringfurther into it." He, however,appeared to doubt the truth of some ofthe charges in Carson's book on theslave trade ; but, after a proper investigation,he satisfied himself of their correctness; and at a dinner party, givenby Bennett Langton, he consented tobelong to a society, which had beenestablished with a view of carrying thebenevolent object of Carson into effect.Having also promised to bringthe matter before the house of commons,if no abler person could be found willingto undertake it, soon after the meetingof parliament, in 1787, he gave noticeof his intention to call the attention ofthe house to the subject ; but beingafterwards prevented, for sometime, byill health, from appearing in public,Pitt, in his name, on the 9th of May,1788, proposed a resolution, (foundedon a number of petitions which had previouslybeen presented,) pledging thehouse, early in the ensuing session, totake the state of the slave trade intoconsideration. A long period, however,elapsed, before the discussion was resumed.Wilberforce, at length, submittedtwelve propositions to the house, which,by the powerful exertions Pitt, Burke,and Fox, though violently opposed, wereultimately adopted without a division.A tedious and protracted examinationof witnesses ensued ; and it was notuntil 1791, that Wilberforce moved forleave to bring in a bill to prevent thefurther importation of African negroesinto the British colonies. The leadingmembers of administration, as well asthe opposition were strongly in favourof the motion, which, however, was lostby a majority of seventy-five.On the 2nd of April, 1792,\Vilberforceagain called the notice of parliament tothe subject. On this occasion he didnot advocate immediate emancipation,but considered that the Africans shouldTHE SENATE.be gradually prepared, by moral andreligious education, to receive the boon :observing that " true liberty was a plantof celestial growth, and that none couldtaste of its odour, but those who hademployed the nobler faculties of thehuman soul, in contemplating the goodnessof the divine essence from whenceit sprung." He concluded a most patheticand impressive speech, by declaringthat " in his exertions for thenegroes, he had found happiness, thoughnot hitherto success, which enlivened hiswaking, and soothed his evening hours;that he carried the topic with him tohis repose, and often had the bliss ofremembering, that he had demandedjustice for millions, who could not askit for themselves."A motion in favour of " gradual "abolition was now carried ; and Wilberforce,inspirited by partial success,redoubled his exertions in behalf ofthe wretched Africans. The justice ofhis cause, the grandeur and glory ofthe undertaking, begat in him an enthusiasmwhich no obstacles couldovercome. His earnest entreaties, hisardent appeals to the feelings of hisauditors, on the subject nearest hisheart, almost amounted to eloquence ;and at length, during the brief administrationof Fox, in 1807, he reapedthe reward of his benevolent toils; abill for the entire abolition of the slavetrade being then carried through bothhouses of parliament.Thinking nothing done, whileaught remained to do," Wilberforce,during the remainder of his parliamentarycareer, omitted no opportunity ofdistinguishing himself as the most ferventadvocate of negro emancipation.His political opinions, in general, coincidedwith those of his friend Pitt,particularly with regard to the Frenchrevolution, and the government ofNapoleon, which he appears to haveheld in equal abhorrence. His conduct,however, as a public character,was laudably independent : he lenthimself to no faction ; but, on all occasions,spoke and voted according tothe honest dictates of his conscience.When Pitt's trusty official ally, LordMelville, was impeached, he animadvertedmost severely on that nobleman'srefusal to account for the applicationof a sum of 10,000, belonging to thepublic purse. " Such a declaration," heinsisted, " would be astonishing comingfrom any man ; but from a man of LordMelville's knowledge of this country, itslaws, its criminal proceedings, one inthe habit of making defences (or otherpeople, that such a man should set upsuch a defence for himself, was so astonishingand extraordinary, that nothingbut guilt itself could have suggested it.What is it but to lay down a principle,which, if the house were to adopt,would put an end to the British constitution? What is it but to say ' I willbe greater than the law I will beabove the constitution?' In short, itis a libel on the constitution to supposesuch a thing will be suffered. It wouldopen a door to prodigality and corruption; and if it had occurred in thetime of Charles the Second, that profligatemonarch would only have hadto say to his minister, that he had spent40,000, wanted more, and did notchoose to give any account of it."In person, Wilberforce is short, and,in appearance, by no means dignified.As an orator, even during the last sessionof his attendance in parliament,he was spirited, copious, and clear. Inprivate life, he is described as havingbeen invariably beloved and honoured.He was united, in 1797, to a daughterof an opulent Birmingham merchant,named Spooner, by whom he has alarge family.During the year in which his marriagetook place, he published A PracticalView of the prevailing ReligiousSystem of professed Christians, in thehigher and middle classes in this country,contrasted with real Christianity.In this work, which is written in avein of Calvinistic severity, the authoreulogizes Lord Kenyon for his supportof virtue, and discouragement of vice ;censures Dr. Robertson for an inattentionto religion in his writings ; reprehendsSterne and Rousseau for theirvicious sentimentality ; and intimates,that eternal happiness is risked by thosewho perform in theatrical exhibitions.That Wilberforce has often unconsciouslybeen led into exaggeration,and unwittingly outstepped the boundsof truth, that he has sometimes allowedhis feelings to predominate overhis reason, and that he has attributedunworthy motives to those, whoseSPENCER PERCEVAL.honour is as spotless as bis own, cannotbe denied: but, on the other hand, hehas devoted a long life to the cause ofhumanity ; neither sickness nor defeatcould ever arrest his benevolent exertions; the object nearest his heart hasbeen the moral improvement of mankind; every project that could conduceto so beneficial a result, he haspromoted, every abuse that couldthwart it, he has endeavoured to detectand expose. In the course of his politicalcareer, he supported catholicemancipation and parliamentary reform; reprobated the lottery act as injuriousto popular morals ; insisted thatthe employment of boys of a tenderage in the sweeping of chimnies, wasa most intolerable cruelty j and, shortlyafter the hostile meeting took placebetween Tierney and Pitt, attempted,but in vain, to procure a legislativeenactment against duelling. ByBrougham, he has been described asthe venerable patriarch of the causeof the slaves ; whose days were to benumbered by acts of benevolence andpiety; whose whole life and he prayedthat it might long be extended for thebenefit of his fellow-creatures hadbeen devoted to the highest interestsof religion and charity."SPENCER PERCEVAL.SPENCER PERCEVAL, the secondson of John, Earl of Egmont, by hiswife Catherine Compton, daughter andsister of the Earl of Northampton, andBaroness of Arden in her own right,was born on the 1st of November,1762. He was educated at Harrow, andTrinity college, Cambridge. In 1782,he became a student of Lincoln's inn,and went to the bar in 1786. Althoughhis timidity, at the commencement ofhis professional career, was a greatdrawback to his speedy advancement,yet he evinced sufficient forensic abilities,gradually to obtain an extensivecircle of clients, and at length he becamea leader on the midland circuit.In 1796, he obtained a silk gown,and shortly afterwards was appointedcounsel to the admiralty, deputy recorder,and counsel to the university ofCambridge.A pamphlet which he had written,to prove that an impeachment of thehouse of commons did not abate by adissolution of parliament, attracted thefavourable notice of Pitt, and led to theauthor's ultimate connexion with government.He was returned to parliamentin 1796, as member for Northampton,which borough he representedduring the remainder of his life. Duringthe early part of his political career, hezealously supported the measures ofPitt, and was particularly earnest inadvocating the necessity of the warwith revolutionized France. His speechin favour of the assessed tax bill procuredhim considerable notice ; and heatlength, rose so high in the estimationof Pitt, that when that minister wasabout to fight a duel with Tierney, hesaid, in reply to a question put to himby Lord Harrowby, that in case he fell,Mr. Perceval was, in his opinion, themost competent person to succeed himin office, he being apparently equal tocope with Mr. Fox ; an opinion in which,however, few of his contemporaries wouldhave concurred.Under the Addington ministry, Percevalbecame, in 1801, solicitor-general,and attorney-general in the followingyear. While he remained in office,Jean Peltier, the editor of a Frenchjournal, printed in London, was indictedfor a libel on Buonaparte, duringthe peace of Amiens. Perceval's duty,on this occasion, was both delicate anddifficult, yet he discharged it with infiniteaddress. In his speech to thejury, he made the following observationson that crime to which he afterwardsfell a victim : " 1 have statedwhat I think the tendency of thiswork, and now let me put it to you,whether you do not think with me, thisis a crime in this country; whetherthe exhortation to assassination in timeof peace is not a very high offence.THE SENATE.If it were in time of war, I should haveno difficulty in stating, that there issomething so base, so disgraceful,there is something so contrary toeverything that belongs to the characterof an Englishman, there issomething so immoral in the idea ofassassination, that the exhortation toassassinate this, or any other chiefmagistrate, would be a crime againstthe honourable feelings of the Englishlaw."On the death of his great politicalleader, Perceval resigned office, and,for the first time, appeared on the oppositionbenches. Pending the arrangementsfor a new ministry, consequenton the death of Fox, he was offered thechancellorship of the exchequer, buthe coquetted for some time between hisprofession and political power. Hehad married, in August, 1790, Jane, thedaughter of Sir Thomas Spencer Wilson; his family was now large, and heobjected to taking any uncertain officewhich might deprive him of the meansof providing for his children by his exertionsat the bar. It was, at length,arranged that, as a bonus for his becomingchancellor of the exchequer, thechancellorship of the such v of Lancaster,which was worth about Jt2,000 a year,should be conferred on him for life. Hisconduct, however, on this occasion,was so severely animadverted upon inparliament, that he allowed the grantto be cancelled without quitting theexchequer. He has been ridiculouslypraised for his disinterestedness in thusrenouncing a lucrative post, which hehad accepted for the purpose of enablinghim to gratify his ambition.He abandoned it only when he foundthat he could not retain it but at theimminent hazard of losing his reputation; and proved, by relinquishing itwithout resigning the chancellorship ofthe exchequer, that, notwithstandinghis scruples, the certain sweets of placewere more valuable, in his estimation,than the probable fees of his clients.On the death of the Duke of Portland,he was raised to the head of thetreasury, and continued in his highoffice until the llth of May, 1812, whenhe was shot through the heart with apistol-ball, in the lobby of the house ofcommons, by a person of the name ofBellingham, who made no attempt toescape, but calmly said, " I am theman who shot Mr. Perceval," and surrenderedhimself without offering theleast resistance. It appeared that hehad resided for some time at Archangel ;where, having become bankrupt, andconceiving himself aggrieved by theRussian government, he first solicitedthe British ambassador, and, subsequently,on coming to England, ofwhich he was a native, memorializedthe ministers to procure him redress; butfailing in his application, he determinedto shoot the first member of administrationwho came in his way. He hadpreviously resolved on the destructionof the ambassador, for what he deemedhis excellency's negligence ; but noopportunity occurred of carrying hispurpose into effect. He confessed thathe had no personal hostility againstMr. Perceval, and would have preferredshooting the ambassador ; yet, as thematter had turned out, he was satisfiedthat he had only done his duty. Anattempt was made to prove him insane,but he was found guilty of murder, andexecuted.On the 12th of May, the prince regentsent a message to both houses,recommending a parliamentary provisionfor the late premier's widow andfamily. On the 13th, Lord Castlereaghmoved a resolution, which was carriedbv a great majority, that an annuity of2,000 should be granted to Mrs.Perceval, and that the sum of 50,000should be vested in trustees for thebenefit of her twelve children. Onthe 14th, above three hundred members,dressed in mourning, carried upthe address, in answer to the regent'smessage. During the necessary proceedingsrelative to this grant, all theinfluential members, in both houses,took occasion to express their admirationof Perceval's talents, and theirsorrow at his lamentable end. Had hedied in the ordinary course of nature,the character of a clever politicianwould have been readily conceded tohim by all parties; but few, or none,would have claimed for him the distinctionsdue to a great statesman. Butfalling, as he did, at the post of duty,his merits were greatly magnified ; hissmooth, unpretending oratory, wasnamed eloquence ; his cleverness as afinancier extolled as genius ; and hisLORD GRENVILLE.persevering industry and firmnessamidst political embarrassments, passedfor heroic fortitude and patriotism. Atthis period we are enabled to form acalmer, and, consequently, a more correctestimate of his character ; and itwill not be erring greatly to pronouncehim an aspiring lawyer, possessed ofgreat shrewdness, indefatigable application,considerable fluency of speech,adroitness in debate, and imperturbablecalmness of temper; but destitute ofthose more lofty qualities which arethe admitted characteristics of truesenatorial greatness. He was hostileto the claims of the catholics, and onceasked if those who supported themwould not, if it were in their power,procure the repeal of the test act. Hisappearance was prepossessing, his deportmentcourteous, and his characterin private life unblemished. At oneperiod of his life, he was the retainedlegal adviser of the Princess of Wales,and, in that capacity, prepared for thepress a collection of documents, relativeto the charges brought against her royalhighness, by Sir John and LadyDouglas, which was subsequently publishedunder the title of The Book.WILLIAM Wykeham GRENVILLE, LORD GRENVILLE.THIS distinguished statesman, theson of George Grenville, was bornon the 25th of October, 1759, and receivedhis education at Eton and Oxford.On quitting college, he enteredhimself a student of one of the innsof court; but, influenced by the persuasionsof his cousin, William Pitt, heabandoned all idea of attaining forensiceminence, and devoted his whole attentionto politics.In 1782, he became secretary to hisbrother, the Marquess of Buckingham,who had been appointed lord-lieutenantof Ireland; and, in the latter end ofthe following year, was nominated of the forces. At thegeneral election, which speedily followedhis acceptance of office, he wasreturned, by a very small majority, aknight of the shire for Bucks. Hisperfect knowledge of the privileges andcustoms of parliament, led to his appointmentas speaker of the house ofcommons, in 1789 ; but he did not occupythe chair long, for, in the same year,he succeeded Lord Sydney as secretaryof state for the home department,and was created a peer, by the title ofBaron Grenville. In 1791, he becamesecretary for foreign affairs; and, bythe king's command, on the executionof Louis the Sixteenth, ordered M.Chauvelin, the French ambassador, toquit the kingdom immediately : a longcorrespondence ensued, in which theagent of the regicides was treated withseverity, and Lord Grenville is believedto have urged the necessity of war.On account of the violence displayedby the mob, towards the king, whenhis majesty went to open parliament,in 1795, Lord Grenville introduced abill for the protection of the royal person;and, soon afterwards, broughtforward another, for regulating the residenceof aliens in this country, both ofwhich were adopted by the legislature.He went out of office with Pitt, because,as it was alleged, George the Thirdrefused to grant those concessions tothe catholics, which they had been ledto expect would have been the consequenceof the union, a measure thatLord Grenville had warmly supported.He afterwards made a fruitless attemptto effect a coalition between the Addingtonparty and Pitt, on whose returnto power, he obtained the editorshipof the exchequer, worth about 4,000per annum, although he took no officein the new administration. On thedeath of Pitt, in 1806, he coalescedwith Fox, whose principles he hadonce professed to abhor; and became,nominally, at least, head of the ministry,which has been termed that of All theTalents, during whose brief tenure ofpower the act was passed for abolishingthe slave trade.Lord Grenville was now severely assailedfor retaining his office of auditorof the exchequer, which, however, hewould not relinquish, and the sanctionTHE SENATE.of the legislature was obtained to hisholding it at the same time with that offirst lord of the treasury. A coalitionof the united parties in power, with thefriends of Lord Sidmouth, led to theintroduction to the cabinet of LordEllenborough, then chief justice of theking's bench, a proceeding which wastermed highly inexpedient, and calculatedto weaken the administration ofjustice. The failure of the expeditionssent out under Whitelock and others,by the new administration, the allegedwant of skill evinced in its diplomatictransactions with France, the loss itsustained by the death of Fox, and thedifference of opinion existing betweenits leading members and the king, withregard to catholic emancipation, whichthey were as anxious to grant as hewas determined to withhold, contributed,respectively, to its speedy dismissal.Their advocacy of concession,which they had pledged themselves tosupport, was, however, the immediatecause of the downfal of Lord Grenvilleand his friends. Sheridan said, thatthe premier had not only thrust hishead against a wall, on this occasion,but had built, clamps, and squared oneexpressly for the purpose.On the termination of the restrictionsimposed on the Prince Regent, in 1812,it was confidently expected that LordsGrenville and Grey would have beencalled to power ; but they declined toact in concert with Spencer Perceval.Immediately after the assassination ofthe latter, they were again solicited totake office; but, having insisted, amongother proposed conditions of their acceptingthe conduct of public affairs,that the whole of the royal patronage,even with regard to officers of thehousehold, should be given up to them,the regent declined their services.Lord Grenville opposed governmentduring the war ; but, on the signal defeatof the French, in 1814, he heartily congratulatedthe country on the prospectof an immediate peace; and, in the followingyear, supported ministers intheir resolution to depose Napoleon.From that time he ceased to take soprominent a part in parliamentary discussionsas he had previously done,except during the debates on catholicemancipation, of which he continuedan uniform and able supporter.Several of his speeches on financehave been published, with tables illustrativeof his plans. As chancellor ofthe university of Oxford, to which hewas elected, in 1809, by a small majorityover Lord Eldon, he has defendedhis Alma Mater, in a pamphlet,against the charge brought against herof having expelled Locke. He has alsoedited the letters of the great Earl ofChatham to his nephew, Thomas Pitt,afterwards Lord Camelford; enrichedan edition of Homer, privately printed,with valuable annotations ; and translatedseveral pieces from the Greek,English, and Italian, into Latin, whichhave been circulated among his friends,under the title of Nurse Metric. LordGrenville was married, in 1792, to AnnePitt, daughter of the first Lord Camel-ford,but has no issue.CHARLES, EARL GREY.J- HIS distinguished nobleman, sonof the first Earl Grey, was born inNorthumberland, on the 13th of March,1764, and educated at Eton, and Trinitycollege, Cambridge. After taking adegree, he made a tour on the continent,where he became acquainted, itis said, with one of the royal dukes, towhose household he was, subsequently,for a short time, attached.In 1785, he was returned to parliamentwithout opposition, for his nativecounty; and, in his maiden speech,delivered on the 21st of February, 1787,he opposed the address in answer to theking s speech. Soon after, he became amember of the Whig club, and rapidlyrose to be a leader of his party. In thefollowing May, he addressed the houseon the affairs of the Prince of Wales ;and also, indignantly demanded thatthe attention of government should beturned to the corrupt practices in thepost-office. Attaching himself to theEARL GREY.society called The Friends of the People,he became a supporter of all the popularmeasures brought forward by hispolitical friends. He took an activepart in the proceedings against WarrenHastings ; advocated the claims of thePrince of Wales to a regency bill withoutrestrictions ; moved for an inquiryrelative to the connexion of this countrywith Russia; and, in May, 1791, procuredthe appointment of a committeeon the subject of imprisonment fordebt. On this occasion, he statedthat, in his opinion, " it was desirableto distinguish the unfortunate debtorfrom the knavish one ; to place thecreditor in that situation which affordedthe fairest and speediest means of compensation;and to regulate the gaols inthis country in such a manner as toprevent unnecessary hardship and restraint."In 1792, he took a leading part inthe debates relative to the negotiationwith the Empress of Russia ; and, inthe following year, strenuously opposeda warlike demonstration against revolutionizedFrance. In one of the debateson this subject, he deprecated the conductof government in assembling theparliament under such circumstances asmust necessarily spread alarm throughoutthe country ; adding, that " with aview to relieve one of the grievancesof which the people complained, hehad, in the course of the past year,given notice of his intention to move forareform in parliament, in which intentionhe continued, and should embracethe first opportunity of performing."Shortly afterwards, he accused ministersof having illegally used the wordinsurrections," for the purpose of conveningthe legislature ; he also made anunsuccessful motion that the attorney-generalshould be directed to proceedagainst the author of a pamphlet, issuedby the Crown and Anchor Society, inwhich the American war, the nationaldebt, &c. were attributed to the dissenters; and, at the close of the sameyear, he warmly supported the propositionof Fox, that it would be expedientto treat with the republicangovernment of France.In 1794, he opposed the subsidiarytreaties with Sardinia, as being notonly iniquitous and unjust, but absurdand impolitic ; and, soon afterwards,while speaking in support of his motionagainst the employment of foreigntroops within the kingdom, candidlyconfessed that France then groanedunder a most furious tyranny, to whicheven the despotism of a Nero or Caligulawas, in his opinion, preferable.Only a short period had, however,elapsed, when he moved an address tothe king, condemnatory of his alliancewith powers, whose object was to regulatethe French government, withwhich, bad as it might be, neither thisnor any other country, except Franceherself, had aught to do. In the courseof the same year, he opposed the suspensionof the habeas corpus act, anda measure for raising volunteer forcesunder the pretence of resisting invasion."Early in 1795, he made twomotions, both of which were unsuccessful,that the existence of a republicangovernment in France ought notto be a bar to a negotiation for peacewith that country. On the 15th ofFebruary, in the following year, hemoved for an address to the king to thesame effect ; which, however, was notadopted; and, on the 6th of May, attempted,but in vain, to carry a resolutionthat ministers should be impeachedfor having misapplied the public money.In 1797, pursuant to his formerpledge, he brought forward his proposedmeasure for a reform in parliament,which the house, it need scarcelybe said, rejected. In 1800, he opposedthe union bill, and warmly recommendedcatholic emancipation, which,he thought, " would pacify Ireland,and effect all that the country required."In 1801, he joined Sheridanand Burdett in censuring the king'sspeech ; and contended ably, but withoutavail, against the continuance ofthe rebellion act, and the suspension ofthe habeas corpus act. Throughout thetwo following years, he distinguishedhimself as an advocate for popular measures; but, in 1804, he opposed a voteof thanks to Sir Arthur Wellesley andthe British army in India, because, ashemaintained, they had been engagedin an unjust war. Early in 1805, heobjected to the legacy duty bill, asbeing oppressive to the youngerbranches of families : and supportedthe proposed impeachment againstLord Melville. In this year, as wellTHE SENATE.as in the last, he made some fruitlessattempts to obtain a committee of inquiryinto the state of the country.In 1806, he obtained the post offirst lord of the admiralty, with a seatin the cabinet, on the accession topower of the Fox and Grenville coalescedparties. He now became memberfor Appleby, which he continuedto represent until called to the house ofpeers on the death of his father, in1807. Finding that he could not supportthe usual state of first lord of theadmiralty without entrenching materiallyon his private income, which wasnot more than sufficient for the propermaintenance of his family, he made arepresentation on the subject to theking, who immediately ordered that,from that time, 2,000 per annumshould be added to his salary. Theact for the abolition of the slave tradewas now passed ; and, on the death ofFox, which took place shortly afterwards,he succeeded to the vacant postof secretary of state for foreign affairs.His tenure of this important office wasbut brief. The cabinet, composed asit was of discordant parties, which,however, Fox had contrived to holdtogether, did not long survive his loss,being indignantly dismissed by theking, for attempting, notwithstandinghis majesty's known opinion on thesubject, to procure catholic emancipation.After supporting an additional grantof 8,000 to Maynooth college, he retired,for the benefit of his health, whichhad become much impaired, to fellowmenhouse, Northumberland, wherehe amused himself for some time inagricultural pursuits. In 1808, havingpreviously succeeded to his father'searldom, he opposed, in the house ofpeers, a motion for a vote of thanks tothe officers employed against Copenhagen.Early in 1810, he supporteda demand for an inquiry as to thecauses which led to the failure of theexpedition against Walcheren ; and,about the same time, objected to thethanks of parliament being voted toLord Wellington for the victory atTalavera, on the ground that, in itsconsequences, it was nearly tantamountto a defeat. In 1811, he charged LordEldon with having set the great seal toa commission for opening parliament, in1789, while the king was tinder medicaladvice ; on the 24th of June, in thesame year, he called the attention ofthe house to an article, which hadthen appeared in a paper published inLondon, recommending the assassinationof Buonaparte ; and, shortlyafterwards, contended that Lord Stanhope'sbill for making bank-notesa legal tender was ill-advised andimpolitic.On the commencement of the unrestrictedregency, in 1812, the princeauthorized his brother, the Duke ofYork, to inform Lords Grey and Grenville,that he should feel much gratifiedif some of those persons, with whomthe early habits of his public life hadbeen formed, would strengthen hishands and constitute a part of the government."Lords Grey and Grenville,however, declined to take officewith Spencer Perceval ; on whose assassinationthey were again invited topower ; but, after much negotiation,their conditions were deemed toosweeping, by the regent, who abruptlyterminated the treaty, by appointingthe Earl of Liverpool first lord of thetreasury.In 1815, Lord Grey opposed, and,with Lord Grenville and others, entereda protest against, the corn bill.In 1817, he supported Lord Donough-more's motion for going into a committeeon the catholic claims ; and,with great zeal, opposed Lord Sid-mouth'sbill for the suspension of thehabeas corpus act, as being harsh andunnecessary. He avowed the mostdecided hostility to the home secretary'ssubsequent measures, and particularlyto the employment of spiesand informers. In 1819, he objectedto the proposed grant of 10,000 perannum to the Duke of York, as custosof the king's person ; reprobated, andsolemnly protested against, the suspensionof cash payments by the bank ;supported, for the fourth time, LordDonoughmore's unsuccessful motionrelative to the civil disabilities of thecatholics ; and, shortly afterwards,brought in a bill to relieve them fromtaking the declaratory oaths againsttransubstantiation and the invocationof saints, which was lost, when broughtup for a second reading, on the 10th ofJune, by a majority of fifty-nine.LORD Belle Y.On the opening of the next session iof parliament, he moved, but without Isuccess, an amendment to the address,which concluded in the following terms :We have seen, with deep regret,the event which took place at Manchester,on the 16th of August, andfeel that it demands our most seriousattention and deliberate inquiry, inorder to dispel those feelings to whichit has given birth, and to shew that themeasures then resorted to, were theresult of cogent and unavoidable necessity; that they were justified bythe constitution ; and that the lives ofhis majesty's subjects cannot be sacrificedwith impunity."The obnoxious measures, which ministersshortly afterwards introduced,for imposing restrictions on the press,&c. met with his unqualified condemnation.He was hostile to the bill ofpains and penalties against QueenCaroline ; subsequently to the withdrawalof which, he took no very activepart in the parliamentary debates, untilthe bill for the repeal of the test andcorporation acts was introduced, whenhe exerted himself most vigorously inits favour. The last great measure,in the discussion of which he distinguishedhimself, was that brought forwardby ministers in favour of thecatholics, whose civil disabilities he himselfhad, for many years past, most ardently,but without success, endeavouredto remove.Earl Grey, throughout his career,has been a most zealous and indefatigableadvocate for liberal, tolerant, andwhat are termed, popular principles.Firmly convinced of the soundness ofhis political opinions, although frequentlydefeated, he appears to haveconstantly looked forward to a seriesof certain, though remote, triumphs ;some of which he has already achieved.His name (first as Mr. Grey, and afterwardsas Lord Hawick) is conspicuousin the reports of nearly all the importantdebates which took place in the houseof commons, between the years 1785 and1807. When a young member of parliament,he is described as having beenthe Hotspur of his party ; and, in Canning'spoem of All the Talents, Temple'swit, and Sidmouth's firmness, are sarcasticallycoupled withthe temper of Grey,And Treasurer Sheridan's promise to pay.On his first entrance into public life,his copiousness and elegance of diction,strength of argument, and graces ofelocution, were highly eulogized; anda Tory writer describes him, in 1828,as being, then, one of the best, if notthe best orator, in the house, whosemature years had effectually subduedthe ardour and zeal of party and competition.He was married, in 1794, toMary Elizabeth, the sister of LordPonsonby, by whom he has a largefamily.NICHOLAS VANSITTART, LORD BEXLEY-thefather of this statesman, HenryVansittart, an East India Director, issupposed to have perished at sea, earlyin 1771, on board the Aurora, in whichhe had embarked for India, at the latterend of the preceding year. It is said,that, some time after he had sailed, hiswife dreamt that she saw him sittingnaked on a barren rock, and that he toldher not to credit the story of his death,which she would soon receive. Intelligenceshortly afterwards reached her ofthe presumed loss of the Aurora ; but thedream had made such an impression onher mind, that, for a period of two yearsshe refused to assume mourning.Nicholas Vansittart, her son, was bornin the year 1766; and, after obtainingsome classical instruction at Cheap,removed, about 1784, to Christchurchcollege, Oxford; where he proceededto the degree of B. A. in 1787-8, andto that of M. A. in 1791. He had, inthe mean time, become a law student,and was called to the bar in 1792. Hesoon afterwards published Reflectionson the Propriety of an ImmediatePeace; in 1794, he produced a reply toan able letter, which had been addressedto the minister, under the assumedname of Jasper Wilson ; and, in thefollowing year, appeared his letters toTHE SENATE.Mr. Pitt, on the conduct of the bankdirectors. In 1796, he became memberof parliament for Hastings; and,during the same year, he publishedAn Inquiry into the State of theFinances, in answer to Morgan's pamphleton the national debt.Having, by his speeches and tracts,obtained the notice of government, hewas sent out, in February, 1801, asminister-plenipotentiary to the courtof Copenhagen, with a view of detachingthat power from the northern alliance.Failing in this object, he shortlyafterwards returned to England, andwas appointed joint secretary to thetreasury. In 1802, he became memberof parliament for Old Sarum j two yearsafterwards, he originated an act relativeto the Greenland fishery ; and,subsequently to the dismissal of Addingtonand his friends, supported thatstatesman in his opposition to the additionalforce bill. In April, 1805, hezealously argued in favour of Pitt'smotion for referring the considerationof Lord Melville's conduct, whiletreasurer of the navy, to a selectcommittee ; but afterwards supportedan amendment for proceeding againstthe latter, by a criminal prosecutionrather than an impeachment.In 1805, he resigned his post in thetreasury, and was appointed to thechief secretaryship of Ireland, whichhe resigned during the same year. In1806, he was returned to parliamentfor Helstoue, in Cornwall ; and, duringthe Grenville administration, againacted as joint secretary to the treasury.In 1811, he published two speechesrespecting the bullion committee ; and,in 1812, Three Letters on the Britishand Foreign Bible Society. During thelatter year, he was selected, by LordLiverpool, to fill the important officeof chancellor of the exchequer, whichhe held for about eleven years ; and,on his resignation, early in 1823, hewas raised to the peerage, by the titleof Baron Bexley, of Bexley, in Kent.Besides the productions already mentioned,he published, in 1815, a Speechon the Committee of Ways and Means,and also on the Budget. He was married,on the 26th of July, 1806, toCatherine Isabella Eden, seconddaughter of William, the first LordAuckland, by whom he has no issue.Although his abilities and acquirementsare alike respectable, LordBexley cannot, with justice, be saidto rank high, either as an author, aspeaker, or a financier. His budget,while he held office as chancellor ofthe exchequer, was, on more than oneoccasion, brought forward by LordCastlereagh ; to whom, however, aswell as to Lord Liverpool, he becamehighly acceptable as a subordinate, bythe congeniality of their political sentiments.ROBERT STEWART, MARQUESS OF LONDONDERRY.THIS minister, the son of RobertStewart, who was created Marquess ofLondonderry in 1816, and Lady SarahConway, daughter of the Earl of Hertford,was born in Ireland, on the 18thof June, 1769. After having madesome progress in his studies at Armagh,he became a student of St. John's college,Cambridge, in 1786. On quittingthe university, he proceeded to makethe usual continental tour ; and, on hisreturn, he was elected, at an expenseof 30,000 to his father, representativeof the county of Down, in the Irishparliament. During the contest, hegave a written promise, on the hustings,that he would support parliamentaryreform ; and he subsequently didso, to a limited extent.His first senatorial effort was a speechin support of the right of Ireland totrade with India, notwithstanding thecompany's monopoly. Although hedisplayed no extraordinary talent onthis occasion, he certainly did not sinkbeneath mediocrity ; and the membersof opposition, with whom he voted,considered him capable of soon affordingconsiderable strength to their party.But he soon deserted the principlesMARQUESS OF LONDONDERRY.with which he had commenced hispublic career ; for, on obtaining a seatin the British house of commons, helent all the support in his power togovernment. In 1797, he returned tothe Irish parliament, and was madekeeper of the privy seal for Ireland.Soon after, he became one of the lordsof the treasury ; and, in the followingyear, obtained the chief secretaryship.While in this office, he exerted himselfmost strenuously in favour of the union,which, it is supposed, was greatly facilitatedby his address and abilities insoothing opposition.In the united parliament, he sat forthe county of Down ; and Pitt, in returnfor the exertions of the subject ofthis memoir, (who had, some timepreviously, become Lord Castlereagh,)during the debates on the union bill,procured his appointment to the head ofthe board of control. On the resignationof Pitt, the new premier found it convenientnot to remove the pliant anduseful president ; who, on his part,evinced no great inclination to go out ofoffice with his patron. Pitt, accordingly,found him still at his post, on returningto the head of affairs. Lord Castlereaghwas now appointed to the war secretaryship,which he gave up on the death ofPitt, and returned to it again when theGrey and Grenville administration wasdismissed, in 1807. Having by thistime become unpopular among his constituents,he lost his election for thecounty of Down, after a long and expensivecontest, and subsequently satfor a borough.The absurd expedition to Walcherentook place while he was at the headof the war department : and its unfortunateresult not only rendered himobnoxious to the public, but, in somedegree, contemptible to his colleagues ;as the measure was entirely his own,in origin as well as execution. Canninghad previously procured a secret declarationfrom the heads of the administration,that Lord Castlereagh, ofwhose incompetence to fill the office hefelt perfectly satisfied, should be requested,within a given period, to exchangethe war secretaryship for someother post in the government. LordCastlereagh, having become acquaintedwith the proceedings of his colleague,thought proper to challenge him ; andafter some ineffectual attempts hadbeen made to produce an amicable arrangement,the two ministers, attendedby their respective seconds, met onPutney heath ; where, at the second exchangeof shots, Canning was woundedin the right thigh, and Lord Castlereaghhad one of the buttons shot off the breastof his coat. The parties then quittedthe ground, but without being reconciledto each other, and immediately afterwardsabandoned their respective offices.In 1812, Lord Castlereagh becamesecretary of state for foreign affairs,which post he held during the remainderof his life. In December,1813, he proceeded to the continent,as plenipotentiary on the part of thiscountry, to negotiate for a generalpeace. No pacification, however, tookplace, until after the downfal of Napoleon,and the capture of Paris in thefollowing year ; when Lord Castlereaghattended the congress of Vienna; which,with a strong hand, enforced what hasbeen termed " the Satanical settlementof Europe." Lord Castlereagh's conduct,on this occasion, rendered hisname odious, both abroad and at home :the thanks of parliament were, however,voted to him for his services;which were further rewarded by aribbon of the Garter.On the death of his father, in 1821,he succeeded to the Irish marquisateof Londonderry, but still kept his seatin the commons. The laborious sessionof 1822 appears to have had a seriouseffect both on his body and mind. OnFriday, the 9th of August, in that year,at an interview which he had with hismajesty, he displayed some symptomsof mental alienation. During the afternoonof the same day, Dr. Bankedvisited him, at the request of the marchioness; and saw him again, by appointment,in the course of the nextevening, at Foot's Cray, in Kent,whither his lordship, accompanied byLady Londonderry, had proceeded inthe interim. The physician found himin bed ; and, after a few moments'conversation, felt persuaded that hewas decidedly labouring under mentaldelusion. On the following Mondaymorning, the marquess requested thatDr. Bankhead should be sent to himas soon as Lady Londonderry hadrisen. Dr. Bankhead, accordingly,THE SENATE.about half an hour after, proceeded tohis lordship's dressing-room : on hearingthe doctor's step, the marquess,who was standing in his bed-gown,with his back towards the door, exclaimed,without turning his head,Bankhead, let me fall on your armit is all over !" He had just beforeinflicted a wound in his neck, with aknife, by which the carotid artery wassevered ; and, in a few moments, hebreathed his last. This event took placeon the 12th of August, 1822; and, onthe 20th of the same month, the remainsof the marquess were interred inWestminster abbey.In person, Lord Londonderry waswell formed, but not elegant ; and hisfeatures, although handsome, had rathera dull and inanimate expression. Inprivate life he was kind, conciliating,and liberal. When, at the conclusionof the war, his brother was rewardedwith a peerage, he would not permithim to accept the usual pension with it,but generously gave him an equivalentout of his private fortune. While inpower, he is said to have gratefullyremembered his former benefactors:and, it is added, that he never brokea promise, express or implied, norabandoned a friend who claimed andmerited his assistance.For a long period he was not onlythe ministerial leader in the house ofcommons, but the most influentialmember of the cabinet; and, during agreat portion of his life almost uninterruptedlyin possession of power,yet scarcely ever popular. By a suppleness,which was rarely perceptible toits dupes, and a self-complaisant effrontery,which never became either arrogantor offensive, he attained a politicalstation far too exalted for his talents.He appeared to be perfectly unconsciousof the inadequacy of his mentalpowers for the proper discharge of hishigh duties ; and, probably, thought hewas acting a wise and beneficent part,when his conduct was most absurd anddespotic. His actions, through his comparativeignorance, were frequently atutter variance with his disposition. Heseemed to think, that increase of freedomcould not procure increase of happiness; and that, by enforcing implicitobedience to the high behests of their'superiors, he added to the welfare ofmen. Though lenient and placable innature, his was decidedly the iron ageof policy : the current of free, liberal,and enlightened opinions was stemmedand pent up during his administration ;but only to rush forward with morerapid and overwhelming impetuosityafter its fall.As a man of business, he was activeand energetic ; as a public speaker,plausible, but not elegant. It has beensaid of him, that he swayed the houseof commons entirely by his manner.Although never eloquent, his perfectself-possession, his complacency, andtact, rendered him skilful and effectiveas a debater. He could be copious inwords, without uttering an idea ; andapparently candid, when his object wasto mystify or conceal. He never labouredunder the awkward drawbackof modesty ; but could, on every occasion,unblushingly deliver a speechwithout a legitimate beginning, middle,or end ; full of unnecessary parentheses;lengthened out by repeated intangiblepropositions ; and, on the whole, absolutely" signifying nothing." It doesnot appear that he was, by any means,eminent for his knowledge of French ;and yet, it is asserted, that he oncespoke an oration, to the members ofthe congress at Vienna, in that language," three hours long, and withouta single interruption."WILLIAM HUSKISSON.WILLIAM HUSKISSON was bornat Birch Moreton Court, in the monthof March, 1770. He received the rudimentsof his education at one or moreprivate schools in Leicestershire; andwhen about twelve years old, proceededto Paris, with his relation, Dr. Gem,who wished to direct young Huskisson'sstudies towards medical science, butapparently without effect. The greatGEORGE CANNING.events of the time exercised a powerfulinfluence on his mind. He renderedhimself conspicuous by delivering anardent speech, at The Club of 1789,and it is said, was present at the takingof the Bastile.When Lord Gower went out as ambassadorto France, he appointed youngHuskisson to be his private secretary,and in 1793, successfully recommendedhim to Duncan as a person highly qualifiedto assist in the projected arrangementsof an office for the affairs of emigrantswho had taken refuge in England.In 1795, he became under-secretary inthe colonial department; and in thefolio wing year, he took his seat in parliamentas member for Morpeth. At a moreadvanced period of his life, he had thehonour of representing Liverpool. Heretired from office on the resignationof Pitt, who, in addition to a grant of,600 per annum, payable to his wife,(a daughter of Admiral Milbanke, towhom he was married in 1799,) in theevent of his death or dismissal, hadprocured for him a positive pensionamounting to double that sum.On Pitt's return to power, in 1804,Huskisson was appointed one of thesecretaries of the treasury; and continuedin office until the death of thepremier, in 1806. In the followingyear, he was recalled to his post, whichhe retained until 1809. In 1814, hebecame first commissioner of woods andland revenue ; and in 1823, was advancedto the important offices of treasurerof the navy and president of theboard of trade : shortly afterwards, heobtained a seat in the cabinet. On thedeath of Canning, and the formation ofthe Goderich administration, Huskissonwas appointed secretary of state for thecolonial department ; and continued inoffice until May, 1828, when he wassucceeded by Sir George Murray.Very opposite views have been entertainedof his talents. His advocacy ofthe great principle of free trade wouldalone, in the opinion of many, entitlehim to rank with our best statesmen :but others declare his ideas on thesubject to have been highly detrimentaland absurd. As a professedadherent of Pitt, and a follower of thefortunes of that minister's disciple,Canning, he has been accused of inconsistency,for clinging to office, duringan administration, which did not actonthe principles of his departed leader :and if, as it has been stated, his patrimonywas sufficient to enable him tolive with comfort as a country gentleman,his acceptance of a pension,after a few years of service in theemigrant office, and as an under secretaryin the colonial department, wascertainly far from creditable to his publiccharacter.GEORGE CANNING.THE father of this distinguished oratorwas an unfortunate man of letters,who, having offended his opulentfamily by marrying a dowerless beauty,was thrown upon the world with anallowance of only 150 a year ; whichbeing inadequate to his support, he lefthis native country (Ireland) for the purposeof qualifying himself as a barristerin the courts at Westminster. He hadpreviously distinguished himself by theproduction of several prose pieces andpoetical effusions ; and, in consequenceof his reputation as an author, associated,on his arrival in London, withWhitehead, Churchill, Coleman theelder, and other literary men. He alsobecame a zealous partisan of the celebratedWilkes ; but these connexionsrather tended to his injury than hisbenefit as a professional man. Makingno progress at the bar, he, at length,abandoned the law in despair, and becamea wine merchant. A fatality, however,seemed to attend him ; he failedin business, and succeeded in nothingthat he subsequently attempted. In afew years, repeated disappointmentsdestroyed his constitution ; and he diedheart-broken at an early age, on thefirst anniversary of his son's birth. Hisbeautiful widow, who was a relative ofSheridan, went on the stage in order tosupport herself and her child : she madeTHE SENATE.her first appearance at Drury Lanetheatre, in the character of Jane Shoreto Garrick's Lord Hastings ; but hertalents as an actress not being sufficientlybrilliant for the metropolitanboards, she was compelled to accept ofa provincial engagement; and, afterperforming for some years at variouscountry theatres, she, at length, marrieda member of the profession whichnecessity had driven her to adopt.Her son, the celebrated George Canning,was born in the parish of Mary-le-bone,on the llth of April, 1770.His paternal uncle, who was a merchantof some eminence, undertook thecare of his education, and, at a properage, sent him to Eton, where thetalents of young Canning developedthemselves so rapidly, that he becamea senior scholar when only in hisfifteenth year. Shortly afterwards heedited a periodical, called the Microcosm; the contributors to which wereJohn and Robert Smith, Freer, LordH. Spencer, and two or three more ofhis school-fellows. The 2nd, llth,12th, 22nd, and six or eight othernumbers of this publication, have beenattributed to the youthful editor's pen.Canning left Eton in 1787, and enteredat Christchurch, Oxford, wherehe soon distinguished himself for applicationand talents. He gained severalprizes by his Latin essays ; and hisorations were so admirable as to producea general impression that he wouldattain to great eminence in whateverprofession he might be advised to adopt.He quitted college too early to obtaina degree, and immediately after becamea student at Lincoln's-inn. In Londonhe fully supported the high reputationfor natural abilities and great acquirementswhich he had obtained at Oxford.His wit, erudition, and pleasing deportment,soon rendered him conspicuous :his society was very generally courted,and he was looked upon, by those whoknew him, as a remarkably promisingyoung man.' His relation, Sheridan,introduced him to Fox, Grey, andBurke; by the latter of whom, it issaid, he was induced to abandon hisprofession for the study of politics. Inorder to obtain tact and confidence asapublic speaker, he frequented debatingclubs, which, at that time, weremuch more respectable than, generallyspeaking, they became subsequentlyto the period of the French revolution ;and, at length, he displayed talents sopowerful and varied, as to attract theadmiration of Lord Lansdowne, whopredicted to Bentham, that he wouldone day become prime minister ofEngland.From Canning's Whiggish connexions,it was generally supposed thatthe line he was to take, as Moore observes,in the house of commons, seemedalready, according to the usual courseof events, marked out for him. Theopposition was so confident of his support,that Sheridan spoke of him inparliament as the future advocate offree and liberal opinions. Canning,however, was either in fear of beingeclipsed by his talented leaders, if heenrolled himself in the ranks of opposition,or entertained an opinion that hehad more chance of obtaining the prefermenthe sought, as a partisan, ratherthan an opponent, of the ministry.Accordingly, in 1793, he entered parliamentas member for Newport, in theIsle of Wight, under the auspices ofPitt, to whom he had probably beenintroduced by his college friend, Mr.Jenkinsonon, afterwards the first LordLiverpool.At the latter end of January, 1794,he delivered his maiden speech, inwhich he displayed considerable talent ;but, at the same time, indulged in somuch contemptible levity towards Fox,that, however highly he might havegratified his patron, he must have disgustedthe moderate men of all parties.His subsequent conduct, for some time,in parliament, was rather daring thanbrilliant : he bearded the politicalgiants on the opposition benches withan effrontery that, while it tended toincrease his value as a ministerialskirmishes, lowered him materially ingeneral estimation. Without a solitaryexception, he supported and eulogizedthe measures brought forward by thepremier, and as invariably opposedand ridiculed the propositions of hispolitical antagonists ; acting, on alloccasions, less as a partisan than a retainedadvocate of the ministry. Hewas so evidently the political creatureof Pitt, that he frequently incurredsuch sarcastic reproaches, as equalled,if they did not exceed, in severity, theGEORGE CANNING.invectives which he frequently lavishedon the opposition. Francis, on one occasion,thus corrected him for his flippancy: " The young gentleman, whois just escaped from his school and hisclassics, and is neither conversant inthe constitution or the laws of his country,imprudently ventures to deliveropinions, the effect of which is merelyto degrade him in the opinion of theworld." On another occasion, Courteneysaid of him "We have seen the honourablegentleman attach himself to theminister, apparently for the purpose ofpromoting his own fortunes:Thus, a light straw, whirl'd round by ev'ry blast,Ii carried off by some dog's tail at last.' "In 1796, Canning obtained a visiblereward for his services, being appointedone of the under secretaries ofstate ; " Mr. Must," as Fox observed inthe house of commons, " having beensuperannuated to make room for him,although still as fit for business as atany former period of his life." Aboutthis time, Canning was returned memberfor Wendover ; and during the twofollowing years, he appears to havedevoted himself with great zeal to theduties of his office. In 1799, he took aconspicuous part in the debates relativeto the union with Ireland; and it isworthy of remark, that, while he advocatedthe views of his patron in hisspeeches on this subject, he avoided,with great dexterity, committing himselfin any manner relative to thecatholic question.During the same year, 1799, hemarried Joan, one of the daughtersand co-heiresses of General Scott. Bythis union, Canning's pecuniary independencewas achieved, and his politicalconsequence considerably increased :his wife's sisters having been previouslymarried the one to Lord Down, andthe other to the Marquess of Lichfield,afterwards Duke of Portland. He nowbegan to assume somewhat more importancein his party, but withoutemancipating himself from the thraldomof Pitt, whose measures, rightor wrong, he continued to supportwith unabated zeal and increasingtalent, not only as a parliamentaryspeaker, but as a satirical writer. Inconjunction with Ellis and Freer, heestablished the And Jacobin Examiner,a periodical which, from the malignancyit displayed, and the cool easewith which it immolated its politicalvictims, has been rather appropriatelytermed the literary Robespierre of itsday.In 1801, Pitt, with his immediate partisans,withdrew from office ; they weresucceeded by Addington and his friends,whom, as soon as Pitt began to voteagainst them, Canning assailed withgreat vehemence. At this period, toadopt an expression of his best biographer,he proved himself to be Pitt'swhipper-out, as well as his whipper-in.During the debate relative to the Irishmilitia bill, he accused ministers of beingneither consistent nor uniform. " Theyknow not," he continued, " what theypropose, and take no effectual means ofcarrying their plans into effect. Theynever advance boldly to their object, butObliquely waddle to the end in view.' "Nor did he cease, by his pen, to eulogizehis great political leader, or tovituperate those whom Pitt thoughtproper to oppose. About this time heproduced that celebrated song in whichthe heaven-born minister" is describedas " the pilot that weatheredthe storm ;" and wrote those satiricaleffusions, The Grand Consultation, &c.which may rather be characterizedas venomous than caustic, and certainlydo much more credit to his head thanhis heart.At length, the administration ofAddington and his friends was dismissed,and Pitt resumed the premiership,with Canning paddling in hiswake as treasurer of the navy. Pittdied in 1806 ; and on a propositionbeing made to pay his debts, whichwas warmly supported by his greatpolitical antagonist, Fox, Canning insistedthat the amount required forthat purpose ought not to be consideredas an eleemosynary grant to posthumousnecessities, but as a public debtdue to a public servant.The friends of the departed premiernow retired from office, and the administrationof All the Talents, headedby Fox and Lord Grenville, succeeded.The new ministers found in Canning amost virulent, active, and determinedopponent. He ridiculed them, withgreat wit but more gall, in print, andTHE SENATE.fiercely assailed them with all his oratoricalpowers in parliament. He opposedsome of their measures whichwere consonant to his own politicalsentiments ; and lent but a cold supportto the bill for abolishing the slave trade,(which he had previously advocatedwith great zeal,) because it was broughtforward as a ministerial measure. Nightafter night was Fox, although nearly inadying state, compelled to attend inhis place, for the purpose of replyingto the arguments, or repelling the sarcasmsof his ardent and resolute antagonist.On the death of that eminentman, Canning made some observationsin parliament, derogatory to his character,for which he was most severelycensured : and on the downfal of theGrenvilles,he exulted over them in somepoetical effusions, which, says one of hisbiographers, " reflect indelible disgraceupon the statesman and the man : theyare utterly unworthy of his splendid talents,and cast a deep and witheringshade over his integrity."Canning joined the no-popery party,which succeeded the Grenville in office,although it was known that his opinionswere strongly in favour of catholicemancipation. He had now to encountera series of terrible attacks fromthose whom he had opposed and lampoonedwhile in power ; but he stoodhis ground with great resolution, defendinghimself with admirable dexterity,and returning to every assailanta Roland for his Oliver. One of hisanonymous adversaries, at this period,alludes to him in the following terms :"It is only his public situation whichentitles or induces me to say so muchabout him. He is a fly in amber : nobodycares about the fly ; the onlyquestion is, how the devil did it getthere ? Nor do I attack him from thelove of glory, but from the love ofutility, as a burgomaster hunts a rat inaDutch dyke, for fear it should flood aprovince''In 1809, a quarrel with Lord Castlereaghled to the resignation of Canning,as well as that of his noble colleague.It appears that Canning had secretly,under a threat of resigning his ownpost in case of refusal, procured fromthe senior members of the administrationa promise, that Lord Castlereaghshould be persuaded accept some otheroffice, in exchange for the war department,over which Canning felt satisfiedthat his lordship was not competent topreside. By a breach of confidence,Castlereagh became acquainted withthis fact, and he thought proper to requiresatisfaction for the deceit whichhis colleague had practised towardshim, in endeavouring clandestinely toprocure his removal. Canning offeredneither apology nor explanation, which,indeed, his lordship did not appeardesirous of obtaining, and a duel tookplace between them at Putney, onThursday, the 21st of September, 1809.The parties fired once without effect ;but at the second exchange of shots,Lord Castlereagh's ball passed throughhis adversary's thigh. Canning still remainederect, and a third dischargewould have taken place, had not theseconds perceived that he was severelywounded; they immediately interfered,and left the ground with their respectiveprincipals, without having effectedan amicable arrangement. Sheridanobserved of Lord Castlereagh, in allusionto this affair: " He is a perfect Irishman,even in his quarrels, for he doesnot appear to be a whit more satisfiednow that he has received satisfaction,than he was before."When, in consequence of the insanityof the king, who had always beendecidedly hostile to the claims of thecatholics, the Prince of Wales becameregent, Canning openly and unequivocallydeclared himself an advocateof concession ; but he deprecated anydiscussion on the subject at that period,as it might probably close the door ofhope for ever, to those whom it was intendedto assist. " I wish the questionat rest," said he, in his speech on LordMorpeth's motion, in 1812, " not in theway of victory, but of conciliation ; notso as to attack the honest prejudices ofprotestants, but so as to remove them.The time will come, and I trust at nogreat distance, when mutual moderationand reflection will produce generalconcurrence." Shortly afterwards, in adebate on the state of the nation, hespoke with equal eloquence and greaterwarmth on the same subject. He had,he said, on a former night, opposed themotion, concerning the catholic claims,because it involved a censure of ministers,and because he did not think theGEORGE CANNING.mode of bringing it forward very wellchosen. " Now, however," continuedhe, " the matter is changed, and I lookupon it as a most serious question, whenit is considered that we have heardfrom two ministers, this night, that thedoors are to be shut for ever againstthe catholic claims." He concluded hisspeech by insisting that the subjectought decidedly to be taken up as a ministerialmeasure. On the assassinationof Perceval he refused a share in theadministration, because he understoodthat no change of opinion had takenplace in the cabinet, with regard toemancipation. Shortly afterwards hebrought forward a motion, which wascarried by a majority of one hundredand twenty-nine, that the house would,early in the next session, take into itsmost serious consideration the state ofthe law affecting the catholics ; andsubsequently again declined an invitationto accept office, ministers beingstill averse to concession.In 1812, after a severe contest, heprocured his return for Liverpool. Thenext great public event in his life,was his appointment as ambassador toLisbon, where there was neither courtnor sovereign, at the enormous salaryof 14,000 per annum. For acceptingthis situation, he was so severely censured,as to be compelled, during theelection at Liverpool, in 1816, to enterinto an explanation in defence of hisconduct. He declared that the appointmentwas incidentally cast uponhim, after he had made private arrangementsto proceed to Portugal,for the benefit of his son's health ; andthat he had resigned the moment hefound the Prince Regent of Portugalwas not likely to revisit Europe. " Ofthe seventeen months," said he,which I passed in Lisbon, duringthe last six I was as private an individualas any among you. I sent homemy resignation in April, 1815, and itwas no fault of mine that I was notsooner superseded."Early in 1816, having been reconciledto Castlereagh, he was induced togo into office as president of the boardof control, and supported the celebratedsix acts so strenuously, that he wasassailed with more virulence than hehad been at any former period of his life.The levity with which he spoke of " therevered and ruptured Ogden," (to use anexpression for which he has been justlycensured,) whose case was brought forward,as an individual who had sufferedby the suspension of the habeas corpusact, one of the celebrated six acts,exposed him to many severe attacks.His language, on this occasion, wasdenounced," says his biographer, " inan anonymous pamphlet, generallyascribed to Mr. Hothouse, as a monstrousoutrage on the audience it insulted."The writer concluded his workwith the following passage: " If everyou accuse me of treason, throw me intoprison, make your gaolers load me withchains, and then jest at my sufferings, Iwill put you to death !" Although Mr.Hothouse denied that he was the authorof this pamphlet, Canning appears, foryears afterwards, to have entertainedsome ill-will towards him. On oneoccasion, he even ventured to allude tothe two members for Westminster, asthe honourable baronet and his man !"At the latter end of March, Canningwas bereft of his eldest son, a youth ofnineteen, on whose monument theafflicted father thus recorded his owngrief, and the virtues of him who hadso lately been his pride.Though short thy span, God's unimpeached decrees,Which made that shorten'd span one long disease,Vet, men ful in chastening, K ave thee scopeFor mild, rcderminjj virtues, faith and hope;Meek resignation ; pious charity :And, since this world is not a world fur ther,Far from thy path removed, with partial care,Strife, glory, gam, and pleasure's flowery snare;Bade earth's temptations pass thee harmless by,And fix'd on heaven thine unrewarded rye !Oh I mark'd from birth, and nurtured for theskies !111 youth, with more than learning's wisdom wise !As sainted martyrs, patient to endure !Simple as unw.-an'd infancy, and pure !Pure from all stain (save that ol human clay.Which Christ's atoning blood hath wash'd away !)By mortal sufferings now no more oppressed,Mount, sinless spirit, to thy destined rest !While I, reversed our nature's kindlier doom,Pour forth * father's sorrows on thy tomb.In the month of June, in the sameyear, Queen Caroline returned to thiscountry ; and Canning, who was averseto taking any share in the proceedingsthat were meditated against her majesty,tendered his resignation, which theking declined accepting; at the sametime, however, permitting Canning toTHE SENATE.abstain, as much as he thought fit, fromthe expected discussions on the queen'sconduct. Canning accordingly proceededto the continent, where he remainedduring the progress of the billof pains and penalties. On his return heagain tendered his resignation, which,on this occasion, to use his own language,was as most graciously accepted,as it had been in the former instancemost indulgently declined.In 1822 he was appointed governor-generalof India ; but soon afterwardsaccepted the foreign secretaryship,which had become vacant by the self-destructionof the Marquess of Londonderry,while Canning was preparing todepart from England. In July, 1823,he was stigmatised, by Mr. Brougham,as having exhibited the most incrediblespecimen of monstrous trickery, for thepurpose of obtaining office, which thewhole history of political tergiversationcould afford. Canning immediatelystood up and exclaimed, " I rise to saythat that is false !" The speaker theninterfered, and a motion was made thatthe sergeant at-arms should take boththe members into custody ; but aftersome discussion it was withdrawn, ontheir respectively promising the houseto think no more of the matter. Theymet at the ensuing Eton Monte, andcordially shook hands, says a cotemporarywriter, in the presence of athousand admiring spectators.Canning had, by this time, becomedeservedly popular, for the spirited andliberal opinions which he had lately professedand most powerfully advocated,as well with regard to foreign as domesticpolicy. He dissented, pointedly,from the principles of the holy alliance; accelerated, if he did not evenproduce, the recognition of the republicsof Mexico, Columbia, and BuenosAyres ; and insisted on the necessity ofaiding Portugal against Spain, with suchfervent eloquence, as had rarely, if ever,been heard in parliament, since thesetting of those great political luminaries,during whose splendid meridianthe dawn of his genius had glimmered.At the funeral of the Duke of York,in January, 1827, he caught a cold ; theconsequence of which was a disorderthat soon afterwards terminated hiexistence. Early in March, he delivereda powerful speech in support ofcatholic emancipation : so intense washis anxiety for the fate of the motion,which was lost by a majority of fouronly, and so great were his exertionson this occasion, that for a short timeafterwards, he was rendered incapable,by illness, of re-appearing in his place.Meanwhile, the friends of Lord Liverpool,who had been attacked by paralysis,in May, lost all hopes of his recovery:the premiership consequentlybecame vacant; and on the 12th ofApril, it was announced in the houseof commons, that Canning had beenappointed first lord of the treasury.Six members of the Liverpool cabinetimmediately afterwards resigned ; anda powerful opposition was at once organisedagainst the new minister.Canning struggled with all his expiringenergy, to retain his eminence :he sat out the session ; but his disease,which is stated to have been an inflammationof the kidneys, gradually gainedupon him ; and, at length, on the 8th ofAugust, 1827, he expired in the Dukeof Devonshire's house, at Chadwick,after having endured more excruciatingtortures, it is said, than the brutality ofa horde of American savages, or therefined cruelty of a set of Spanish inquisitors,ever inflicted on any onehuman body. He was buried at thefoot of Pitt's grave, in the northtransept of Westminster abbey ; and apublic subscription, amounting to above10,000, was raised for the purpose oferecting a monument to his memorySubsequently to his decease, Canning'swidow was created a viscountess. Heleft two sons: the eldest a captain inthe navy, the other a student at Eton;and one daughter, who was married,in 1825, to the Marquess of Clanricarde.Those who knew this highly giftedman," says Quince Adams, " testifythat his intercourse in private andsocial life, was as attractive as his publiccareer was brilliant and commanding."He is described, by other writers,as having been a lover of simplicity;generous, affable, presuming, withoutostentation, and accessible to thehumblest individual. In his domesticcircle, observes a cotemporary author,he was almost adored. To his motherand sister, who were entirely dependentfor subsistence, as he stated, on his labours,he gave up one half of a pension,GEORGE CANNING.which it appears, had been conferred onhim when he retired from the office ofunder secretary of state. To the formerhis attention was unceasing and extraordinary: during her long residence atBath, he visited her as often as he possiblycould, and devoted a portion ofevery sabbath to write her a letter.A contributor to a modern periodicaldescribes Canning's dress as having beenplain, but in perfect good taste ; his persontall and well-made, his form beingmoulded between strength and activity;his countenance beaming with intellect,but having a cast of firmness, mingledwith a mild, good-natured expression ;his head bald as "the first Caesar's ;" hisforehead lofty and capacious; his eyereflective, but, at times, lively ; and hiswhole countenance expressive of thekindlier affections, of genius, and of intellectualvigour. In the prime of hislife he was decidedly handsome, butlatterly, continues the writer, he exhibitedmarks of what years, care, andambition had done upon him.Canning died when at the zenith ofhis political reputation : he had attainedthe pinnacle of all his earthly ambition,as well with regard to popularity asplace. His early errors were forgottenin admiration at his recent spirited,upright, and manly conduct. No unprejudicedmind could withhold its applausefrom a minister, whose viewswere at once so eminently patriotic,and so universally benevolent. In hislatter days, he was, with two or threeglaring exceptions, the advocate of allthat was liberal, enlightened, and conciliating.Had he lived, he would, mostprobably, have become entitled to thegratitude of the world. No politicaladventurer ever terminated his careermore honourably : no man's principlesbecame more ameliorated by his success.The close of his public life was asmuch deserving of high approval, as itscommencement had merited contempt.In the early stages of his progress towardsthat eminence which he at lengthobtained, his conduct was governed byhis necessities. He had adopted politicsas being a more lucrative professionthan the law ; and had advocated measuresin parliament which he was paid,or encouraged by hopes of future emolument,to support, as he would havedefended the causes of those by whomhe might have been retained, had hegone to the bar. Circumstances madehim a senatorial slave to a powerfulparty, and for a long period he wascompelled to justify measures which hecould not afford to oppose. Even afterPitt's decease, with more prudence thanvirtue, he retained the badge of his politicalHeroism ; and, as his only hope,clung to the principles of the departedpremier, as a shipwrecked mariner tothe helm of " some tall bark," which,in a subordinate station, he had recentlyassisted to steer. His struggles securedhim that notice which it was his greatobject to retain. The partisans of Pittbecame either his patrons or supporters,and his importance gradually increased.As soon as he could safely throw offthe yoke which he had courted, heemancipated himself from thraldom.The first gleam of his independence occurredon his obtaining a competencyby marriage : when he had, in somemeasure, obtained by his talents the individualinfluence which he coveted, hebecame more intrepid : as he rose, hisviews were proportionably enlarged ;and, at length, they became extensive,bold, and philanthropic, as his stationwas exalted.His death was, by a large portion ofthe public, attributed to the severe oppositionformed against him on hisbeing called to the premiership. Hisdisease was, doubtless, exasperated bythe efforts he made to avoid beingousted by his antagonists ; but the foundationof that disease had been previouslylaid, and with the common caresof his high office, or even in the reposeof private life, it is doubtful whether hisconstitution would have withstood it.Nor was the opposition which he had toencounter at all unprecedented, eitherin talent, resolution, or political power.In the prime of his health and intellecthe would probably have grappled withand overthrown it. Pitt, when scarcelya man in years, had defeated an adverseparty, which, compared with that arrayedagainst Canning, was as Ossa to awart ; and Fox, when he last took officewith Lord Grenville, found a more bitterpolitical opponent, in Canning himself,than either of those with whom the latter,on becoming prime minister, had tocontend. The fate of these two celebratedmen was remarkably similar:THE SENATE.weak and enfeebled by indisposition,which was aggravated by the usualconsequences of taking high office, FoxlikeCanning, rapidly declined, andexpired soon after he had obtained thatstation to which he had most ardentlyaspired. They died, it has been said,perhaps incorrectly, in the same room,but without a doubt in the same house.Canning was a staunch advocate forcatholic emancipation, and felt morewarmly than he expressed himself infavour of the abolition of the slavetrade; but to immediate manumissionin the colonies he could not be persuadedto agree. While he freely admitted thatslavery was repugnant both to the Christianreligion, and the spirit of the Britishconstitution, he contended that neitherthe one nor the other enjoined the necessityof destroying that old iniquity, atthe risk of public safety, and the expenseof private wrong. He professed thathe felt content to retard the introductionof liberty to the colonies, in orderthat it might at length be venturedupon with less hazard. " British parliaments,"said he, in a debate on thissubject, in March, 1816, "have concurredfor years in fostering and aidingthat very system which the betterfeeling of the house now looks uponwith horror. How should we deal withsuch a system? Shall we continue it?No. But having been all of us thewhole country, involved in the guilt,and sharers in the profit of it, we cannotnow turn round to a part, and say tothem, ' You alone shall expiate thecrime!' "His opinions, on two other greatquestions, he expressed nearly in thefollowing terms, shortly after his elevationto the premiership : " I have beenasked what I intend to do with parliamentaryreform : I answer, to oppose it,as I have ever invariably done. 1 havebeen also asked what course I mean toadopt with regard to the test-act question:my reply is, to oppose it"A very high degree of excellence has,with justice, been attributed to his orations.He enshrined the most appropriateclassical allusions, the most brilliantideas, and the most exquisiteirony, in language, which, with rareexceptions, even when uttered withoutpremeditation, no art could refine, towhich no labour could give an additionalpolish. For elegance, and purityof composition, he has, perhaps, neverbeen excelled ; and in taste, with regardto rhetorical ornaments, but seldombeen equalled. His raillery wasoften irresistible, his wit pure and poignant,and his humour at once admirablyrefined, and remarkably effective.He was possessed of so large a share ofpolitical courage, that during his wholepublic life, he was rarely known to flinchfrom an adversary, however powerful ;or avoid an attack, however well-merited.His boldness, especially at theearly part of his career, often roseinto arrogance ; and his retorts degeneratedinto daring vituperation. But hisspeeches, as well as his opinions, improvedwith his years ; they becamemore noble, manly, and conciliating,in proportion to his success; and, atlength, he ceased altogether to bolsterup a bad case, by reckless assertions;or to overwhelm an opponent withvirulence, whom he could not silenceby argument. He rarely lost his perfectself-possession, but when in thefervid utterance of his thoughts herose into the most lofty and spirit-stirringeloquence. As an instance ofthe effect which he frequently producedon his auditors, it is related, that when,one night, in allusion to the part he hadtaken in recognizing the infant republics,in South America, he exclaimed,in the style and manner of Chatham,that looking to Spain in the Indies, hehad called a new world into existenceto redress the balance of the old, theeffect was actually terrific : " it was,"says a periodical writer, " as if everyman in the house had been electrified:Tierney who had previously been shiftinghis seat, removing his hat and puttingit on again, and taking large andfrequent pinches of snuff, seemed petrified,and sat fixed and staring, with hismouth open, for half a minute."The beauty of Canning's celebratedpoetical pieces, in the Anti-Jacobin, ismuch debased by the contemptibleabuse of those who were opposed tohis own party. They are, however,perhaps, the finest political lampoonsthat have ever been written : one ofthem, Elijah's Mantle, is particularlyvivid, pungent, and felicitous.SIR FRANCIS Burnett.SIR FRANCIS Burnett.FRANCIS, son of Sir Robert Burdett,a gentleman of an ancient and distinguishedfamily, and the fourth baronetof that name, was born on the 25th ofJanuary, 1770. He spent the greaterpart of his boyhood and youth at Westminsterschool, whence he proceeded toOxford; and while there, adopted thesurname of Jones, in compliance withthe will of a relative, by whom he hadbeen bequeathed considerable property.He then made a tour on the continent ;and, during the early part of the Frenchrevolution, resided at Paris, where heattended, as a spectator, and not withany political motives, the meetings ofthe national assembly and those of therevolutionary clubs. After travellingthrough France and Switzerland, hereturned to England, in 1793, and onthe 5th of August, in the same year,married Sophia, youngest daughter ofThomas Courts, Esq., the celebratedbanker, and sister to the Marchionessof Bute, and the Countess of Guildford.In 1796, he was returned to parliament,by the interest of the Duke ofNewcastle, as member for Borough-bridge,with Scott, subsequently LordEldon. He soon distinguished himselfby the liberality of his opinions, and hisresolute hostility to the measures ofgovernment, which he denounced asbeing inimical to the liberties of thepeople. The war with revolutionizedFrance, he declared to be wholly unjustifiable;and, in 1797, he supportedwith great eloquence, a motion in favourof parliamentary reform. Early in thenext year, he rendered himself particularlyconspicuous in a debate onthe assessed taxes ; asserting that thehouse of commons, apparently, metfor the sole purpose of devising waysand means to extract large sums ofmoney from the country ; the freedomof which, as he energetically maintained,would soon be destroyed, if ministerspersevered in such a course asthey seemed to have adopted. In thesame session, he strenuously opposedthe bill for regulating the publicationof newspapers ; declaring that a freegovernment had nothing to apprehend,and everything to hope, from the libertyof the press.On the opening of parliament in 1799,he expressed his dissatisfaction at theomission of any assurance of a speedypeace, in the speech from the throne ;and, soon afterwards, designated theconduct of ministers towards certainstate prisoners, as unconstitutional anddespotic. In the debate that ensued,relative to a renewal of the suspensionof the habeas corpus act, in consequenceof the riots at Manchester, he assuredthe house, that several individuals, afterhaving been hurried to town, and passeda night in rooms at the house of correction,which were not prepared fortheir accommodation, had been brought,on the following day, oppressed byfatigue, and galled by heavy fetters,before the privy-council, to be examinedrelative to circumstances of which theywere ignorant, and on charges of whichthey were innocent. He concluded bydeclaring that, if the habeas corpus actwere suspended, there would be no redressfor unoffending persons, howeverseverely they might be treated.The conduct of Aris, then governorof Cold-bath Fields prison, to whosecustody the state prisoners were consigned,excited his vehement indignation; which appears to have been fullywarranted by the circumstances whichtranspired on the subsequent examinationof that officer ; who admitted, beforethe house of commons, that, in thetreatment of his prisoners, he had madeno distinction between those who weresuspected of having committed offencesagainst the state, and convicted felons.He soon afterwards moved, but withoutsuccess, for a list of those who hadbeen arrested by government during thesuspension of the habeas corpus act.Although the ministers' adherents subsequentlyvoted for a committee to inquireinto the discipline of Cold BathFields prison, he was absurdly stigmatized,in a circular from the Duke ofPortland to all the governors of gaols,as unfit to perform the common officesTHE SENATE.of humanity ;" and an order was, atthe same time, issued, that he shouldnot be permitted to visit any prison inthe kingdom. In his place in parliament,he, shortly afterwards, severelyanimadverted upon this unjustifiablemandate ; and Pitt was at length compelledto admit, that many of the magistrates,whose conduct Burdett hadmost severely reprobated, had shewna great want of feeling and circumspection.In 1800, he repeatedly protestedagainst the suspension of the habeascorpus act, and the renewal of the seditionbill. He, also, during the same year,reprobated the 'conduct of ministers withregard to Ireland ; and resisted a measurebrought forward by government,to prevent persons in holy orders fromsitting in the house of commons. InJuly, 1802, after a contest of fifteen days,he was returned to parliament, on thepopular interest, for the county of Middlesex,by a majority of two hundredand seventy-one votes ; but the electionwas, subsequently, declared void, on accountof some misconduct on the part ofthe sheriffs, for which they were committedto Newgate. A new writ beingissued, after another severe contest, hewas again placed at the head of thepoll. He had, about the same time,declined an invitation to become candidatefor Westminster, in favour ofMr. Paulll, towards the prosecution ofwhose charge against Lord Wellesley,as governor-general of India, he is saidto have liberally contributed. Shortlyafterwards he subscribed 1,000 to theWestminster hospital, and the likeamount to the society for the reliefof persons imprisoned for small debts ;and, in the month of October, he embracedan opportunity of testifying hisrespect for Dr. Parr, by presenting himto the then vacant living of Graham,in the diocese of Lincoln.He continued in active opposition toministers, especially during the premiershipof Addington, whom he declaredto be altogether incapable of directingpublic affairs, until the accession topower of Fox and Lord Grenville, whosepolicy he warmly supported. In 1806,he published his celebrated address tothe freeholders of Middlesex, and wasagain elected for that county, which hecontinued to represent until the close ofthe short parliament that ensued, whenhe was returned, by an immense majority,for Westminster. At the commencementof the election, a misunderstandingoccurred between him and Mr.Paulll, (who had again offered himselfas a candidate), which terminated in ahostile meeting, at Combe wood, onthe 5th of May, 1807, at which, thesecond shots of both parties took effect ;Sir Francis Burdett being wounded,severely, in the knee, and Mr. Paulll,slightly, in the leg.In June, 1809, he brought forward amotion, which proved unsuccessful, relativeto parliamentary reform, andearly in the next year, delivered ananimated address to the house on thesame subject. He next attempted, butwithout effect, to procure an inquiry asto the conduct of ministers, respectingthe expedition to Flushing, and the militaryoperations in Spain and Portugal.On the 9th of February, (1810,) he presented,and eloquently supported, a petitionfrom his constituents for a radicalamendment in the representation of thepeople; and, on the 3rd of April, movedfor a committee, which was granted, toinvestigate the proceedings of a court-martial,by which Captain Lake hadbeen acquitted of a charge of having lefta man, named Jeffrey, on the uninhabitedisland of Sombrero; where, asit was asserted, he had been devouredby birds of prey.On the 6th of the same month, thehouse, after a warm debate, adjudgeda letter which he had addressed to hisconstituents, respecting the committalof Gale Jones for a breach of privilege,to be a libellous and scandalous paper;whereupon, a motion was made andcarried for his own apprehension. Onthe following day, he was visited bythe sergeant-alarms ; to whom, however,he refused to surrender; maintainingthat the speaker's warrant wasillegal, and declaring that he wouldresist its execution by force. A greatnumber of persons soon collected in theneighbourhood of his house, and committedmany disgraceful excesses; onthe following day they re-assembled,and pelted all passengers who would nottake off their hats and cry "Burdett forever!"About one o'clock, Mr. Reid, themagistrate, with a body of constables,and a troop of guards, endeavoured toSIR FRANCIS Burnett.disperse them: the riot act was read,and the soldiers, irritated by repeatedattacks, at length fired upon the people,many ofwhom were severely wounded.In the evening, Sir Francis Burdettclaimed the protection of the sheriffs,Atkins and Wood, who, the next day,proceeded to his residence with a numberof followers ; but their interference, asmight have been anticipated, provedineffectual. By this time, additionaltroops had been marched into London,howitzers had been placed in all theprincipal squares, and sixteen pieces ofartillery, from Woolwich, in St. James'spark. The riot act was again read, andthe mob being dispersed, the serjeant-alarms,with his assistants, broke intothe house of Sir Francis Burdett, whonow surrendered. He was conveyedto the Tower under a strong escort,civil and military; which, on its return,being resolutely assailed by the multitude,the soldiers discharged theircarbines in all directions, woundingmany, and killing one man, namedPledge, upon whom a coroner's inquestwas afterwards held, which found averdict of wilful murder against somelife-guardsman unknown.Sir Francis Burdett soon afterwardscommenced actions, against the speakerof the house of commons, for havingordered a forcible entry into his house,&c. ; against the sergeant-alarms forhaving executed the speaker's warrant ;and against the lieutenant of the Tower,for holding him in custody ; in all ofwhich he was defeated. On the 17thof April, Lord Cochrane presenteda remonstrance to the house, from theelectors of Westminster, in which theystated, that they most sensibly felt theindignity offered to them, by the committalof their representative ; againstwhose detention, petitions were subsequentlybrought up from London,Coventry, and Abingdon. On the prorogationof parliament, in June, whenhis imprisonment, as a matter of course,terminated, extensive preparations weremade for conducting him to his residence; but, fearful that the intendedprocession might lead to a serious breachof the peace, he privately left the Towerby water. On the 31st of the followingmonth, his liberation was celebrated,by a public dinner, at theCrown and Anchor tavern ; on quittingwhich, the populace took the horsesfrom his carriage, and dragged it tohis house themselves.Resuming his seat, at the openingof the next session of parliament, inJanuary, 1811, he denied, in a speechof great animation, that the house ofcommons, as then constituted, legallyrepresented the people ; and, during thedebates on the regency bill, he strenuouslycontended for investing thePrince of Wales with the full powersof sovereignty. In the following year,he opposed, with considerable warmth,Lord Stanhope's bill, for making banknotesa legal tender ; which, if passedinto a law, would, he said, have theeffect of sending all the gold out of thecountry. On the 26th of February,1816, he resisted the continuance ofthe property-tax ; and, on the 19th ofMarch, 1819, strenuously contendedagainst the abolition of trial by battle.On the 1st of July, in the same year,he moved, but without success, thatthe house should take the subject ofparliamentary reform into consideration; observing, " that the people hadno right to be taxed without their ownconsent, expressed by a full, free, andfair representation; a principle he stoodupon, as upon a rock from which hethought it impossible to be moved."He next distinguished himself byrepeated but fruitless efforts to call theattention of the house to the conductof the magistrates and yeomanry, atthe celebrated meeting of the people,on the 10th of August, 1819, in theneighbourhood of Manchester. He hadpreviously written an energetic letterto his constituents on the subject, forthe publication of which, proceedingswere commenced against him by theattorney-general; and, at the ensuingLeicester spring assizes, he was foundguilty of having published a seditiouslibel in that county. Some legal objectionswere made to the verdict; these,however, after having been solemnlyargued, were pronounced by the courtto be groundless ; and, in Hilary term,1821, he was sentenced to three months'imprisonment in the king's bench, andto pay a fine of 2,000.Immediately after his liberation, hesupported a motion for granting thequeen an allowance of 50,000 perannum, and for restoring her name toTHE SENATE.the liturgy. On this occasion, he saidthat the attorney-general, in hisofficial capacity, unrestrained by hermajesty's rank or misfortunes, hadendeavoured, on her trial, by a statementof seeming facts, highly coloured,to excite the utmost prejudice againsther, and then called no evidence tosupport the most infamous parts of hisaccusation."On the 6th of February, 1822, hemoved for delay in answering theking's speech, on account of the natureof its contents ; observing, " that it wasthe practice of our forefathers, to deliberatebefore they resolved, to understandbefore they voted ; and that, nothaving the powers of divination, or thefaculty of conjuring with any certainty,he could not be prepared with anamendment ready cut and dried."Shortly afterwards, he vehementlyopposed the motion of . Lord Castlereagh,for continuing the insurrectionact in Ireland ; contending, " that agreater military force, well directed,would effectually preserve the peace ofthat country." On the 29th of April,in the same year, he supported LordJohn Russell's motion for reform ; andon the 17th of July, he spoke againstthe assumption of arbitrary power, inmatters of privilege, by the house ofcommons. On the 4th of February,1823J he condemned the armed interferenceof France with Spain ; and onthe 24th of the same month, carrieda motion for an inquiry into the conductof the sheriff of Dublin, in certainproceedings connected with trialswhich had then recently taken place inIreland.Although, on the 17th of April, inthis year, he stated that it was hisintention to take no share in the debatesrelative to the catholic claims, onthe ground, that the annual discussionof the subject was a mere farce, fromwhich the friends of emancipationought to withdraw, yet, on the 1st ofMarch, 1825, he thought proper topresent the general petition of thecatholics, and to move for a committeeof the whole house, to take theirclaims into consideration. His motionbeing agreed to, he proposed, in thecommittee, a series of resolutions,which being adopted, he brought inabill, founded upon them, on the 23rdof the same 'month. The bill wastriumphantly carried through all itsstages in the commons ; but the lordsrejected it, by a majority of forty-eight.On the 7th of June, in thesame year, he moved that the evidencetaken by the commissioners for inquiringinto the abuses of the court ofchancery, should be printed. On the29th of March, 1826, he opposed Mr.Huskisson's bill, for repealing Mr.Hume's act in favour of combinationsby workmen, because the measure hadnot been allowed a sufficient trial ; and,on the 18th of the following month,he supported Mr. Whitmore's motion infavour of a revision of the corn laws.In the next session, having againbeen intrusted with the general petitionof the catholics, he moved a resolutionin their favour, on presenting it;which, however, after an adjourneddebate, was negatived, by a majority offour. On the elevation of Canning tothe premiership, he took his seat onthe treasury benches, and, for sometime,continued to support ministers,whose views, on many important subjects,were completely in accordancewith his own. On the 8th of May,1828, he again appeared as the advocateof the catholics ; and, after adebate which was continued to the10th, obtained the appointment of acommittee to consider their claims. Abill for their relief was again carriedthrough the commons, and rejected bythe peers. On the opening of parliament,in 1829, he concurred, with Mr.Brougham, in recommending that, asministers appeared willing to bring forwardemancipation as a governmentmeasure, the catholic association shoulddissolve itself: and during the subsequentdebates on the question, hesupported, with great fervour, thoseconcessions, which he had so materiallycontributed to obtain.The character of Sir Francis Burdettdemands no nicety of delineation ;its features are bold and obvious. Fewmen have displayed more unity of purpose; none have ever been less divertedfrom a conscientious course. An aristocratby birth and fortune, he has voluntarilyexerted the whole of his abilities,acquirements, and influence, in behalfof the people. Unambitious of office,impregnable to corruption, undismayedEARL OF LIVERPOOL.by powerful antagonists, and careless ofpersecution, he has, perhaps, as muchas any man of his day, merited thereputation of a patriot. No liberal,tolerant, or humane opinion, has beenpublicly broached, during his parliamentarycareer, of which he has notbeen an advocate. Stedfastly attachedto the constitution, and a zealous, yetenlightened, adherent to the establishedchurch, he has ever been inimical toany encroachment on the rights of thepeople ; and an unchangeable supporter,upon principle, of extensive toleration.His talents and acquirements are equallyrespectable ; and his eloquence is bold,glowing, and forcible. In private life,he is urbane, beneficent, and, amiable.From his youth upwards, he appearsto have stood aloof from dissipation ;preferring, in his hours of relaxation,the old English sport of fox-hunting,to all the frivolities of fashionableamusement.ROBERT BANKS Jenkins, EARL OF LIVERPOOL.ROBERT BANKS, the only son ofCharles Jenkinsonon, afterwards Earl ofLiverpool, was born on the 7th of June,1770. He commenced his educationat a school on Parsons' Green, nearFulham ; continued it at the Charterhouse; and completed it at Christchurchcollege, Oxford. A few months beforehe had attained his majority, he wasreturned to parliament for Rye ; and, onthe 27th of February, 1792, he delivereda most promising maiden speech, inwhich he skilfully supported the armedinterference of England between Russiaand the Porte. Soon afterwards, havingwitnessed the horrors of the earlypart of the French revolution, he opposed,with great earnestness, an unsuccessfulmotion, brought forward byFox, for an address to the king, prayinghis majesty to treat with the executivegovernment of France. " Onthis very day," he exclaimed, " whilewe are here debating about sending anambassador to the French republic,on this very day is the King of Franceto receive sentence ; and, in all probability,it is the day of his murder ! Whatis it, then, that gentlemen would proposeto their sovereign ? To bow hisneck to a band of sanguinary ruffians,and address an ambassador to a setof murderous regicides, whose handswould be still reeking with the bloodof a slaughtered monarch! No, sir;the British character is too noble torun a race for infamy ; nor will we bethefirst to compliment a set of monsters,who, while we are agitating this subject,are probably bearing through thestreets of Paris horrid spectacle ! thebloody victim of their fury."He defended the conduct of ministersin declaring war against France ; and,on one occasion, observed, " that he hadno difficulty in saying, that a march toParis was practicable and attainable;and that he, for one, would recommendsuch an expedition." In the month ofApril, 1793, he was appointed a commissionerof the India board ; and, inMay, 1796, he became Lord Hawkesbury,on the elevation of his father tothe earldom of Liverpool. He nowsupported, among other ministerialmeasures, the union between GreatBritain and Ireland. He subsequentlybecame secretary of state for foreignaffairs, during the Addington administration,and conducted the negotiationwhich terminated in the treaty ofAmiens. He also recommended a suspensionof the habeas corpus act; defendeda grant of 300,000 which hadbeen made to Portugal; strenuouslyadvocated the liberties of Switzerland ;and contended, firmly, but unsuccessfully,against a virulent opposition, towhich, at length, was added the formidablehostility of Pitt ; under whom, onthe fall of the Addington cabinet, hetook office as secretary of state for thehome department.The additional force bill engagedthe earliest attention of the new government,and it was carried, principallyby Lord Hawkesbury's exertions,through the upper house; to which hehad, some time before, been raised, bywrit, as a peer's eldest son, for theTHE SENATE.purpose of increasing the influence ofministers in that assembly. Soon afterwards,a measure for the abolition ofthe slave trade, which had passed thecommons, was rejected by the lords,on his moving that the subject shouldbe properly investigated during thenext session. In the course of thedebate on Lord Grenville's unsuccessfulmotion, in 1805, for consideringthe petition of-the Roman catholics ofIreland, Lord Hawkesbury declared itto be his opinion, that, as long as thecatholics refused to take the oath ofsupremacy, they ought to be excludedfrom political power.On the death of Pitt, he was offeredthe premiership ; which, however, hedeclined, in consequence of the powerfulcoalition of the Fox and Grenvilleparties. During the short-lived administrationof All the Talents whichensued, he held no office ; but, on itsdismissal, he returned to his formerpost, after having again refused toplace himself at the head of the cabinet.In December, 1808, he succeeded tothe earldom of Liverpool ; and, on theassassination of Spencer Perceval, in1812, he consented, at the Prince Regent'sspecial request, to accept of thevacant premiership.In the early part of his administration,he resisted a motion in favour ofthe catholics, but supported a concessionto the dissenters; and, on accountof some serious outrages whichhad been committed in the manufacturingdistricts, procured an enactment,by which frame-breaking was declareda capital felony. The success of theBritish arms in Spain, the disasters ofBuonaparte in Russia, the subsequentmarch of the allies to Paris, the terminationof the war with America, andthe victory of Waterloo, rendered himfor some time popular ; but publicdistress, the consequence of a long andarduous war, at length produced discontent,and violent clamours andoutrages ensued ; to repress which,the habeas corpus act was suspended,bills were introduced and carriedthrough both houses, for the suppressionof seditious meetings, and theextinction of small political publications,and other severe measures, wereadopted, that exposed the ministers toindignant reproach.On the death of George the Third,Lord Liverpool resigned his seals ofoffice, pro JormH, and received themagain, with an assurance of royal confidenceand esteem, from the newmonarch. His previous unpopularitywas soon afterwards much increasedby the introduction, to the house oflords, of a bill of pains and penaltiesagainst Queen Caroline ; of whose guilt,he appears to have felt a full conviction; but it does not seem to have occurredto him, that the king, by hisown libertine habits, had deprived himselfof any just claim to a divorce.Perceiving, at length, that he couldnot, at once morally and safely, appendany real punishment to his proposedenactment, he submitted to a virtualdefeat, by withdrawing the bill. Still,in justice to Lord Liverpool, it is fairto submit, that, however glaring theinexpediency of his proceedings onthis occasion appear to have been, itwould be exceedingly difficult topoint out what course he ought to haveadopted.During the remainder of his life,Lord Liverpool rendered himself conspicuous,principally by his oppositionto the more important claims of thecatholics; although he supported twobills in their favour, the one enablingthem to vote in the election of membersof parliament, and the otherqualifying them to act as magistratesor subordinate revenue officers. Healso carried his principles of tolerationso far as to favour the Unitarianmarriage bill ; which, however, wasultimately rejected. He appeared, for thelast time, in the house of lords, on the16th of February, 1827, when he supportedan address for conferring a provisionsuitable to their rank on theDuke and Duchess of Clarence. Thenext morning, after having breakfastedalone in his library, he was found, byhis servant, stretched on the floor in aparalytic fit. He was shortly afterwardsremoved to his seat at Combewood, where he lingered in a state ofmental imbecility until his death, whichtook place on the 4th of December,1828. He was twice married : first, toTheodosian, a daughter of Lord Bristol,the bishop of Derry; and, secondly,to Miss Chester, the daughter of aclergyman ; but had no issue.LORD HOLLAND.In personal appearance, Lord Liverpoolwas plain, but dignified : his featureshave become familiar to the public,by the various portraits painted of himby Lawrence, Young, Hopper, andothers. In private life, he was pious,upright, charitable, and unostentatious.Though of a newly-raised family, hewas in policy, but not in manners,a confirmed aristocrat. The faults ofhis public career were entirely thoseof judgment; for, though often wrong,it is evident that he never erred againstconviction. His talents were far inferiorto his virtues ; and he is entitledto respect, but not to admiration. Inhonesty as a minister, he has neverbeen surpassed: in prejudices, he hasrarely been equalled. No man everopposed, at once so strenuously and soconscientiously, the advance of liberalopinions : he was adverse to catholicemancipation, parliamentary reform,the immediate manumission of slaves inthe West India islands, and the freedomof political or religious discussion.With him originated the bill for theerection of an additional number ofedifices for public worship, which hethought would have the most beneficialeffect on the religion and morality ofthe country : but, in other respects, hewas a determined foe to addition orchange ; regarding improvement as innovation,the remedy of old abuses asan incitement to popular inquiry, andthe church and state, as he found it,perfectly faultless, and invulnerable toreproach. As an orator, he was plain,but nervous ; and, in debate, he invariablytreated the supporters of thosemeasures, to which he was most inimical,with courtesy and respect. CyrilJackson told his father, when he quittedOxford, that he would never make agreat statesman; and a talented cotemporary(the Reverend George Cooly,in his Life of George the Fourth) hassaid of him, that he thought his businessamply done, if the current year passedon without a war, a rebellion, or anational bankruptcy.HENRY RICHARD Vassal, LORD HOLLAND.HENRY RICHARD, the only sonof Stephen Fox, Lord Holland, wasborn on the 23rd of November, 1773,and succeeded his father in title andestate at the latter end of the followingyear. He commenced his educationat Eton, and completed it at Christchurchcollege, Oxford; where he tookthe degree of M. A., in 1792.During the early part of the Frenchrevolution he visited France, and thenceproceeded to Italy. While abroad, heformed an intimacy with the wife ofSir Godfrey Webster; in consequenceof which, the latter brought an actionagainst him, and obtained damages tothe amount of 6,000. Lady Websterbeing subsequently divorced, Lord Hollandmarried her, and, on that occasion,took, by royal sign manual, the surnameof Vassals.He commenced his parliamentarycareer by protesting against the assessedtax bill, and soon became a formidableopponent to the administration. Atthe peace of Amiens he visited Spain,where he remained with his family fornearly three years ; during which periodhe applied himself, with much success,to the study of Spanish literature.On his return to England, he advocatedthe political principles he hadpreviously avowed, with increased zeal ;and, after having rendered himself particularlyconspicuous during the prosecutionof Lord Melville, he took office,as lord privy seal, in the brief administrationof All the Talents ; on the dismissalof which, he returned to the oppositionbenches. In 1817, he broughtforward a motion, which was negativedby a large majority, for affording moreliberty and " harmless comforts" toNapoleon Buonaparte ; against whosedetention at St. Helena, he had, on aformer occasion, protested, as being aviolation of national faith. He hasoften distinguished himself by hispowerful advocacy of catholic emancipation,parliamentary reform, and theabolition of the test and corporationacts. As an orator, he is energetic,THE SENATE.copious, and effective, although hisutterance is imperfect, and his gesticulationungraceful. He patronizes menof letters, and enjoys considerable reputationas an author. He has publisheda letter to Dr. Shuttleworth, in favourof the catholic claims ; edited the historicalfragment of his uncle, CharlesJames Fox, and written the lives ofSullen de Castro, and Lope de Vega,once," as he felicitously observes, " thepride and glory of Spaniards, who,in their literary as in their politicalachievements, have, by a singular fatality,discovered regions, and openedmines, to benefit their neighbours andtheir rivals, and to enrich every nationof Europe but their own."HENRY Fitzpatrick PETTY, MARQUESS OFLANSDOWNE.LORD HENRY PETTY, a youngerson of the celebrated Earl of Shellafterwards Marquess of Lansdowne,by his second wife, LouisaFitzpatrick, a daughter of the Earl ofUpper Ossory, was born on the 2nd ofJuly, 1780. After having passed sometimeat Westminster school, he wasremoved to Edinburgh, where he resided,with other young noblemen,under the roof of Professor DugaldStewart; and became initiated in thescience of debate, by attending the disputativemeetings of the SpeculativeSociety. He concluded his educationat Trinity college, Cambridge ; and, onattaining his majority, became memberof parliament for Cane. He seldomengaged in those violent debates whichwere occasioned by the French revolution; but chiefly devoted his attentionto the affairs of Ireland. At this earlyperiod of his career, Fox, on account ofhis talents, compared him to Pitt, whenof the same age. On the death of thelatter, Lord Henry succeeded to thechancellorship of the exchequer, andalso became representative of the universityof Cambridge, lie did not remainlong enough in office to displaymuch of that talent for finance, whichhe was supposed by his friends topossess, and soon ceased to representthe university ; but continued in parliamentas member for Camelford.On the death of his elder brotherwithout issue, in 1809, he succeededto the family titles and estates. Heabetted the party of the Prince ofWales, during the debates on the regencybill ; and, on the assassination ofMr. Perceval, some probability appearedto exist of his going into officewith his party, whose conditions, however,were so dictatorial, that the regentrejected them. Although hostileto the Liverpool cabinet, he was farfrom a virulent, and not even an active,opponent to its measures. In 1814, hemoved for an address to the PrinceRegent, which was adopted without adivision, declaratory of the deep regretfelt by the house that the humane exertionsof this country for the abolitionof the slave trade had not been attendedwith complete success j and praying thatmeans might be taken more fully toeffectuate the merciful intentions of thelegislature.In the year 1824, he introduced amotion for the immediate recognitionof the South American states. " Letme ask noble lords, (thus he arguedon this occasion) if they can contemplateany course of events by which theindependence of the colonies can befinally prevented ? Can any manrationally expect that the governmentof old Spain, situated as it now is, andas it must be, while it is occupied by aFrench army, and situated as it mustbe, long after that French army hasretired, can exert efforts at all adequate,even to the appearance of a successfulattempt, to bring under forcible subjectionthe inhabitants of those remoteand boundless countries, when theyhave once tasted the cup of liberty,and become conscious of their greatness?Can we suppose it possible thatthe progress of civilization, and everythingpioudand great connected withVISCOUNT GODERICH.it, in those countries, can be arrested ?As well might we expect that the currentof the gulph stream should ceaseto carry the warm waters of the tropicsforward towards its northern shores, assuppose that the full tide of civilizationand independence can be preventedfrom extending itself from mountain tomountain, and from shore to shore, ofthat new world. The time was, whenSpain had the power to root tip thevineyards of Mexico, that the inhabitantsmight rely on the mothercountry for wine: the time, indeed,was, when old Spain could make itfelony to carry roads from the inland tothe sea shore of that country, lest theinhabitants should have communicationswhich their rulers might notapprove. But those times are now nomore : the regeneration of that countrymust continue, and your lordships areinvited to assist in its perfection."In 1827, he accepted a seat in thecabinet, and soon afterwards obtainedthe seals of the home department. Onthe death of Canning, the marquess,displeased with the nomination ofHerries to the chancellorship of the exchequer,and disappointed in an attemptto introduce Lord Holland intothe cabinet, waited upon the king toresign the seals of his office ; but, onfinding that Herries had been recommendedby Lord Goderich, (then firstlord of the treasury,) to the king, themarquess consented to retain his post;which, however, he relinquished earlyin 1828.His temper is placid, his knowledgeextensive, and his delivery pleasing. Hepatronizes literature and the arts ; is anuniform supporter of liberal measures jand, in private life, displays great moralpurity, united with mild and courteousmanners. He has issue by the marchioness,who is his cousin, being adaughter of the second Earl of Rochester.FREDERICK JOHN ROBINSON, VISCOUNT GODERICH.THIS statesman, son of Thomas,second Lord Graham, was born onthe 30th of October, 1782 ; and completedhis education at St. John's college,Cambridge, where, in complimentto his rank, he obtained the honorarydegree of M. A. In 1807, he procureda seat in the house of commons, forthe borough of Ripon, which he representedin several succeeding parliaments.At the commencement of hispublic career, he was an avowed anti-catholic,and a staunch supporter of thelanded interest; but he did not attractmuch notice until 1812, when, in consequenceof the complete accordance ofhis principles with those of the partyin power, he was nominated a lord ofthe treasury. He subsequently becamevice-president of the board of trade ;and, on the 1st of March, 1815, broughtforward the obnoxious corn-bill, which,in spite of a most determined opposition,was carried through its last stagein the house of commons on the 10th ofthe same month. Terrific riots ensued ;during which, the infuriated populaceattacked his residence, and destroyedthe principal part of his furniture andvaluable paintings. On the followingnight, he placed a guard of soldiers inhis-house, who, on a repetition of theviolence displayed on the precedingevening being attempted, fired on themob, of whom they killed two, andwounded many. The affair beingafterwards mentioned in the house ofcommons, justified himself, as havingmerely taken such precautions as werein his power for the defence of his property; which, however, it was asserted,in reply, had, by the preceding attack,been rendered scarcely worth protecting.Early in 1823, on the recommendationof Lord Liverpool, he was appointedchancellor of the exchequer.In 1824, he proposed, and carried, anabatement of the window tax, and ofthe duties on leather and rum ; anabolition of stamps on law proceedings ;and a reduction of the four per cents tothree and a half. On the formation ofthe Canning ministry, in 1827, he becamesecretary of state for the colonies ;and, on the 28th of April, in that year,he was raised to the peerage, by the titleTHE SENATE.of Viscount Goderich, of Norton, in thecounty of Lincoln, for the purpose ofacting as ministerial leader in thehouse of lords. The death of Canningsoon afterwards took place, and LordGoderich succeeded to the premiership ;which, however, he had neither politicalstrength nor talent enough to hold,against the powerful opposition of theDuke of Wellington and his friends,by whom he was speedily compelledto retire from office.Lord Goderieh is urbane and candidto his political opponents, honest in hisintentions, and well skilled in the practicalduties of office ; but his knowledgeis not extensive, neither is his dispositionfirm, nor his intellect exalted. At thecommencement of his parliamentarycareer, his oratory was at once puerileand pedantic ; he has, however, long enjoyedthe reputation of being a respectablespeaker, although his argumentsare frequently trite, and his deliveryunimpressive. Adopting the principlesof Liverpool and Castlereagh, hisopinions, during the ascendancy ofthose statesmen, were neither liberalnor tolerant; but he subsequently becamea convert, in some degree, to themore enlightened policy of Canning.At the latter end of 1824, he wasunited to Lady Sarah Hobart, by whomhe has had three children.SIR ROBERT PEEL.ROBERT, the eldest son of SirRobert Peel, Bart., the founder of hisfamily, was born on the 6th of February,1788. He acquired the rudiments ofeducation under the personal superintendenceof his father; who, amongother lessons of great practical utility,impressed upon him the necessity of alwaysattending to the business in hand,and of doing it in earnest. At a properage, he was sent to Harrow, where hewas cotemporary with Byron, who saysof him, in a document, published in hisvaluable Life by Moore : " Peel, theorator and statesman, (that was, or is,or is to be,) was my form-fellow, andwe were both at the top of our remove(a public school phrase). We wereon good terms, but his brother was myintimate friend. There were alwaysgreat hopes of Peel amongst us all,masters and scholars, and he has notdisappointed them. As a scholar, hewas greatly my superior ; as a declaimerand actor, I was reckoned at least hisequal ; as a school-boy, out of school,I was always in scrapes, and he never;and, in school, he always knew hislesson, and I rarely; but when I knewit, I knew it nearly as well. In generalinformation, history, &c. &c. I thinkI was his superior."On quitting Harrow, he became agentleman-commoner of Christchurchcollege, Oxford, where he took adegree, with considerable distinction.In 1809, he was returned to parliamentas member for Castel ; and early in1810, he seconded, in rather a neatspeech, the motion for an address, inreply to the king's speech on openingthe session. In the course of the sameyear, he was appointed under secretaryof state for the colonial department ;and, on the 12th of September, 1812,he became chief secretary for Ireland ;in which capacity, on the 23rd of January,1814, he obtained leave to bringin a bill for the better execution ofthe laws in Ireland ; for which, however,after it had passed through its firststages, he proposed to substitute a revivalof the insurrection act. At thelatter part of the same year, he supporteda measure for improving theIrish peace preservation act; and, inApril, 1816, he strenuously opposedSir John Newport's motion for an addressto the prince regent, censuringthe conduct of ministers, with regardto the troubles in Ireland ; and, bywayof amendment, proposed another,which, after a warm debate, was carried,"deploring the circumstances thatrendered it necessary to have twenty-fivethousand soldiers in that kingdom,and entreating, that an account of thedisturbances there should be laid beforethe house."In 1817, he brought forward a billSIR ROBERT PEEL.for providing a more effective systemof police in Ireland ; and, on the elevationof Mr. Abbott to the peerage, hewas returned to parliament as representativeof the university of Oxford.In 1818, he opposed a repeal of thewindow tax, against which a petitionhad been presented from Dublin ; anddefended the grammar school atHarrow, from the operation of Mr.Brougham's bill concerning public charities,because the master of the Rollshad decided that its funds appeared tohave been properly managed. Aboutthis time he resigned the Irish secretaryship; but still continued to renderhimself somewhat conspicuous as a debater.In February, 1821, he opposedthe Marquess of Tavistock's motion, foravote of censure against ministers, inrespect of their proceedings with regardto the queen, although he confessed,that he could not approve of theirhaving rejected her majesty's namefrom the liturgy ; and, during the samesession, he avowed himself to be vehementlyhostile to the catholic claims.On the 17th of January, 1822, he wasappointed secretary of state for thehome department. In the course ofthe same year, he resisted the measurein favour of catholic peers j and broughtforward the alien act. In 1823, hedistinguished himself during the debatesrelative to the Spanish negotiations; and in a most masterly style,defeated a motion in favour of a personnamed Olivia Serres, who stated herselfto be a daughter of the late Duke ofCumberland, brother of George theThird. In 1824, he proposed a modificationof the alien act ; and, in thefollowing year opposed and voted againstthe catholic relief bill.In 1826, he commenced his trulylaudable measures for the improvementof the criminal code. On theappointment of Canning to the premiership,he resigned his office; towhich he again returned, under theWellington administration, in January,1828. Although he had, hitherto, beena most inveterate antagonist to theclaims of the catholics, he was now inducedto support that celebrated bill fortheir relief, which the cabinet thoughtproper to bring forward as a governmentmeasure. To extenuate what wastermed his apostacy, he urged that theposition of affairs had altered ; that concessionto the catholics had become amatter of expediency ; and that thecatholic question had interfered withthe proper government of the countryfor thirty-five years, by causing constantdivisions in the cabinet. " I shall follow,"said he, in reply to a severe attackfrom Sir Charles Ethereal, " the exampleof the pilot, who does not alwayssteer the same course to guard the shipfrom danger, but a different courseunder different circumstances, as theyarise, in order to save the vessel fromthe very dangers which the captain andcrew have most dreaded."In consequence of the change of hisopinions on this important s object, heresigned his seat for the university ofOxford; and, having failed to procurehis re-election, became member for theborough of Westbury. Shortly afterwards,he originated the act for establishinga regular system of police, tosupersede parochial watching ; and towardsthe close of the reign of Georgethe Fourth, at the time of whose demisehe was still in office as home secretary,he succeeded to his father's baronetage.He was united, on the 8th of June, 1820,to Julia, youngest daughter of the lateJohn Floyd, Esq., by whom he hasissue.In debate, he is neat, fluent, adroit,but not eloquent. As a statesman, hehas displayed much practical ability.Uncommon industry and plain goodsense, added to a most intimate knowledgeof official business, have enabledhim to master difficulties, which, tomany politicians of more exalted intellect,and greater pretensions, wouldhave been insurmountable. His conduct,on several occasions has exposedhim to bitter reproach, and the wisdomof some of his measures is certainlysomewhat doubtful ; but even those whoare opposed to him in politics, must admithis utility to a large extent; and noman of candour can deny, that his exertionsto soften the rigour of our criminalcode, entitle him to the gratitudeof his country.THE SENATE.LORD JOHN RUSSELL.LORD JOHN RUSSELL, third sonof the Duke of Bedford, by his firstduchess, was born on the 19th of August,1792. He commenced his education ata private school, near Sandwich, andcompleted it at Cambridge. He enteredparliament at an early age, and spoke,for the first time, in July, 1814, on thealien act repeal bill. He opposed thewar with Buonaparte, and took occasionto observe, when Mr. Methuenexpressed his gratification, that Englandhad become a rallying point for legitimacy,that if the honourable member'sdoctrines had prevailed, George theThird would have been the possessorof a German electorate, instead of theimperial throne of Great Britain. In1818, he became member for Tavistock ;and on Sir Francis Burdett's motionfor reform, in 1819, he avowed himselffriendly to triennial parliaments; butwould not pledge himself to support ameasure that went the length of proposingan inquiry into the general stateof the representation ; because such aninquiry, he contended, was calculatedto fill the minds of the people withvague and indefinite alarms.On introducing his first motion relativeto parliamentary reform, in1819, he made a very temperate andable speech, which he concluded bysubmitting, for the adoption of thehouse, four resolutions declaratory ofthe expediency of disfranchising corruptboroughs ; of giving compensation to thepure electors ; of transferring the rightof representation, so taken away, to largetowns and counties ; and of adoptingfurther measures for the prevention ofbribery at elections. These resolutions,at the suggestion of Lord Castlereagh,he afterwards withdrew, and gave noticeof a motion for the disfranchisementof Grarapound; which ultimatelytook place in 1821, when the forfeitedfranchise was transferred to the countyof York.He made an unsuccessful motion todisfranchise corrupt boroughs, and tobestow the representation upon populoustowns, in May, 1821 ; and in 1822,1823, and 1820, proposed resolutions,that the state of the national representationrequired the serious noticeof the house ; which, however, werenegatived, on each occasion, by largemajorities. Towards the close of thesession of 1826, he brought forward aseries of resolutions to prevent4>riberyat elections, which being supported andopposed by an equal number of sixty-twoon each side, the speaker gave hiscasting vote in their favour. At thenext election, on account of his advocacyof catholic emancipation, he losthis seat for the county of Huntingdon,which he had represented since 1820,but was returned for the Irish boroughof Brandon-bridge. On the 26th ofFebruary, 1828, he introduced hiscelebrated bill for the abolition of thetest and corporation acts, which soonafterwards passed into a law. His lastimportant speech in parliament, previouslyto the demise of George theFourth, was delivered on the 28th ofMay, 1830, when he opposed Mr.O'Connell's motion for universal suffrage,declaring that he was no friendto sweeping measures, but an advocateonly for moderate reform.He has ever advocated the diffusionof popular knowledge, and a totalabolition of all distinction on account ofreligious opinions. His eloquence isnot remarkable for force or dignity j buthe never rambles from the subject beforethe house ; and always addresseshimself to facts rather than to feelings.Though a constant observer of hisparliamentary duties, he has become avoluminous author; having written alife of his unfortunate ancestor, LordWilliam Russell; An Essay on theHistory of the English Constitution;Memoirs of the Affairs of Europe, fromthe peace of Utrecht to the presenttime; and, as it is asserted, A BriefSketch of the History ot the Establishmentof the Turks in Europe. He isalso the author of a Tragedy entitledDon Carlos, which, though unsuccessfulon representation, has gone throughfour or five editions.DISSENTERSDISSENTERS.DANIEL WILLIAMS.DANIEL WILLIAMS was born atWrexham, in Denbighshire, about theyear 1G44. When only nineteen yearsof age, he became a presbyterianpreacher; and, after having officiatedin various parts of England, he wasnominated chaplain to the Countess ofWestmeath. He subsequently obtainedthe appointment of pastor to a congregationin Wood-street, Dublin, whichhe retained for upwards of twentyyears. Being exposed to much inconvenience,on account of his zeal for protestantism,he quitted Ireland, (whichhad become " a citadel for popery")at the latter part of the reign of Jamesthe Second, and took up his residencein London. A proposal was soon afterwardsmade, at a meeting of the membersof his own communion, to pass avote of thanks to the king, for havingdispensed with the penal laws relativeto nonconformity ; which, however,met with so resolute an opposition fromWilliams, that, after much discussion,it was withdrawn. " I am persuaded,"said he, on this occasion, " that theseverities inflicted on the dissenters,were rather for their resistance toarbitrary power, than for their religiousdissent ; so that it were better to bereduced to our former hardships, thandeclare for measures destructive to theliberties of our country."On the accession of William theThird, being the most influential presbyterianminister of his day, he wasadmitted to an interview with thatmonarch ; whom, it is said, he persuadedto ameliorate the condition ofthe Irish dissenters. In 1688, he waschosen pastor to a large congregationin Hand-alley, Bishopsgate-street ; and,in 1691, he succeeded Baxter, as alecturer, at Pinner's hall. He now becameinvolved in a controversy on thedoctrine of the Trinity, which led tohis establishing a separate lecture atSailers' hall. In 1692, he published atract, against the Antinomian doctrinesof Crisp, entitled, Gospel Truth Statedand Vindicated, &c. ; and, soon afterwards,another, entitled, A Defence ofGospel Truth, &c. These productionsexposed him to a charge of Socinianism,(the justice of which he vehemently denied)and to a malignant attack on hismoral character, which, after a strictinvestigation had been made into hisconduct by a committee of ministers,was declared to be without the leastfoundation. In 1709, he received adiploma of D. D. from the university ofEdinburgh. Towards the close ofQueen Anne's reign, he gave greatoffence to the Tory ministers, by hisbold invectives against the intolerantprinciples of their party, and his zealfor a protestant succession. Soon afterthe arrival of George the First in thiscountry, he presented the new monarch,at the head of a deputation of metropolitanpastors, with a congratulatoryaddress from the dissenters. His deathtook place on the 26th of January, 1716.He was twice married, and both hiswives are stated to have been in opulentcircumstances. He bequeathed thebulk of his fortune for the alleviationof distress, and the advancement oflearning and religion. Among othernoble benefactions, he gave large sumsfor the education of youth, in Dublin ;for the support of a preacher to thenative Irish ; and for the relief of thewidows of poor ministers. He alsodevised estates for the support of sixpresbyterian students at the universityDISSENTERS.of Glasgow ; and left his books, includingthe collection of Dr. Bates, (for whichhe had 'given 15,000,) together with aconsiderable sum of money, to found apublic library in London. The last-mentionedbequest led to the establishmentof Red Cross Street Institution.The remarkable influence of Dr.Williams among the dissenters, in theearly part of the last century, may beattributed as much to his wealth as tohis talents ; and these appear to havebeen somewhat overrated. His style,though lucid and chaste, is deficient ineleganceas well as vigour. Several ofhis sermons are good, plain, practicalexpositions of Scripture ; but the mass ofhis writings, . six volumes of which appearedafter his decease, may be designatedas useless additions to the lumberof controversy. He is entitled to considerablepraise for the temper he displayedin his theological disputes ; forhis adherence, when affluent, to thehumble connexions he had formed inthe early part of his life; and for thecharitable mode in which he disposedof his great wealth : but the brightestpoint in his character, if the pietywhich has, without contradiction, beenattributed to him, be excepted, appearsto be his prominent, fearless, and disinterestedhostility to persecution orarbitrary power.EDMUND CALAMY.EDMUND CALAMY was born onthe 5th of April, 1671, and receivedhis education, principally, at MerchantTailors' School; at Wickham House,in Suffolk; and at the university ofUtrecht; where, it is said, in additionto his diurnal labours, he devoted onenight in every week to intense study.After having refused a professorship atthe university of Edinburgh, whichhad been offered to him by Dr. Car-stares,the principal, he returned toEngland, in 1691, and obtained leave topursue his theological researches at theBodleian library. In the following year,he became assistant to a dissenting ministerin London ; on the 22nd of June,1694, he was publicly ordained at themeeting-house in Little St. Helen's ; andtwo years afterwards appeared his Tableof Contents to Baxter's Life and Times,with observations on that work ; anabridgment of which, with a continuationup to the year 1691, he publishedin 1702. This production, in which hegave accounts of many of the ministerswho had been ejected by the actof conformity, with their apologies fornot conforming, involved him in acontroversy with Hoadly, and otherdivines. About the same time, hewas chosen one of the lecturers atSalters' Hall; and, in 1703, succeededthe Rev. Vincent Alsop, as pastor of acongregation in Westminster. Duringa tour through part of Scotland, whichhe made in 1709, the degree of D.D.was conferred upon him by the universitiesof Edinburgh, Glasgow, andAberdeen. In 1713, he republished hisAbridgment of Baxter, with a furthercontinuation; in 1718, he wrote a defenceof his namesake and grandfather,against certain reflections cast upon himin Echard's History of England ; and,in 1728, appeared his additional accountsof ejected ministers. He died on the3rd of June, 1732, leaving several children.Calamy, says Mayo, was moderatewith regard to differences inpoint of religion ; and it has beenremarked, that so great was his love oftruth, that he never omitted an importantfact, although it might, in aconsiderable degree, tend to defeat hisarguments. As a writer, he is generallycorrect, but rarely eloquent. An accountof his own life and times, ofwhich Dr. Kippis said, that there wasnot much in it which would now beinteresting, has recently been published.His works, including those alreadymentioned, are forty-one in number.Among them are several funeral sermons: the Church and Dissenterscompared as to Persecution, &c. ; theMinistry of the Dissenters Vindicated ;Memoirs of the Rev. John Home ; andthe Life of Dr. Increase Rather.ISAAC WATTS.ISAAC WATTS.ISAAC WATTS was born on the17th of July, 1674, at Southampton;where his father, who had previouslybeen imprisoned for non-conformity, atthe latter part of his life kept a .Isaac was the eldest ofnine children. From his earliest yearshe displayed great avidity for learning,and before he could speak plain, wheneverany money was given to him, hewould carry it to his mother, and say,as well as he could, " A book ! a book !Buy a book !" It is reported that healmost " lisped in numbers." On oneoccasion, his mother having chastisedhim for addressing her in rhyme, heunconsciously repeated his offence inimploring her forgiveness. From thistime she encouraged his natural predilectionto verse-making, and gavehim a small gratuity whenever hislines excited her approbation. Havingpresented him with a farthing, for oneof his childish efforts, he soon afterwardsbrought her, it is said, the followingcouplet:I write not forHow 1 your fafarthing'; but to tryling poets cau outvie.He studied Latin under his father,and Greek and Hebrew at the free-schoolof his native town. Some liberalpersons were so pleased with his alacrityin learning, as to propose raising a fundfor his maintenance at the university ;to which, however, having resolved notto abandon the dissenters, he declinedproceeding; and completed his educationat an academy in London, kept bya non-conformist divine, named Rowe.One of his schoolfellows was Hughes,afterwards a dramatist of some celebrity,whom he endeavoured, but withouteffect, to wean from his attachmentto the stage.In 1693, he became a communicantof Howe's congregation, and soon distinguishedhimself by his devotionalardour. He continued to study withgreat zeal; and, about this period, filleda large volume with Latin dissertations,which, according to Johnson, displayedmuch philosophical and theologicalknowledge. He amused himself, occasionally,by poetical composition, inLatin and English. A copy of verses,which he addressed to his brother, arereputed to be remarkably elegant ;and Johnson says, that his diction,although not always pure, was copiousand splendid ; but " some of his odes,"as the same critic remarks, " are deformedby the Pindaric folly thenprevailing; and are written with suchneglect of all metrical rules, as iswithout example among the ancients."In order to impress the contents ofsuch books as he admired upon hismemory, he is said to have abridgedthem. He was likewise in the habit ofamplifying the system of one author,by supplements from another; also, towrite an account, on the margin, orblank leaves, which he introduced forthe purpose, of the distinguishing characteristicsof every important book heperused ; objecting to what he deemedquestionable, and illustrating or confirmingwhat, in his opinion, was correct; a practice which he subsequentlyrecommended all students to adopt.At the age of twenty, he returned toSouthampton, and passed the followingtwo years in study, and devotional retirement.He then became tutor to theson of Sir John Hartopp ; and, on hisbirth-day, in 1698, preached his firstsermon, to Dr. Chauncey's congregation,in Mark-lane, to whom he hadbeen chosen assistant. On the death ofhis principal, he was offered, and accepted,the succession ; but was incapacitated,for a long period, from performinghis pastoral duties, by a severefit of illness, from which he was slowlyrecovering, when he received an invitationto take up his abode at the residenceof Sir Thomas Abbey, a Londonalderman ; in whose family he continuedduring the remainder of his life,on such a footing, as Johnson remarks,that all notions of patronage and dependancewere overpowered by the perceptionof reciprocal benefits.The greater part of his time wasnow occupied in composition, but heDISSENTERS.continued to preach until he was nearlyseventy years of age ; and, in spite ofmany natural disadvantages, acquiredconsiderable reputation as a pulpitorator. The university of Aberdeen conferredupon him the degree of D.D., onaccount of the excellency of some of hisworks ; among which, those on Logic,and The Improvement of the Mind, !deserve especial praise. Although, inhis well-known Psalms and Hymns,he is said to have " only done best,what nobody has done well," yet theirpopularity is so great, that, for manyyears past, it is computed that no lessthan fifty thousand copies of them areprinted annually in Great Britain andAmerica.In addition to the foregoing productions,he published several sermonsand controversial tracts ; Lyric Poems ;Philosophical Essays; An ElementaryTreatise on Astronomy and Geography ;A Discourse on Education ; and ABrief Scheme of Ontology. The profitsof his works, as well as two thirds ofhis slender emoluments as a pastor,were devoted to benevolent purposes;and so exemplary was his character,in every respect, that he appears tohave been beloved and admired bynearly all the virtuous and learnedamong his contemporaries. Shortly beforehis death, which took place on the25th of November, 1748, he observed toa friend : " I remember an aged ministerused to say, ' that the most learnedand knowing Christians, when theycome to die, have only the same plainpromises of the Gospel for their support,as the common and unlearned.'And so," added he, " I find it. Theplain promises of the Gospel are mysupport ; and I bless God that they areplain promises, and do not requiremuch labour and pains to understandthem ; for I can do nothing now, butlook into my Bible for some promise tosupport me, and live upon that."It has lately been asserted, but apparentlywithout foundation, that, towardsthe close of his life, the doctrine of theHoly Trinity had ceased to be a portionof his creed ; and that, a short time beforehis death, he revised his Psalmsand Hymns, so as to render themwholly unexceptionable to every Christianprofessor. He is said to have beenone of the first of those who taught thedissenting preachers to court the attentionof their hearers by the beauties oflanguage. " In the pulpit," says Dr.Johnson, " though nis low stature,which very little exceeded five feet,graced him with no advantages of appearance,yet the gravity and proprietyof his utterance made his discoursesvery efficacious. Such was his flow ofthoughts, and such his promptitude oflanguage, that, in the latter part of hislife, he did not pre-compose his cursorysermons, but, having adjusted theheads, and sketched out some particulars,trusted for success to his extemporarypowers."Few men," says the same writer,speaking of Dr. Watts, " have left suchpurity of character, or such monumentsof laborious piety. He has providedinstruction for all ages, from those whoare lisping their first lessons, to the enlightenedreaders of Malebranche andLocke ; he has left neither corporealnor spiritual nature unexamined ; hehas taught the art of reasoning, and thescience of the stars. His character,therefore, must be formed from themultiplicity and diversity of his attainments,rather than from any singleperformance ; for though it would not besafe to claim for him the highest rankinany single denomination of literarydignity; yet, perhaps, there was nothingin which he would not haveexcelled, if he had not divided hispowers to different pursuits."It is related of him, that he addressedthe following impromptu to a stranger,by whom, on being pointed out by acompanion, as " the great Dr. Watts,"he had been designated, in a whisper,as " a very little fellow : "Or*tall, to reach the pole,p the ocean with a span,t be measured by my foul ;the standard of ibe iNATHANIEL Larder.NATHANIEL Larder.NATHANIEL Larder wasborn at Hawkhurst, in Kent, on the6th of June, 1684. After acquiringsome scholastic knowledge at his nativeplace, and studying theology underDr. Oldfield, at Horton, he proceeded,in 1699, to the university of Utrecht,and afterwards to that of Leyden. Hereturned to England in 1703 ; but, forsome time afterwards, modestly declinedto enter the ministry. In 1713,he became domestic chaplain to LadyTrebly, and tutor to her son, with whomhe subsequently made a tour on thecontinent. In 1723, his pupil died,and he engaged, with some other ministers,in delivering a course of lecturesat the Old Jewry chapel. Thesubject assigned to him was the credibilityof the Gospel history, on whichhe delivered three sermons, and theseappear to have formed the nucleus ofhis most celebrated work.In 1729, he became assistant to Dr.Harris, at Crutched Friars, where hecontinued to preach until 1751, whenhe quitted the pulpit altogether; partlyowing to his deafness, and the greatdecrease of his hearers, but principally,perhaps, for the purpose of obtainingsufficient leisure to complete his Credibilityof the Gospel History; or, theFacts occasionally mentioned in theNew Testament, confirmed by passagesof Ancient Authors, who were cotemporarywith our Saviour and his Apostles,or who lived near their time. Ofthis excellent work, to which a greatportion of his life was devoted, the firstpart was published in 1727, and thetwelfth and last in 1755. It was followed,in 1756 and 1757, by a supplement,in three volumes, containingthe Lives of the Apostles and Evangelists.Many years before his death,which took place at Hawkhurst, wherehe had a small estate, in the autumnof 1768, the university of Aberdeenhad conferred on him the degree ofD. D., by diploma.Dr. Lardner appears to have been aman of sincere and rational piety ; greatabilities, and extraordinary research.As a preacher, he was not very successful." His style," according to Kippis,wanted animation, and a very defectiveelocution rendered him disagreeablein the pulpit, even after he wascelebrated as an author."The name of Dr. Lardner," says ajudicious critic on his life by Kippis,will be always respected by the friendsof free inquiry, true religion, and revelation.While one party may exult inthe change of his opinions, and considerhim as a convert from the school ofArius to that of Socinus, every partywill triumph when they reflect that byhis assiduous and unremitted labours,the evidence of Christianity has beenestablished on the basis of historicaltruth." The same writer observes,that he seems to have had a clear,rather than a capacious mind ; to havepossessed a sound judgment rather thanaquick and comprehensive perception.We suspect that, distant from credulity,he may be styled a sceptic, taking theterm in its earliest and best sense, asacareful inquirer, who readily doubts,in order to follow his examinationmore closely. We see this scepticismin some of his earliest works ; and wefind it, as usual, gradually increasingin old age. This disposition led him,among other things, to examine, andat last to reject, the famous passage ofJosephus respecting Christ ; it inducedhim to disbelieve the pretended miraclewhich prevented Julian from rebuildingJerusalem, a miracle which historicaltestimony persuaded even Mr. Gibbonto suspect might almost have happened.As a writer, eminent as he at lengthbecame, he was, for a long period, butlittle noticed ; and, it is said, that, inconsequenceof the slowness of itssale, he disposed of the copyright andstock of his laborious and admirablework on the Gospel History, for150. Besides his principal production,he wrote Counsels of Prudenceto Young People, which met with greatapprobation from Archbishop Seeker; AHistory of the Heretics of the Two FirstDISSENTERS.Centuries ; A Collection of Jewish andHeathen Testimonials to the Truth ofthe Christian Religion ; A Vindication(in answer to Woolston) of Three ofour Saviour's Miracles ; Two Schemesof a Trinity considered, and the DivineUnity asserted; A Letter, concerningthe question whether the Logos (orWord) supplied the place of a HumanSoul in our Saviour, which, it is said,made Priestley a Socinian ; and someother theological pieces, inserted in thecomplete edition of his works publishedby Dr. Kippis, in 1788.SAMUEL CHANDLER.THIS eminent divine, the brother ofMary Chandler, whose political talentelicited praise from Alexander Pope,was the son of a dissenting pastor atHungered, where he was born, in1693. After studying for some time atMoore's academy, at Bridgewater, hewas removed to a school at Tewkesbury,kept by Mr. Samuel Jones ;among whose pupils, at that time, wereSeeker and Butler; the first of whom,subsequently, became primate, and theother, Bishop of Durham. He completedhis education at Leyden, whencehe returned to England, m 1715; and,during the same year, married a younglady, of considerable fortune; which,however, he soon afterwards lost in theSouth Sea bubble.In 1716, he was chosen pastor to aPresbyterian congregation at Pelham ;and, soon afterwards, entered intopartnership with a bookseller in thePoultry. In 1726, he became lecturerat the Old Jewry chapel ; of which hewas, subsequently, chosen principalminister, on account of the excellenceof his sermons in defence of Christianity.These were afterwards published, andmet with so flattering a reception, thatChandler, emboldened by success, soonproduced another work ; which was followedby a great number of controversialand polemical pieces, writtenwith so much ability, that, it is said,he was offered liberal preferment inthe established church, if he thoughtfit to conform.In 1727, he published Reflections onthe Conduct of Modern Deists ; in1728, A Vindication of the Antiquityand Authority of Daniel's Prophecies ;and, in 1731, A Translation of LimeHistory of the Inquisition, withan Introduction concerning the Riseand Fall of Persecution ; which involvedhim in a controversy with Merrimac.In the following year, he addressed toBishop Gibson, A Letter on the Repealof the Test Act. He then formed adesign of writing commentaries on allthe prophets ; but, after publishing AParaphrase and Critical Commentary onJoel, and making some progress withanother on Isaiah, he abandoned theundertaking, being convinced, on theappearance of Schouten's lectures, thathe did not possess sufficient orientallearning for its completion. In 1736,he printed a History of Persecution,with Remarks on Dr. Rogers' CivilEstablishment of Religion; in 1741, aVindication of the History of the OldTestament; in 1742, A Defence of thePrime Ministry and Character ofJoseph ; and, in 1744, The Witnessesfor the Resurrection Re-examined. In1748, he obtained the degree of D. D.from the universities of Edinburgh andGlasgow; and about the same periodbecame a fellow of the Royal and AntiquarianSocieties.His next publication was a Treatiseon Subscription to Explanatory Articlesof Faith ; and, soon after the demiseof George the Second, he printed asermon, in which he compared thatmonarch to King David. This productionwas severely ridiculed by PeterAnne, a deistical writer, in a piece,entitled, A History of the Man afterGod's own heart; to which, Chandlerreplied, with considerable asperity, inA Review of the History, &c. Pursuingthe subject still further, he employedhimself, during his last years,in composing A Critical History of theLife of King David, in two volumes,which has been pronounced a valuablepiece of biblical criticism on the Psalms.SAMUEL CHANDLER.Four volumes of his sermons, and hisParaphrase and Notes on the Epistles ofSt. Paul to the Galatians, Ephesians,and Thessalonians, were published afterhis decease, which took place on the 8thof May, 1766.He possessed extraordinary influenceamong the dissenters, which, it is said,he occasionally made useful to government.As a preacher, he was particularlyattractive ; although his languageis described as having been inelegant,and his action ungraceful. It is related ofhim, that his doctrines varied accordingto the state of his health ; being mostevangelical when he was most indisposed.At one period of his life, onaccount of several attacks of fever,which threatened to terminate his literarypursuits, he had recourse to avegetable diet; but, after a period oftwelve years, his former complaintsbeing entirely removed, he returned toanimal food. He is described as havingbeen so devoted to study, that he frequentlyforgot or neglected his meals ;and intense application, at length,brought on him a severe malady, whichdeprived him of his ease, and warnedhim to prepare for a speedy terminationof his earthly career. In his latterdays, he frequently declared, " that, tosecure the divine felicity procured bythe Redeemer, was the principal andalmost the only thing which made lifedesirable ; and that, to attain this, hewould gladly die, submitting himselfentirely to God as to the time andmanner of death, whose will was mostrighteous and good, being persuadedthat all was well which ended well foreternity !"PHILIP DODDRIDGE.PHILIP DODDRIDGE, the twentiethchild of an oilman, in London,whose father had been ejected from therectory of Clipperton, by the act of uniformity,was born on the 26th of June,1702. For some hours after his birth,he exhibited no signs of life; and hisrelatives doubted the possibility of hissurviving the usual perils of infancy.His health continued to be so remarkablydelicate through life, that onevery recurrence of his birth-day, afterhe had arrived at years of discretion,he expressed his astonishment athaving been so long preserved. Hismother taught him some portion ofScripture history, before he could read,by means of the figured Dutch tileswhich ornamented the chimney of herapartment. He became an orphan atan early age, and his guardian baselydissipated the little fortune which hisfather had bequeathed him ; so that,while yet a mere boy, he found himselfutterly destitute. At this time hewas studying at a private school atSt. Alban's ; and, fortunately, his applicationand pious deportment hadattracted the notice of Dr. Clarke,a dissenting minister of that place,who kindly charged himself with theconduct and expense of his furthereducation.In 1716, he began to keep a diary,in which he regularly accounted forevery hour of his time. It was his custom,at this period, although onlyfourteen years of age, to visit the poor,and discourse with them on religioussubjects, occasionally administering totheir necessities out of his own slenderallowance. In 1718, he went to residewith his sister, at Ongar, in Essex;and his uncle, who was steward to theDuke of Bedford, soon afterwards procuredhim the notice of some membersof that nobleman's family. The duchessliberally offered to support him at theuniversity, and to procure him prefermentin the church, if she shouldlive until he had taken orders ; butDoddridge felt compelled to declinethis kind proposal, on account of hisscruples as to the thirty-nine articles.In the attainment of his favouriteobject, that of becoming a dissentingpreacher, he met with serious obstacles." I waited," he says, " onDr. Edmund Calamy, to beg his adviceand assistance, that I might bebrought up a minister, which was alwaysmy great desire. He gave meDISSENTERS.no encouragement in it, but advised meto turn my thoughts to something else."He received this advice with greatconcern, but resolving " to follow Providence,and not to force it," he was, soonafterwards, about to embrace an advantageousopportunity of entering uponthe study of the law; but before comingto a final resolution on the subject, hedevoted one morning to earnest solicitationfor guidance from the Almighty ;and while thus engaged, a letter wasbrought to him from Dr. Clarke, inwhich his benefactor offered to advancehim to a pastoral office. Regarding thiscommunication, to use bis own words,"almost as an answer from heaven,"he hastened to St. Alban's ; whence,after passing some time with his generousfriend, he removed, in October,1719, to a dissenting academy, kept byMr. John Jennings, at Kibworth, andafterwards at Hinckley, in Leicestershire,where he pursued his studieswith extraordinary diligence and success; being not only ardent, but admirablymethodical in his pursuit ofknowledge. The notes which he madeon Homer, it is said, would be sufficientto fill a very large volume ; andhe enriched an interleaved copy of theBible with a vast quantity of extractsand observations, elucidatory of thetext, from the works of many eminentdivines. While thus occupied, he found,as he states, " that an hour spent everymorning in private prayer and meditation,gave nim spirit and vigour forthe business of the day, and kept histemper active, patient, and calm."Among his private papers, writtenabout this period, was a solemn pledgeto devote himself, his time, and hisabilities, to the service of religion,(which, it appears, he read over once aweek, to remind him of his duty,) anda set of rules for his general guidance.By these, he enforced upon himself thenecessity of rising early ; of returningsolemn thanks for the mercies of thenight, and imploring divine aid throughthe business of the day ; of divestinghis mind, while engaged in prayer,of every thing else, either externalor internal ; of reading the Scripturesdaily ; of never trifling with a bookwith which he had no business ; ofnever losing a minute of time, or incurringany unnecessary expense, sothat he might have the more to spendfor God ; of endeavouring to make himselfagreeable and useful, by tender,compassionate, and friendly deportment;of being very moderate at meals ;and of never delaying any thing, unlesshe could prove that another time wouldbe more fit than the present, or thatsome other more important duty requiredhis immediate attention.In July, 1722, being then in the twentiethyear of his age, he began his ministeriallabours as preacher to a smallcongregation at Kibworth, where hedescribes himself, in answer to a friend,who had condoled with him on beingalmost buried alive, as freely indulgingin those delightful studies which afavourable Providence had made thebusiness of his life. " One day," addedhe " passeth away after another, and Ionly know that it passeth pleasantlywith me."In 1727, he was chosen assistantpreacher at Market Marlborough, andreceived invitations to accept othermore important pastoral stations, which,however, he declined. In 1729, by thesolicitation of Dr. Watts, and others,but with some reluctance, he formed anestablishment for the education ofyoung men who were designed for theministry. The dissenters of Northamptonsoon afterwards earnestly solicitedhim to become their pastor; but herefused to quit his congregation, dreading,as he states, to engage in morebusiness than he was capable of performing; and, on a repetition of theirrequest, preached a sermon to themfrom the following text: "And whenhe would not be persuaded, we ceased,saying, the will of the Lord be done."(Acts xxi. 14.) On returning fromchapel, he passed through a room ofthe house where he lodged, in whicha child was reading to his mother.The only words I heard distinctly,"says Doddridge, " were these : ' Andas thy days, so shall thy strength be."Still I persisted in my refusal."His resolution was, however, atlength, overcome, and he removed toNorthampton on the 24th of December,1729. His ordination, with the usualceremonies, took place in March, 1730;and, in the following December, hemarried a lady named Maris. On thisoccasion, he drew up the following rulesPHILIP DODDRIDGE.for his conduct as a husband : " It shallbe my daily care to keep up the spiritof piety in my conversation with mywife ; to recommend her to the divineblessing ; to manifest an obliging, tenderdisposition, towards her ; and particularlyto avoid everything which has theappearance of pettishness, to which,amidst my various cares and labours,I may, in some unguarded moments,be liable."In the year of his ordination andmarriage, he published a treatise, entitled,Free Thoughts on the most probableMeans of Reviving the DissentingInterest, occasioned by the late Inquiryinto the Causes of its Decay ; in 1732,Sermons on the Education of Children;in 1735, Sermons to Young Men ;in 1736, Ten Sermons on the Powerand Grace of Christ, or, The Evidencesof His Glorious Gospel ; in 1739, thefirst volume of his Family Expositor,of which he produced a second in thefollowing year. In 1741, appeared hisPractical Discourses upon Regeneration; and, in the two following years,Three Letters to the Author of a Treatise,entitled, Christianity not foundedin Argument. In 1743, he publishedThe Principles of the Christian Religionexpressed in Plain and EasyVerse, divided into Lessons for theUse of Children and Youth ; in 1745,The Rise and Progress of Religion inthe Soul; in 1747, Remarkable Passagesin the Life of Colonel JamesGardiner ; in 1748, the third volume ofhis Family Expositor; and, also, TheExpository Works and other Remainsof Archbishop Leighton. His last production,published in his life-time, wasA Plain and Serious Address to theMaster of a Family, on the importantsubject of Family Religion.In December, 1750, while travellingto St. Alban's, for the purpose of preachinga funeral sermon on Dr. Clarke, hecaught a severe cold, from which he appearsto have suffered much throughoutthe winter. In the spring it was somewhatalleviated ; but it returned, withsuch alarming violence, in the course ofthe summer, that his physicians advisedhim, but without effect, to suspend hislaborious employments. He preachedhis last sermon in July, 1751; and, inthe following month, proceeded to Clifton,in the hope of restoring his health,by means of the Hot-well waters. Hismalady increasing, he was advised tomake a voyage to Lisbon, but, on accountof his scanty means, he declinedto adopt the recommendation. A clergymanof the church of England, towhom he was almost a stranger, onbeing made acquainted with his distressingcircumstances, set on foot a subscriptionfor his relief, declaring, " Thatit would be an everlasting reproach tothe church, and the nation in general,if a man, who did so much honour toChristianity, and who might, if hisconscience had not prevented, haveobtained the highest ecclesiastical dignities,should, on account of his circumstances,be discouraged from taking astep on which his life depended." Anample sum was soon raised, andDoddridge hastened to Falmouth ; onreaching which, he appeared to be somuch worse, that his wife suggested thepropriety of his returning home, or remainingwhere he was ; but he replied,calmly, " The die is cast, and I chooseto go." He accordingly embarked, onthe 30th of September, and reachedLisbon on the 13th of the followingmonth : but no favourable change inhis health took place; and he becamesensible that the termination of hisearthly career was rapidly approaching.The serenity of his last moments wasinterrupted only by the regret whichhe felt at leaving his amiable and belovedwife a friendless widow in aforeign land. His death took placewithin a fortnight after he had landed,(on the 26th of October, 1751,) and hisremains were interred in the burialground of the British factory. Hiscongregation erected a monument tohis memory, at the meeting-house, inNorthampton, and liberally providedfor his wife and children.He left the manuscript in shorthand,but partly transcribed for thepress, of the last three volumes of hisFamily Expositor; which Orton, who,with some oR. his pupils, completedthe transcript, published in 1754 and1756. In 1763, appeared his Lectureson the Principal Subjects of Pneumatology,Ethics, and Divinity; of thesea new and improved edition wasprinted in 1794 ; and, recently, a largeand very interesting collection of hisletters has been presented to the public.DISSENTERS.In person, Doddridge was ratherabove the middle height ; and particularlyslender. The expression of hiscountenance was sprightly, and hisdeportment polite and engaging. Hisfamiliar discourse was always ag ree-able,and not unfrequently brilliant.Although a man of sincere piety, and astrict and dignified observer of his pastoralduties, he was particularly gay,and often facetious, among friends, orinthe bosom of his family. He took asmuch delight in innocent mirth as achild, and was by far the most livelyand amusing member of the circle inwhich he moved.In the pulpit, he is described as havingbeen a great master of the passions : hismanner was earnest ; and all that hesaid appeared to be the result of conviction.To strangers, his deliveryand gestures appeared artificially vehement; but those who were acquaintedwith the vivacity of his temper, consideredhis energy, as a preacher, perfectlynatural and unaffected. Forsome time, he prepared his discourseswith great care, but the multiplicity ofhis avocations at length compelled himto extemporize. While at Kibworth,his library was so small, that he borrowedreligious books from his congregation; and these, being, for the mostpart, practical works, led him, it is supposed,into that plain and useful stylewhich contributed so materially to hissubsequent success. He always evinceda laudable anxiety to be well understood.I fear," he remarks, on one occasion,that my discourse, to-day, was tooabstruse for my hearers, I resolve tolabour after greater plainness, and bringdownmy preaching to the understandingsof the weakest." He never descendedto personal invective in hissermons, and carefully avoided engagingin controversy. " Men of contraryparties," said he, " sit down moreattached to their own opinions, aftersuch encounters, than they were at thebeginning, and much more estrangedin their affections."No man could be more rigidlywatchful of his own conduct. His passionsappear to have been admirablycontrolled by his piety ; and his actionswere, generally, the consequencesof sober deliberation. Twice a year,he seriously reviewed what he haddone, and omitted to do, during thepreceding six months ; and formed resolutionsfor future improvement. Beforehe went on a visit, or set out on ajourney, he considered what opportunitieshe might have of doing good, sothat he might be prepared to embracethem ; and to what temptations hemight be exposed, that he might armhimself against them. Even his benevolencewas governed by previousconsideration. " I have this day," hesays, in one of his annual resolutions,in secret devotion, made a vow, that Iwould consecrate a tenth part of mywhole income to charitable uses, andan eighth part of the profit of my booksto occasional contributions." He notonly carried this resolution into effect,but renewed it for the ensuing year.Although poor, he never involved himselfin debt, and always had a trifle ofcash in hand, at the close of his annualaccounts.Early in life he had wisely resolvedto be an early riser, and thenceforth,unless severely indisposed, quitted hisbed, winter and summer, at five o'clock.I am generally employed," he observes," with very short intervals, frommorning to night, and have seldommore than six hours in bed ; yet, suchis the goodness of God to me, that Iseldom know what it is to be weary."In his Family Expositor, he attributesthe greater part of his productions tohis having invariably risen at five, insteadof seven o'clock ; a practice, which,if pursued for forty years, would, heobserves, add a fourth of that periodto a man's life.As a tutor, Doddridge was eminentlyjudicious ; as a father and a husband,most affectionate ; and, as a friend, sincereand amiable. His various works,especially the Family Expositor, and hisRise and Progress Religion in the Soul,have become so extensively popular,and obtained so much applause fromthe most eminent critics, that to eulogizethem would be sheer supererogation.For the latter production, hereceived the thanks of many eminentdivines ; and the Duchess of Somerset,in a letter to Doddridge, dated in 1750,observes, " I may, with truth, assureyou, that I never was so deeply affectedwith any thing I ever met with as withthat book, and I could not be easy tillJOHN WESLEY.I had given one to every servant inmy house." His Family Expositorhas been translated into almost everyEuropean language; and his sermonson The Evidences of Christianityhave long constituted one of the firstsubjects on which students are examinedat St. John's college, Cambridge.Simpson, in his Plea, declares, that, inhis opinion, no single work " is equalto the admirable course of lectures bythe excellent Dr. Doddridge ;" andDr. Kippis observes, that " he wasnot merely a great man, but one ofthe most Christian ministers that everexisted."JOHN WESLEY.JOHN WESLEY was born in June,1703, at Epworth, in Lincolnshire, ofwhich place his father was rector. Whileyet a mere child, the house in whichhis parents resided having been set onfire by incendiaries, he narrowly escapeddestruction. At a proper age, he wassent to the Charter house ; whence heremoved, in 1716, to Christchurch college,Oxford, where he soon renderedhimself so conspicuous, by his adroitnessin argument, as to incur the imputationof sophistry ; which, however,he indignantly repelled, observing, thatit had been his first care to see thathis cause was good, and never, eitherin jest or earnest, to espouse the wrongside of a question. " Shame on me,"added he, " if I cannot defend rightafter so much practice, and after havingbeen so early accustomed to separatetruth from falsehood, however artfullythey may be twisted together 1"At this period of his life he wascheerful, facetious, and attached topoetical composition ; in which he issaid to have displayed considerableskill. He also distinguished himself byhis classical attainments, and prosecutedhis studies in divinity with such zeal,as speedily to acquire a rich store oftheological learning. Law's SeriousCall, and Stanhope's Kempis, producedan extraordinary religious impressionon his mind; and Jeremy Taylor'sHoly Living and Dying, induced himinstantly, as he states, after havingperused it, to consecrate all his thoughts,words, and actions, to the service ofGod.After taking his first degree, he waselected, in 1724, fellow of Lincoln college.He now determined to chooseonly such acquaintance as he hadreason to believe would help him onhis way to heaven. " I narrowly observed,"he adds, " all who came tovisit me, and I feared the majorityneither loved nor feared God : I couldnot expect, therefore, that they woulddo me any good. When any suchcame, I behaved courteously; but, tothe question, ' When will you come tosee me?' I gave no answer. Theycame a few times ; but, when theyfound their visits unreturned, I sawthem no more." In 1725, he wasordained deacon, by Dr. Potter; and,in the following year, took his degreeof M. A. At this time, he receivedpupils ; and, in 1727, as it is stated inhis diary, which he commenced in thatyear, and continued for above half acentury, mapped out his time in the followingmanner: Mondays and Tuesdays,to be allotted to the classics ;Wednesdays, to logic and ethics ;Thursdays, to Hebrew and Arabic;Fridays, to metaphysics and naturalphilosophy; Saturdays, to oratory andpoetry, but chiefly to compositions inthose arts; and every Sabbath to divinity.He also devoted some attentionto the study of mathematics ; inallusion to which, however, he says, inaletter to his mother, " I think, withyou, that there are many truths it isnot worth while to know. Curiositymight be a plea for spending some timeupon them, if we had half-a-dozencenturies of lives to come ; but it isill husbandry to spend much of thesmall pittance now allowed us, in whatmakes us neither a quick nor a surereturn."His religious enthusiasm graduallyincreased, and, in 1728, he travelledmany miles to converse with " a seriousDISSENTERS.man," who completely destroyed hisgrowing inclination to abandon the societyof men, in order that he mightlive for God alone, by telling him that,as the Bible said nothing of solitaryreligion, if he wished to go to heaven,he must find companions or makethem." In consequence of this admonition,perhaps, Wesley soon afterwardsjoined a small religious society ;the members of which, among whomwas his brother Charles, occasionallymet for mutual improvement, andreceived the sacrament every week.They were, at first, called ; afterwards, Bible Moths, or theHoly Club; and, eventually, in allusionto a sect of ancient physicians,who," says Evans, " practised medicine,by method or regular rules, in oppositionto quackery or empiricism,"Methodists. At first, they read divinityonly on Sunday nights ; but theologicalpursuits and religious duties soon becametheir sole business. They fastedevery Wednesday and Friday ; visitedthe prisons and hospitals ; and theirdiscipline, it is said, was almost equalin rigour to that of the monks of LaTrappe.Wesley, who soon became leader ofthe association, frequently visited theenthusiastic author of the Serious Call :his journies to and from London, whereLaw resided, he always performed onfoot ; and he devoted the amount, whichhe thus saved, to the relief of the poor.He wore his hair long and flowing, inorder that, by avoiding the expense ofhaving it cut and dressed, he mighthave more money for charitable purposes.At length, by the persuasion ofhis mother, who feared that its excessivelength might injure his health,he, occasionally, shortened it himself.Hard study, scanty fare, frequent fasting,and long journies on foot, soweakened his constitution, that, onenight, he was suddenly startled fromhis slumbers, by the bursting of a bloodvessel. Believing himself, as he statesin his diary, to be on the brink ofeternity, he exclaimed, " Oh, God !prepare me for thy coming, and comewhen thought!" Medical assistancewas, however, soon procured ; and, inashort time, he recovered.About this period, his father, who wasnow advanced in years, expressed amost earnest wish that he should succeedhim in the rectory of Epworth :Wesley, however, in 1734, after muchdeliberation, positively declined makingany efforts to procure the next presentation; declaring that, if it wereoffered to him, he should certainlyreject it. Another divine being soonafterwards mentioned as his probablesuccessor in the rectory, old Wesleythus pathetically wrote to his son onthe subject : " The prospect of thatmighty Nimrod's coming hither shocksmy soul, and is in a fair way of bringingdown my grey hairs with sorrow tothe grave. If you have any care forour family, which must be miserablyshattered when I am dropped ; if youreflect on the dear love and longingof this poor people for you, wherebyyou would be enabled to do God moreservice ; and the plenteousness of theharvest, consisting of nearly two thousandsouls, whereas you have not manymore scholars in the university ; youmay, perhaps, alter your will, and bendyour mind to Him who has promised,if, in all our ways we acknowledgeHim, He will direct our paths."Wesley, however, persisted in hisrefusal; and when his brother Samuelrepeated his father's statement, that atEpworth he would have the charge oftwo thousand souls, he replied, " I seenot how any man living can take careof a hundred." He added, that it wasnecessary for his salvation to remainat Oxford ; and although his societyhad dwindled to five members, it hasbeen said that he wished to purify afountain rather than a stream, and toestablish a system that might graduallyimprove the most distant parts of theempire. All the world, as he now believed,was his parish ; and the firststranger he met, " his father, andsister, and mother."His biographer, Hampson, censureshis conduct on this occasion; and insiststhat the injunctions of a venerableparent, the welfare of a numerous anddependent family, and the unanimousconcurrence of the congregation, wereconsiderations of such moment as toleave no difficulty in supposing thattheir voice was the voice of God.On a review of his objections," continuesHampson, " we cannot helpthinking, that several of these wereJOHN WESLEY.frivolous and imaginary ; and that hisreligion had in it too much bustle andbusiness, with too deep a tincture ofausterity."His father soon afterwards died ;and, in 1735, during which year thecelebrated Whitfield joined his society,Wesley was solicited to go out, withGeneral Oglethorpe, to Georgia, for thepurpose of preaching the Gospel amongthe settlers and Indians. After somehesitation, he consented to embark,provided his mother's assent could beobtained, which, he said, should be tohim as the call of God. Her answer,when applied to on the subject, was asfollows: " Had I twenty sons, I shouldrejoice that they were all so employed,though I should never see them more."He accordingly sailed for the newcolony, on the 14th of October, in thesame year, with his brother Charles,two other missionaries, and a smallparty of Moravians. During the voyage,under an impression that self-denialwould be helpful to his soul, he ceasedto eat suppers, to make use of eitheranimal food or wine, or to sleep on abed. He also determined on advisinghis brother Samuel " to banish all suchpoison as the classics from his school,and introduce Christian authors."Rising regularly at four o'clock, heprayed in private until five, and devotedthe next two hours to a carefulperusal of the Scriptures. He breakfastedat seven, engaged in public devotionat eight, studied from nine tilltwelve, dined at one, and afterwardsread to, or exhorted, his disciples untilfour, when he performed another act ofdevotion. After employing an hour inreading to some of the passengers, hejoined the Moravians in their publicservice, at seven ; and, between nineand ten, retired to rest.The ship in which he had embarkedreached the Savannah river on the 5thof February, 1736, and the next morninghe landed. For some time, hislabours, as a preacher, promised to besuccessful ; but he soon rendered himselfoffensive to the colonists, by hissevere and injudicious conduct. Hebitterly satirized individuals from thepulpit ; and, although he departed fromthe church discipline in many points,he tenaciously adhered to it in others.He would riot administer the sacramentto, or read the burial service over,dissenters ; nor would he accept anybut communicants as sponsors in therite of baptism, which he insisted onperforming by immersion. His asceticspractices, and numerous eccentricities,created some doubts as to thesolidity of his judgment. On one occasion,he walked, barefooted, into aschool which he had established, forthe purpose of countenancing some ofthe pupils, who, not being able to procureshoes and stockings, had beentreated with contempt by their morefortunate companions.Oglethorpe, the governor of the colony,entertaining an opinion, that matrimonymight, in some degree, subduehis enthusiasm, and, consequently,render him more useful, formed a projectof engaging his affections in favourof a young lady, named Sophia Custom,daughter of the store-keeper atSavannah. Her person was agreeable,her manners polished, and her mindcultivated. She appears to have entertainedsome inclination towards Wesley,and played her part with consummateskill. On her first introduction to him,he was informed, that, having severelyfelt the anguish of a wounded spirit,she had become a sincere inquirer afterthe way to eternal life. She took everypossible opportunity of being in hiscompany ; and, with a view to increasetheir intimacy, prevailed on him toassist her in acquiring a knowledge ofFrench. At this time, Oglethorpehaving told him that some of the colonistssupposed, that he considered theuse of wine and animal food to be unlawful,to convince them, by Oglethorpe'sdesire, that such was not the fact, hepartook of both. A fever is said tohave been the consequence, which confinedhim for several days ; duringwhich, notwithstanding his reluctance,Miss Custom attended on him nightand day. At the suggestion of thegovernor, who was well acquaintedwith Wesley's approbation of simplicityin attire, she always dressed in white.Melmotte, one of his companions, perceivingthat, on his recovery, he entertainedher with more than ordinarycomplacency, warmly expostulated withhim on the subject, and endeavouredto convince him of her art, and hissimplicity. Under an impression thatMiss ENTERS.his friend was prejudiced against her,he consulted Bishop Nitschman as towhat course he ought, under the circumstances,to adopt. " Marriage,"replied the bishop, " you know, is notunlawful : but whether it is now expedientfor you, and whether this ladyis a proper wife for you, ought to bematurely weighed." His perplexitybeing increased by this answer, he proposedhis doubts to the elders of theMoravian church, and pledged himselfto abide by their decision. " We adviseyou," said they, " to proceed nofurther in the business." " The willof the Lord be done!" exclaimedWesley ; and, from that time, he politelydeclined receiving Miss Custom'svisits.Shortly afterwards, the contemptiblehypocrisy of this young woman wasfully exposed to him, by one of herfemale confederates ; and he appearsto have harboured a feeling of deep resentmentagainst her : for, after she hadbecome the wife of a Mr. Williamson,nephew to the chief magistrate at Savannah,he publicly reprehended her,for something in her behaviour, ofwhich he disapproved," and stated hisdetermination of repelling her from thecommunion, until she should have openlydeclared her sincere repentance. Thisproceeding exasperated those whom hehad previously disgusted : legal proceedingswere instituted against him,which he met with his characteristicintrepidity. Having intimated his intentionof embarking for England, bailwas demanded for his re-appearance,which, however, he refused to give ;observing, to his opponents, " Youknow your business, and I know mine."He sailed from Savannah, on the 2ndof December, 1737, having resided inthe colony about a year and ninemonths ; during which, he had effectedbut little good, notwithstanding hiszeal, and almost incredible exertions,especially when preaching among theIndians, whom he was compelled toaddress by means of an interpreter.He exposed himself," according toHampson, " with the utmost indifference,to every change of season andinclemency of weather: snow and hailstormand tempest, had no effect onhis iron body ; he frequently laid downon the ground, and slept all night withhis hair frozen to the earth ; he wouldswim over rivers with his clothes on,and travel till they were dry ; and allthis without any apparent injury to hishealth. He seems to have also possessedgreat presence of mind and intrepidityin danger. Going from Savannahto Frederica, the pettiawga, inwhich he was, came to an anchor. Hewrapped himself up in a cloak, andwent to sleep upon deck ; but, in thecourse of the night, he rolled out ofhis cloak, and fell into the sea, so fastasleep, that he did not perceive wherehe was till his mouth was full of water.He then swam round to a boat, andgot out."On his arrival at Deal, in May, 1738,he found that Whitfield was about toembark for Georgia. Doubting thepropriety of his friend's voyage, Wesleyadopted the Moravian practice, to whichhe frequently had recourse on subsequentoccasions, of referring, for guidance,to a species of lottery, in which,as he believed, Divine Providence wouldallow him to select the negative oraffirmative to his question, as mightbe most expedient In this case, hedrew an express direction for Whitfieldnot to embark, which he immediatelysent to his friend, in a note, to thefollowing effect: " When I saw thatyou were about to be carried out, bythe same wind that was bringing mein,I asked counsel of God His answerI inclose."Whitfield, however, sailed for thenew colony, and Wesley proceeded toLondon, where he delivered many discourses;but, it is stated, his doctrineof" saving faith" was so unfashionable,that he could not obtain permission topreach twice in the same pulpit. Atthis time, his spiritual guide wasBother, the Moravian; of whom, undera sincere impression of his own unworthiness,he inquired, if he oughtnot to abandon the ministry. "Byno means," replied Bother ; " preachfaith until you have it ; and then, becauseyou have it, you will continueto preach it." His religious enthusiasmincreasing, he, at length, lookedupon laughter as a crime ; and felt convinced,that it was his duty to exhortevery one he met to repent. Omittingto do so, on a certain occasion, whileon a journey to Birmingham, he wasJOHN WESLEY.reproved, as he states, for his negligence,by a violent storm of hail.Up to this time, he had felt no assuranceof salvation. Instantaneousconversion is one of the fundamentaltenets of his sect ; and he dates his ownat about a quarter before nine o'clockon Sunday, the 24th of May, 1738,when he was attending a lecture ofLuther's Preface to St. Paul's Epistleto the Romans, at a society in Alders-gatestreet " I felt," says he, " thatI did trust in Christ, Christ alone, forsalvation : and an assurance was givenme, that He had taken away my sins,even mine, and saved me from the lawof sin and death."His transports of faith, occasioned bythis circumstance, were succeeded bydoubts and misgivings ; to remove which,he visited the Moravians at Hernhuth,in Upper Lusatia, where he became apupil to the celebrated Count Zinzendorf,who, one day, ordered him to goand dig in the garden. Simplicity andtractability being expressly insisted onby the Moravians, Wesley obeyed ; and,when working in his shirt, and in ahigh perspiration, he stepped into acarriage, pursuant to the directions ofhis master, without washing his hands,or putting on his coat, for the purposeof visiting a German of quality:Zinzendorf's observation that he mustbe simple, being esteemed by Wesley,as Hampson states, a full answer to hisremonstrances. On his return to England,he was again assailed by alarmingdoubts ; but, practising bibliomancy,he derived great consolation from thepassages on which he happened to fix,and became confirmed in his opinionsas to the doctrine of faith, by the conductof certain criminals, whom he andhis brother Charles prayed with, andaccompanied from the Old Bailey toTyburn ; and who died, it is said,screaming hymns of joy and assurance.Whitfield returned from Georgia in1739; and, the churches being .closedagainst him, he soon afterwards commencedfield-preaching, in the neighbourhoodof Bristol ; whither, on hisinvitation, Wesley now proceeded ; and,on the day after his friend's departurefrom that city, for the first time, delivereda discourse in the open air.I could scarcely reconcile myself," heobserves, " at first, to this strange way ;having been so tenacious of decency,that I should have thought the savingof souls a sin, almost, if it had not beendone in a church."The wonderful enthusiasm withwhich he was heard, by vast audiences,soon banished his scruples ;and he continued to preach with suchfervour, and extraordinary effect, thatmany persons, among the crowd,which he addressed, were thrown intoconvulsions ; while others cried outaloud, as he states, with the utmostvehemence, even as if in the agonies ofdeath : one, and another, and another,sunk to the earth ; they dropped onevery side, as if thunderstruck ; but heceased not calling upon God, until theirdespair was turned into gladness, andthey were raised up full of peace andjoy in the Holy Ghost.Sometimes he could scarcely makehimself heard, on account of the groansand ravings of his followers ; several ofwhom, at length, imagined that theywere troubled by evil spirits; andWesley, who, at this time, believed indemoniacal possession, laboured withintense zeal, " in expelling Satan fromhis strongholds." On the 12th of May,in the same year, (1739) the first stoneof a meeting-house, for his hearers,was laid, as he states, with the voice ofpraise and thanksgiving. Difficulties,however, soon occurred in the prosecutionof the work, which inducedWesley to assume the entire conductand responsibility of the undertaking,although, as he states, he was destitute offunds, and had no prospect of procuringany. He involved himself considerablyin debt by this bold step, but succeededin completing the erection; and thuslaid the foundation of that unlimitedcontrol, which, later in life, he exercisedover the chapels built by his followers.After labouring for some time atBristol, he revisited the metropolis,where he preached, at first, in the openair, but, eventually, at a large buildingcalled The Foundry, in Cornfields.Entertaining, about this time, seriousdoubts as to the doctrine of the Moravianss,that there were no degrees infaith, he had recourse to bibliomancyfor direction, and opened upon a passagein the New Testament, whichinduced him immediately to separateDISSENTERS.from that celebrated sect. Shortly afterwards,a difference occurred betweenWhitfield and Wesley, who had hithertoruled the methodists in conjunction.The former," says Hampson, " wasan advocate for particular, the latterfor universal redemption ; the one, astaunch predestination, the other asresolute an Arminian; and such was theeffect of this distinction, that they resolved,finally, to separate ; their convertsmutually dividing under theirrespective leaders." It has been saidof them, that " the one could not bearan equal, nor the other a superior ;" andHampson suggests, that the contentionbetween them might have been asmuch promoted by the charms of power,as by the love of truth.Wesley now found himself at thehead of an immense body of devotedfollowers, whom he proceeded to organizewith admirable skill. Havingfailed, it is said, in an attempt to procurethe co-operation of clergymen, hehad recourse to the expedient of appointinga number of lay-preachers,whom he despatched, as itinerants, topropagate his doctrines, and increasehis influence, among the inhabitants ofLincolnshire, Staffordshire, Cornwall,and other parts of the kingdom. Numerouschapels were speedily erectedby his converts, to which he obtainedthe right of nominating ministers ; and,at length, secured the whole of thatauthority, among his connexion, tohimself, which, since his decease, hasbeen exercised by The Conference.Numberless difficulties occurred inthe progress of his labours. At Newcastle,he could not procure ground forthe erection of a chapel, " either for loveor money." " I like this well," heremarks, in a letter on this occasion ;it is a good sign. If the devil canhinder us, he shall." His followerswere persecuted ; and not only washe exposed to ridicule and insult, buthis life, on more than one occasion,was placed in jeopardy. In 1742, heoffered to assist the curate of Epworth,where his father had, during a greatnumber of years, officiated, either inpreaching or praying; but his propositionwas indignantly rejected. Afterlistening calmly to a most severe censureon his conduct, from the pulpit,he directed a person, who was withhim, to inform the congregation, thathe would hold forth at six o'clock, onthe same evening, in the church-yard.Accordingly," he says, " at six Icame, and found such a congregationas, I believe, Epworth never saw before.I stood near the east end of the church,upon my father's tomb-stone, and cried,The kingdom of heaven is not meatand drink, but righteousness and peace,and joy in the Holy Ghost.' "A mob of Cornishmen, on one occasion,having surrounded his lodgings,and uttered many horrible threatsagainst his person, he boldly appeared,bareheaded, among them, saying, " HereI am ! Which of you has any thing tosay to me ? To which of you have Idone any wrong? To you or youor you?" The populace, it is stated,were so charmed by his conduct, thatno man laid hands on him.The popular ferment against him wasnot unfrequently excited by persons inasuperior station. On one occasion,while preaching in a private room atBath, Beau Nash entered, and asked bywhat authority he was acting. " By thatof Jesus Christ," replied Wesley, " conveyedby the present Archbishop ofCanterbury." Nash, in rejoinder, insistedthat he was not only violating thelaws, but frightening people out of theirwits. " Sir," said Wesley, " did youever hear me preach ?" " No," repliedNash. " How, then, can you judge ofwhat you never heard?" " By commonreport." " I dare not judge ofyou by common report." The dialogueproceeded but little further, for Nash,as it is stated, finding that his dictatorialstyle had no effect on the intrepiddivine, was soon glad to withdraw.The tumults occasioned by his preachingwere, according to the CriticalReviewers of 1791, as well as Wesley'sbiographers, countenanced by the provincialmagistrates ; and must haveterminated in the ferocious exterminationof the whole sect, but for theinterference of Sir John Hanson, a Middlesexmagistrate. This gentleman, asHampson states, " waited on Mr.Wesley, in the name of his brethren,with information that they had ordersfrom above to do justice to him and tohis friends, whenever they should apply;his majesty being determined,that no man in his dominions should beJOHN WESLEY.persecuted for conscience' sake." Afterthis assurance of protection, Wesley andhis friends opposed, with great resolution,the various attempts of their adversaries; to whose persecution, perhaps,as much as to their own zeal,they owed the security which theyeventually obtained ; and, at length,Wesley, who appears to have beenenamoured of authority, and charmedwith his success, felt persuaded that hewas one of the happiest and most importantmen in the world.Although the ministers in his connexionwere extensively diffusing hisdoctrines, he laboured with great zealas an itinerant himself. He travelled onhorseback, usually with a lay preacheras a companion ; and such was theextent of his journies, that, it is said,he paid more tolls than any man in thekingdom. " Many a rough journey," heobserves, speaking of one of his progresses," have I had before, but one likethis I never had, between wind andhail, and rain, and ice, and snow, anddriving sleet, and piercing cold." Oneday, while travelling in Cornwall, hepulled up his horse, at a bramble bush,and began to eat its fruit. " BrotherNelson," said he to his companion,we ought to be thankful that there areplenty of blackberries ; for this is thebest county I ever saw for getting anappetite, but the worst for getting food.Do the people think we can live bypreaching?" " For a long time," saysNelson, speaking of one of their itineranttours, " Mr. Wesley and I layon the floor : he had my great coat forhis pillow, and I had a book for mine.One morning, about three o'clock, Mr.Wesley turned over, and finding meawake, clapped me on the side, saying,Brother Nelson, let us be of goodcheer ; I have one whole side yet ; forthe skin is off but on one side.' "He found, however, an ample remunerationfor his privations and perils,by the augmentation of his power, andthe extraordinary effect of his preaching.Frequently, when he had concludedhis discourse, the whole of hiscongregation appeared to be rivetted tothe ground, and not a person moveduntil he retired. On one occasion, along wall, built of loose stones, onwhich many of his hearers were seated,suddenly fell down, without producingany interruption of his own discourse,or the attention of his audience. Noneof those who had fallen, he observes,screamed ; and, none of them being hurt,they appeared sitting at the bottom,just as they had sate at top.In August, 1744, he preached, forthe last time, before the university ofOxford, to which he gave offence, bythe imputation of "a crime of no commonsize." This, probably, was adeviation from what he deemed theGospel doctrine of faith and regeneration.In 1747, he went to Ireland,where a society in his connexion hadalready been established; and so successfulwere his labours, and those of hisfollowers in that kingdom, that duringhis life-time, twenty-nine circles wereformed there, which employed sixty-sevenitinerants, and a considerablenumber of local preachers. In 1748,he instituted a school at Kingswood,for the instruction of the colliers' children; with a chapel adjoining, " which,"says Hampson, " his brother Samuelwished him to have consecrated, andsubject to episcopal jurisdiction ; buthere, as usual, they differed, and, withallhis reverence for lawn sleeves, hechose rather to be the bishop himself."In 1751, he made a tour in Scotland,where he succeeded so far as to establishsocieties of his sect at Edinburgh,Glasgow, Aberdeen, Dundee, Inverness,and some other places. Duringthe same year, he married a widow,of good fortune, named Vieille, althoughhe had, previously, been sostrenuous an advocate for celibacy, that,to use the words of one of his biographers," many young women in hisconnexion took it into their heads thatthey were sacred devoted things, andnot to be profaned by approximationto the other sex." He had eventhreatened some of his preachers withexpulsion for contracting matrimonialengagements ; and his union with Mrs.Vieille excited such surprise, that hisfollowers asked what could possiblyhave induced him to marry. " Reasonsbest known to myself," was his bluntreply.It had been agreed between Wesleyand the object of his choice, that heshould not preach one sermon, or travelone mile the less, on account of theirmarriage. She accompanied him, forDISSENTERS.some time, in his progresses ; but, atlength, growing weary of such an unsettledcourse of life, " she would fainhave confined him," as his biographers,Coke and Moore, state, " to a moredomestic life ; and having found, byexperience, that this was impossible,she unhappily gave way to jealousy.This entirely spoiled her temper, anddrove her to many outrages." Shescrupled not even to lay violent handson him ; having, it is said, repeatedlytorn his hair. Wesley remonstratedwith her, but without effect. In onepart of his correspondence with her,occurs the following passage : " Knowme, and know yourself. Suspect me nomore ; asperse me no more ; do notany longer contend for mastery, forpower, money, or praise. Be contentto be a private, insignificant person,known and beloved by God and me."Of what importance," he asks her, inanother place, " is your character tomankind? If you were buried justnow, or if you had never been born,what loss would it be to the cause ofGod 1" She frequently travelled agreat distance, in order to ascertain, bywatching him from a window on hisentrance into a town, what persons accompaniedhim ; and " repeatedly," asCoke and Moore state, "left his house,but was brought back by his earnestimportunities. At last, she seized onpart of his journals, and many otherpapers, which she would never afterwardsrestore ; and, taking her finaldeparture, left word that she neverintended to return." Wesley observed,on this occasion, " Non earn reliquiae ;non dimisi ; non revocabo : I havenot left her j I have not put her away ;I will not call her back!Some time afterwards, Wesleythought he could increase his utility bythe practice of physic. He, accordingly,dispensed medicines gratuitously ;and published a book of recipes, inwhich a daily application of lunar causticis prescribed for films in the eyes ;toasted cheese for a cut; quicksilver,ounce by ounce, to the amount ofseveral pounds, for a twisting in the intestines; a plaster of brimstone and eggshells,spread on brown paper, for consumption; and the cold bain for agues.When the American colonies declaredtheir independence of the mothercountry, the Bishop of London refusingto ordain some missionaries, recommendedby Wesley, who proposed todisseminate the Gospel in the revoltedprovinces, the latter thought proper totake upon himself the office of consecration.A controversy on his illegalassumption of episcopal powers ensued ;in the course of which he pronouncedhimself, in the Arminian Magazine, tobe " as true and as scriptural a bishopas any in England or Europe." Butsome time before his death, he repentedof the authority which he had thususurped, "and did all in his power,"it is said, " to counteract what he tooplainly perceived an increasing tendencytowards a final separation from thechurch. He, also, long before the closeof his career, forgot the austerity of hisearly principles, and entered with a goodgrace into all the cheerfulness of innocentmirth. " When, fifty years ago,"said he, in a letter to one of his friends,my brother Charles and I, in our simplicity,told the good people of England,that unless they knew their sins wereforgiven, they were under the curse ofGod, I marvel they did not stone us !The methodists, I hope, know betternow; we preach assurance, as a commonprivilege of the children of God ;but we do not enforce it, under the painof damnation, denounced on all whoenjoy it not." At length he became soliberal in his creed, as to admit that thewise and virtuous pagans might be heirsof salvation ; and that Marcus Antoninuswas more likely to be acceptable toGod, than many nominal Christians.But to some of his early opinions hecontinued steadfast through life. Hewas firmly convinced, to the last, of thespecial interference of Providence onthe least important occasions. At onetime, while preaching at Durham, thesun shone in such a manner as toincommode him : " I paused a little,"he says, " and desired God would provideme a covering if it was for hisglory. In a moment it was done ; acloud covered the sun, which troubledme no more." Any impediment thatoccurred to him during his journies, heascribed to the immediate agency ofSatan. " The old murderer," he observes,is restrained from hurting me, but hehas power over my horses."So excellent was his constitution, andJOHN WESLEY.so favourable were his habits to health,that he had reached his sixty-ninthyear before he could be prevailed ontoride in a carriage. He had previouslytravelled, on horseback, upwards of ahundred thousand miles ; for the mostpart with the reins on his horse's neck,and reading works of history, poetry,and philosophy ; having, as he said, otheremployment at other times. At Kings-wood,he preached under the shade oftrees which he had planted ; and, in hisseventieth year, he addressed more thanthirty thousand persons, at Gwenap,by all of whom he was distinctly heard.When seventy-two, his eyes were morepowerful, and his nerves firmer, thanthey had been thirty years before :The cause," he says, in his journal,is God's pleasure. The chief means,my constantly rising at four, for aboutfifty years ; my generally preaching atfive in the morning, one of the healthiestexercises in the world; my nevertravelling less than four thousand fivehundred miles in a year ; the ability,if I want sleep, to sleep immediately ;the never losing a night's sleep in mylife. Two violent fevers, and two deepconsumptions ; these, it is true, wererough medicines, but of admirableservice."In his seventy-eighth year, he wrotethus: " By the blessing of God, I amjust the same as when I was in mytwenty-eighth; in 1769, I weighed ahundred and twenty-two pounds; in1781, I weigh not a pound more orless." When eighty, he declared thathe was no more infirm, than duringthe vigour of manhood. Four yearsafterwards, he says, " I am not so agileas I was ; I neither run nor walk sofast as I did; my sight is a little impaired; 1 find also some decay in mymemory ; yet I feel nothing like weariness,either in travelling or preaching."On his eighty-sixth birth-day, he observes," I am now an old man :" and,in 1790, he says, " I am decayed fromhead to foot. However, blessed be God !I do not slack in my labours ; I canpreach and write still."About the middle of the same year,he finally closed his cash book with thefollowing remark, written so unsteadilyas to be almost illegible : " For upwardsof eighty-six years I have kept my accountsexactly : I will not attempt itany longer, being satisfied with thecontinual conviction, that I save all Ican, and give all I can, that is, all Ihave." In a letter, which he wroteto his friends in America, early in 1791,he expressed his conviction, in the languageof his father, when under similarcircumstances, that his end was approaching: " Time," said he, " hasshaken me by the hand, and Death isnot far behind." He shortly afterwardspreached his last sermon, and died onthe 2nd of March, in the same year.He had said, during his illness, " Letme be buried in nothing but what iswoollen ; and let my corpse be carriedin my coffin, into the chapel withoutany pomp." Notwithstanding this request,on the day before its interment,his body was absurdly exhibited, at hischapel in the City road, clad in hisgown, cassock, band, and clerical cap,and having a Bible in one hand anda white handkerchief in the other !Of his personal appearance, Hampsonhas given the following accurate description: " His face, for an old man,was one of the finest we have seen. Aclear, smooth forehead, an aquiline nose,an eye, the brightest and the mostpiercing that can be conceived, and afreshness of complexion, scarcely everto be found at his years, and impressiveof the most perfect health, conspired torender him a venerable and most interestingfigure." The multiplicity ofaffairs which he directed, the persecutionsto which he was exposed, andthe numberless troubles which lie encountered,had no effect either upon hisspirits or health. Ten thousand cares,as he said, were no more oppressive tohis mind than so many hairs to his head.His manners were lively, pleasant, andpolite. He spoke much in company ;and his conversation, even when helaboured under the infirmities of age,was, for the most part, so entertaining,that he seldom failed to diffuse hilarityamong those with whom he associated.His observations were acute, and hisstores of anecdote apparently inexhaustible.In his demeanour, as in hiscountenance, " there was a cheerfulnessmingled with gravity ; a sprightliness.which was the natural result of anunusual flow of spirits, and was yetaccompanied by every mark of the mostserene tranquility."DISSENTERS.In disposition, he was kind, placable,and affectionate. He practised a stricteconomy, not with any sordid motives,but for the purpose of administeringextensively to the wants of the poor.His integrity was unimpeachable ; andmoney would have been of no valuein his estimation, but, that it affordedhim the means of increasing his utility.He passed six months in Georgia withoutpossessing a single shilling; and whenasit has been surmised, from his ownaccount of a young man at Oxford, hisincome was thirty pounds per annum, hegave away two ; " next year, receivingsixty, he still lived on twenty-eight, andgave away thirty-two ; the third yearhe received ninety, and gave awaysixty-two ; the fourth year he receivedone hundred and twenty ; still he livedas before, on twenty-eight, and gaveaway ninety-two." In the plenitudeof his power, the commissioners of excise,supposing that he possessed plate,which, in order to avoid the duty, hehad not returned, wrote him a letter onthe subject. Wesley replied, " I havetwo silver spoons in London, and twoat Bristol: this is all the plate that Ihave at present, and I shall not buyany more while so many around mewant bread." Many persons, however,thought, (most erroneously,) that notwithstandingthe patriarchal simplicityof his habits, and his apparent carelessnessof money, he was secretly amassinggreat riches, and even addicted to sensualexcesses, in private. A womanonce brought him, as she said, a remonstrancefrom the Lord, for layingup treasures, taking his ease, and caringfor little but eating and drinking. " Godknows me better," said Wesley ; " andhad He sent you, it would have beenwith a more proper message."As a preacher, though not the mostelegant, sublime, or correct, he was certainlythe most successful of moderntimes. In 1790, the number of convertsto methodism, is stated to have beenupwards of one hundred and twentythousand, including three hundred andeighty itinerant, and nearly one thousandfour hundred local, preachers. Hisattitude in the pulpit is described ashaving been graceful and easy ; hisaction calm and natural, yet pleasingand expressive ; his voice not loud, butclear and manly ; his style neat, simple,perspicuous, and admirably adapted tothe capacity of his hearers. His worksamount to thirty two octavo volumes;but, as Evans properly remarks, manyof them were compilations which he consideredfavourable to the diffusion ofknowledge. His writings, except suchpassages as are obscured by the Germanmysticism which he imbibed from hisearly spiritual directors, the Moravians,are clear occasionally forcible, but rarelyelegant. He appears to have felt anexalted confidence in his own literarypowers : for he even offered to confutethe mighty Junius ; observing, " that hewould shew the difference between rhetoricand logic." In the latter, he mightpossibly have equalled, but, in theformer, he would have fallen immeasurablydistant from, his proposed antagonist.His services were wiselyrejected; for, it is certain, that theywould have been far from successful.Wesley, though great in the pulpit,preaching to an enthusiastic congregation,would have dwindled into contemptibleinsignificance, opposed to themasterly Junius, in the pages of thePublic Advertiser.He was the law-giver, as well as theapostle of Arminian Methodism. Withhim originated the simple but extensivescheme, by which his connexionstill continues to be so efficiently directed.He not only laid the foundation,but built the superstructure;exhibiting a great expanse of intellectin forming the grand outlines of hisplan, and singular adroitness in theexecution of its most minute details.With the exception of his astonishingzeal to produce extensive regeneration,the most striking feature in his characterwas a love of power. " He has,"says Hampson, " been often chargedwith this propensity, and the chargeis not yet refuted : we will say more ;we challenge any man to refute it."In commenting upon this observation,another writer remarks, that his stronginclination for authority, contributedmaterially to the establishment of hissect, which, had his temper been lessfirm, or his predilection for absolutesway been less intense, he could nothave ruled or kept together. It haseven been asserted, but upon questionableauthority, that so any did he displayhis prevailing passion, as, whenGEORGE WHITEFIELD.reproached for associating at school withboys much younger than himself, to havereplied, in the language of the poet,"Better to reign hell than serre in heaven!"His influence among his adherents wasso great, that it said, they imitated hisminutest actions to a degree of idolatry :when he left off tea, in 1742, they didthe same ; if he lived upon vegetables,and lay on boards, they followed hisexample ; some imitated his handwriting,and so exactly copied his styleand manner of speaking, that thedifference was almost imperceptible.Of the efficacy of his labours no doubtcan exist. He awakened, as it has beenjustly observed, the minds of manyhardened offenders, as much by thehopes he inspired, as by the punishmentshe denounced : he produced despair,which endured until it was followedby a conviction that the death ofChrist was an atonement for sin ; androused to a sense of morality, numbers,whose obscure state and want of education,rendered them invulnerable to the1 ordinary means of conviction.GEORGE WHITEFIELD.GEORGE WHITEFIELD, a nativeof Gloucester, and youngest son of thelandlord of the Bell, in that city, wasborn in December, 1714: his mother,who became a widow about two yearsafter, sent him, at a proper age, to theCrypt grammar-school, where he soonobtained notice, on account of hiseloquence; his talents for which, saysSouthey, that made him afterwards sogreat a performer in the pulpit, were,at this time, in some danger of receivinga theatrical direction. The master ofthe grammar-school not only encouragedhis pupils to perform plays,but composed a piece for them himself,in which Whitefield sustained oneof the female characters; a circumstancewhich he never rememberedwithout confusion.Before he was fifteen, he left school,at his own desire, and became a drawerin his mother's tap-room. He describeshimself to have been, at this time, sobrutish as to hate instruction ; and acknowledgesthat he often appropriatedto his own use, the money he took inthe house. He says, " If I trace myselffrom my cradle to my manhood, 1 cansee nothing in me but a fitness to bedamned." Yet he occasionally experiencedsome gleams of grace, whichsatisfied him that " God loved himwith an everlasting love ;" and abandoningromances, in which he had previouslydelighted, for such works asThomas aKempis,he not only gave someindications of his future piety, but evencomposed two or three religious discourses.His mother being compelled, bya decline in her circumstances, to makeover the inn to one of her elder sons,George remained in his service astapster, until some dispute with hissister-in-law induced him to quit hissituation ; when, though her means ofsubsistence were very limited, he wentto reside with his mother ; some ofwhose friends having soon afterwardspromised her their assistance in procuringhim a servitor's place at oneof the universities, he resumed hisstudies at the Crypt grammar-school ;where he applied himself with greatdiligence to his books, and, at the sametime, afforded a singular example ofpiety and self-denial to his young companions; it being his practice, at thistime, to fast often, to pray at leasttwice a day, to attend divine servicewith great regularity, and to receive thesacrament once in every month.At the age of eighteen, on the recommendationof his mother's friends,he was admitted a servitor at Pembrokecollege, Oxford, where, avoiding theproffered society of the profligate, heobtained an introduction to the littlefellowship established by Wesley anda few other pious young men ; who,from their living by rule and method,had acquired the name of Methodists.In common with his new associates,he regularly visited the prisoners andthe sick ; fasted on Wednesdays andFridays ; and, by a course of severeDissent Tears.religious discipline, incurred that ridicule,to which singularity, whether ingood or evil, is generally exposed. Hestates that, at this time, he was inthe habit of lying, whole days andnights, on the ground, in silent or vocalprayer; that he left off eating thefruits of the earth, and partook only ofthe worst sort of food ; that he deemedit unbecoming a penitent to have hishair powdered ; and wore woollengloves, a patched gown, and dirtyshoes, in order to acquire a proper degreeof humility. At length he feltpersuaded that he ought to secludehimself from society, until he shouldpossess the power of doing good withoutany corrupt motives : but the austeritiesto which he had subjected himself, havingalready impaired his health and depressedhis spirits, he was exhorted, bya medical friend, to seek relief from hisnative air. He accordingly retired toGloucester, where, having regained hisformer serenity and strength, he occupiedhimself in affording religiousconsolation to the prisoners in thecounty gaol, and the poor inhabitantsof the city.Dr. Benson, then Bishop of Gloucester,being made acquainted with histalents and piety, he was, though notyet of age, offered ordination by thatprelate, who consented to waive, in hisfavour, a resolution he had formed, ofadmitting no one, under the age oftwenty-three, to holy orders. Accordingly,in 1736, Whitefield was ordaineddeacon, and, on the following Sunday,preached to a large congregation at thechurch of St. Mary-le-Crypt, in hisnative place. " Some few," he observes,in one of his letters, " mocked ;but most, for the present, seemedstruck ; and I have since learned, thata complaint had been made to thebishop that I drove fifteen mad thefirst sermon. The worthy prelate, as Iam informed, coolly observed, that hewished that the madness might not beforgotten before next Sunday."On returning to Oxford, Whitefieldtook the degree of B. A., and was,soon after, invited to officiate at theTower chapel. He preached, for thefirst time in the metropolis, at Bishops-gatechurch, in August, 1736. As heascended the pulpit stairs, his youthfulappearance is said to have excitedcontempt, which, however, yielded torespect before the conclusion of his discourse.After having officiated forsome time at the chapels of the Towerand of Napping, as well as in theprison at Lydgate, and various otherplaces in the metropolis, he held a curacyat Summer, in Hampshire, wherehe divided every twenty-four hours intothree separate portions: one of whichhe devoted to sleep and meals ; anotherto public prayers, catechising, and visitinghis parishioners j and the third, tostudy and retirement.About this period, he appears tohave determined on joining John andCharles Wesley, in Georgia, whitherthey had proceeded for the purpose ofaffording religious instruction to thecolonists, and of preaching the Gospelamong the neighbouring Indians. Heaccordingly returned to London, inorder to prepare for his departure ;prior to which, he officiated in variouschurches, and obtained great popularityas a pulpit orator. At length, towardsthe close of 1737, against the earnestsolicitations of his friends, he embarkedfor Georgia, and arrived at Savannahin the following May. While abroad,although he suffered much from feverand ague, his labours were unceasing.Being less rigid than John Wesley, hisministry was much more acceptable tothe colonists, with whom he becameremarkably popular, although, on oneoccasion, he refused to read the burialservice over a deceased infidel, whomhe had in vain endeavoured to convert.At the latter end of 1738, Whitefieldreturned to England, principally forthe purpose of raising contributions tofound an orphan-house in the newcolony; the trustees of which, on hisarrival in London, presented him to theliving of Savannah. In 1739, he wasordained priest, by his old friend, BishopBenson, and preached in some of themetropolitan churches, to very crowdedcongregations. He, soon after, repairedto Bristol, where the pulpits beingclosed against him, he determined onpreaching in the open air, to the Kings-woodcolliers, who had been pointed outto him, by many of his friends, as beingequally in need of religious instructionas the Indian savages. The effect ofhis oratory was powerfully impressive;and he continued, for some time, toGEORGE WHITEFIELD.exercise the strongest influence overhis uncultivated hearers. " The firstdiscovery," he says, " of their beingaffected, was to see the white guttersmade by their tears, which plentifullyfell down their black cheeks as theycame out of the coal-pits."On quitting Bristol, where Wesleywent as his successor, he proceeded toSouth Wales ; and thence, preaching atvarious places during his progress,through the counties of Gloucester,Worcester, and Oxford, towards themetropolis. On the 27th of April, inthe same year, (1737), he was invited,by the Rev. Mr. Storehouse, to officiateat Islington ; but being forbidden toenter the pulpit, by one of the churchwardens,he delivered a discourse in thechurchyard, and so wonderfully affectedhis hearers, that, as he states, they couldhave gone singing of hymns to prison.On the following Sunday, he preachedin the morning " to an exceeding greatmultitude," in Moorfields ; and, in theevening, as it was supposed, to thirtythousand persons, on Kennington Common.On the 6th of May, he addresseda congregation of no less than fiftythousand individuals at the same place,among whom, as he states, an awfulsilence prevailed while he was deliveringhis discourse.After having preached at variousother places near London, and alsoat Northampton, Bedford, Gloucester,Evesham, Bath, and Bristol, he embarkeda second time for Georgia, wherehe immediately established his proposedorphan-house ; having collected 1,000for that purpose, principally from thecongregations he had addressed in theopen air. He obtained some importantadditions to the charitable fund, duringa tour through the colonies to Boston ;and, after having comfortably settled anumber of children in the new building,he returned to England about themiddle of March, 1741.Differences on doctrinal points, whicheventually produced their separation,now occurred between Wesley andWhitefield. The former reprobatedthe Calvinistic tenet of election, whichWhitefield warmly supported; and, atthe same time, endeavoured, but in vain,to make the latter a convert to his ownopinions as to perfection. " Bring meaman," said Whitefield, in reply toWesley's arguments oh this subject;Bring me a man who has really arrivedat sinless perfection, and I willpay his expenses, let him come fromwhence he will." A devout individualwas consequently selected from amongWesley's hearers, and introduced asaperfect man" to Whitefield, whoimmediately threw a bason of water inhis face. So unexpected a salute wasfollowed by a very angry remonstrancefrom the pious Wesleyan, to whichWhitefield replied that, " had he beenperfect, he would have known how tobear affronts with meekness."Whitefield was extremely anxious toavoid all controversy with Wesley, fearingthat disputes on particular pointswould weaken their common cause ;but, notwithstanding the efforts of theirfriends to reconcile them, they parted ;and thenceforth their followers formeddistinct sects. In consequence of thisunfortunate dispute, Whitefield's popularityas a minister suffered a mostserious diminution : the world was, atthe same time, angry with him forhaving published attacks on The WholeDuty of Man, and Archbishop Tillotson,in both of which, he afterwards protestedthat, although injudicious, hehad been decidedly sincere. His pecuniarycircumstances, had also becomegreatly embarassed, and, as it has beenobserved by the editor of a recentedition of his journal, it required all hiszeal and intrepidity to encounter thenumerous difficulties with which hefound himself surrounded.In July, 1741, he visited Scotland,where he was permitted to preach inthe churches, and received the freedomof Aberdeen by way of atonement forthe abuse which had been bestowed onhim, by one of the pastors of that place.From Scotland he proceeded to Wales ;where, in October, 1741, he married awidow lady, named James, betweenthirty and forty years of age, neitherrich or beautiful, who had once beengay, but was then, as he states, "a despisedfollower of the Lamb of God."From Abergavenny, he travelledthrough Bristol to London, where helaboured, with great courage and zeal,to pray down" the puppet-show men,who at that period, assembled in greatnumbers about Moorfields, during theWhitsun and Easter holidays. HisDissenter RS.antagonists did all in their power toimpede and annoy him, yet his successwas so great, that, it is said, he receiveda thousand letters from personslabouring under a conviction of sin,three hundred of whom became membersof his sect in one day. About thistime, his hearers erected for their accommodationa temporary shed, inMoorfields, on the spite of which theTabernacle was subsequently built,where Whitefield officiated for manyyears, with extraordinary success. InJune, 1742, he again went to Scotland ;and, early in 1743, visited Gloucester,whence he proceeded to South Wales,and returned to London in May.Having determined to embark oncemore for America, he repaired for thatpurpose to Portsmouth, where he was,in a cowardly manner, beaten in hisbed, by a lieutenant of a man-of-war.He set sail in the beginning of August,1744, and, soon after his arrival at NewYork, was attacked with so serious anillness, that, for some time, his life appearsto have been in danger. On recovering,he visited, in succession, Boston,Virginia, and, lastly, the Bermudas ;whence he embarked for England, inthe summer of 1748, and reached Londonon the 6th of July in that year.During his long absence, the congregationat the Tabernacle had nearlydispersed ; and his affairs had becomeso embarrassed, that he was compelledto dispose of his furniture, in order toliquidate the most pressing liabilitieswhich he had incurred for the support ofhis orphan-house. He now became chaplainto the Countess of Huntingdon ; atwhose house he preached before many Iof the gentry and nobility, among whomwere the Earl of Chesterfield and LordBolingbroke, who both complimentedhim very highly on his zeal and ability.About this time, a church dignitaryhaving, it is said, endeavoured to convinceGeorge the Second that somemeans should be adopted to check thesingular career of Whitefield, the kingreplied, " My lord, I can see no otherway than to make a bishop of him."In the course of the following autumn,he again visited Scotland, where asynod objected to his being allowed theuse of the churches, because he hadasserted, that without assurance therewas no faith, and had recommended aperfect reliance on immediate revelation.On his behalf, it was, however,insisted that his former enthusiasm,on those points, had so far abated, thathe now preached against a dependenceon impulses, and maintained that agodly life was the best proof of grace.About the time of his return fromScotland he appears to have evinced anardent desire to establish, in conjunctionwith his orphan-house, an academicalinstitution. In 1749, he preached togreat numbers of people, with his accustomedeffect, at various places in thewest and north of England. In 1751, hevisited Ireland, where, although he produceda great impression, his life was, onone occasion, endangered by a rabble,whose vengeance he had great difficultyin escaping. " I thought," he observes,"of Stephen, and was in great hopesthat, like him, I should be despatched,and go off, in this bloody triumph, tothe immediate presence of my Master."From Ireland he proceeded to Scotland; and, in the month of August setout on his return to London, whence,shortly afterwards, he embarked afourth time, for America, where he hadthe satisfaction of finding his orphan-housein a prosperous state. He cameback to England, in the spring of 1752;in the following year, he laid the foundationof a new Tabernacle, which wascompleted in 1754. In 1756, he openeda new chapel in Tottenham-court-road,and at the latter end of the same year,again visited America. In 1760, he wasridiculed by Foote, in the comedy calledThe Minor, a circumstance whichrather increased than diminished hispopularity. In the summer of 1763,he embarked, the sixth time, for America,where he was received with greataffection. In a letter from New York,dated June, 1764, he says, " it wouldsurprise you to see above one hundredcarriages at every sermon, in this newworld." Soon after leaving the last-namedplace he arrived once more inEngland.After having visited Holland, in thehope of restoring his health, whichiliad become seriously impaired by hisexertions, he embarked again forAmerica, in September, 1769, andreached Charleston, in South Carolina,in the following November. Althoughan asthmatic complaint had nearlyGEORGE WHITEFIELD.worn out his constitution, he perseveredin performing his accustomed labours.In September, 1770, he appears to haveofficiated, for some days, with his usualzeal, at Boston : on quitting that place,he proceeded towards Newbury, wherehe arrived on the evening of the 29th,after having preached, by the way, adiscourse of two hours' duration, in theopen air: during the night, he complainedof an awful oppression on hischest, and, about five o'clock the nextmorning he breathed his last.As a popular orator, Whitefield hasrarely been surpassed. According toSouthey, his eloquence was not inaptlycompared, by an ignorant man, to theroaring of a lion among those whoheard him making them tremble, likeFelix before the apostle Paul. By histerrific denunciations against sin, manyof his hearers were thrown into paroxysmsof such extraordinary violence,as to produce the most lamentableeffects on the minds and bodies of thesufferers. Retaining, through life, thedramatic talent he had displayed in hisyouth, his preaching is said to haveresembled " fine stage acting." Whenhe described St. Peter going forth, afterthe cock crew, to weep, he concludedby hiding his face in a fold of his garment.At the close of a sermon, hewould sometimes assume the characterof a judge about to pass sentence on acriminal. " I am now," he would say,"about to put on my condemning cap.Sinner, I must do it: it is my dutyto pronounce judgment upon you."Then, after giving a terrific descriptionof eternal punishments, he would add,in the words of our Saviour, " Departfrom me, ye wicked, into everlastingfire, prepared for the devil and hisangels !" At other times, he would depict,more vividly, it is said, than canbe imagined, the scene of the crucifixion." Look 1" he would exclaim,pointing while he spoke, as if the crosswere before him ;-look yonder! Itis our Lord in his agony ! Do you nothear him ? Hark ! ' Oh ! Father, if itbe possible, let this cup pass from me :nevertheless, not my will, but thine bedone.' " Hume, the historian, relatesthat he once heard Whitefield, aftera solemn pause, thus address his audience: " The attendant angel is justabout to leave the threshold, andascend to Heaven. And shall he notbear with him the news of one sinner,from among all this multitude, reclaimedfrom the error of his ways ?" Thehistorian adds : " To give the greatereffect to this exclamation, he stampedwith his foot, lifted up his hands andeyes to Heaven, and cried aloud, ' Stop,Gabriel ! Stop, Gabriel ! Stop, ere youenter the sacred portals, and yet carrywith yon the news of one sinner convertedtoGod !' This address was accompaniedwith such animated, yet naturalaction, that it surpassed any thing I eversaw or heard in any other preacher."His works, says Evans, in severaloctavo volumes, are made up of sermonsand letters, but it was not fromthe press, but the pulpit, that he shone ;and Franklin justly observes of him,that it would have been fortunate forhis reputation, if he had left nothing inprint ; as, in that case, his talents wouldhave been estimated by the effect whichthey are known to have produced. Hispublished discourses, were, perhaps,carefully composed, (although the factseems to be doubted,) but they hadnot the advantage of being frequentlypreached. It appears that he recitedhis sermons from memory, and that, byrepetition, they became greatly improved.Those parts which he foundby experience to be ineffective, weregradually rejected for new matter,originally introduced from the inspirationof the moment, while in the act ofpreaching, and which, if successful, heever afterwards retained. " The salientpoints of his oratory," says Southey,"were not prepared passages theywere bursts of passion, like jets from aGeyser when the spring is in full play."While thus attentive to the ameliorationof his discourses in matter, heseems to have materially profited byexperience, in his manner of preachingthem. " By hearing him often," saysFranklin, " I came to distinguish easilybetween sermons newly written, andthose which he had often preached inthe course of his travels. His deliveryof the latter was so improved by repetition,that every accent, every emphasis,every modulation of voice, was soperfectly well turned, and well placed,that, without being interested in thesubject, one could not help being pleasedwith the discourse, a pleasure of muchDISSENTERS.the same kind with that received froman excellent piece of music." Thesame author has recorded two singularproofs of the persuasive character ofWhitefield's eloquence. He went, oneJay, to hear the latter hold forth onsome charitable occasion, but with afirm resolution to contribute nothing tothe collection which was proposed to bemade after the sermon. " As Whitefieldproceeded," says Franklin, " he firstrivetted my attention ; then I put myhands in my pocket ; then I resolvedto give so much of my money ; anothereloquent appeal made me determinedto give more ; at last I emptied, intothe place for receiving the gifts of thebenevolent, the entire contents of mypurse, only with regret that the sum wasnot larger." Another equally remarkableinstance happened in England:A man, at Exeter, stood with stonesin his pocket, and one in his hand,ready to throw at Whitefield, as hecommenced preaching ; but he droppedit before the sermon was far advanced ;and, going up to him after the preachingwas over, he said, " Sir, I came to hearyou, with an intention to break yourhead ; but God, through your ministry,has given me a broken heart."On commencing his sermons, whetherin a church, or on a table in the openair, Whitefield's manner was solemnand anxious. Defying danger, andheedless of mockery, the torrent of hiseloquence was rarely interrupted. Henever hesitated in his discourses, exceptwhen his enthusiastic vehemencewas wrought to the highest pitch. Onsuch occasions, he would weep abundantly,and sometimes become so exhaustedby his emotions, that thespectators entertained fears of his life.Although frequently in great painwhile preaching, his efforts were sogreat, that he usually vomited, andoften brought up a considerable quantityof blood, after he had concludedhis discourse.From " the very whirlwind of passion."he sometimes descended tofamiliar stories and mean illustrations,for the purpose of winning the attentionof his more illiterate hearers; andWesley states, that " even the little improprietiesboth of his language andmanner, were a means of profitingmany who would not have been touchedby a more correct discourse, or a morecalm and regular manner of speaking."Occasionally, without permitting hiscongregation to discover his object, hepreached at an individual among hishearers. It is related, that one Sunday,he addressed the greater partof his forenoon sermon to a femaleservant, who had offended him bysome act of negligence in the morning.On being subsequently informed, it isadded, that the girl was much distressedby his observations, he laughedheartily, and requested his informantto let her know " the account wassettled, and that he had nothing moreagainst her."In private life, he was cheerful, thoughsomewhat irritable, and impatient ofcontradiction. Like Wesley, he appearsto have been unhappy in marriage,and the death of his wife, whichtook place in 1765, is said, by one ofhis friends, to have set his mind muchat liberty. In person, he was graceful,well-proportioned, and above the middlestature; his features were good andregular, with the exception of a squinthe had contracted in one eye, whenrecovering from the measles : his countenancewas manly, his voice powerfuland melodious, and his action peculiarlygraceful, forcible, and expressive.In his disposition he was exceedinglycharitable ; in fact, one main object of hislife seems to have been, the collection,by intense personal labour, of a sufficientsum for the erection and endowmentof his orphan-house, in Georgia.His intrepidity was equal to, and perhaps,the consequence of, his zeal. Hevoluntarily encountered danger, andeven courted martyrdom. The fingerof God, in his opinion, was visible inthe most unimportant circumstances ofhis career. " To suppose," he saysa general, without holding a particularProvidence, is as absurd as to imaginethere can be a chain without being composedof links." His intellectual powerswere not equal to those of John Wesley,whom, however, he seems to have excelledin purity of motive. Their perilsand privations, in the cause of religion,were, perhaps, equal ; but they do notappear to have shared in common thatlove of power, for the display of which,Wesley has net inappropriately beendenominated a Protestant Loyal.THEOPHILUS LINDSEY.THEOPHILUS LINDSEY.THEOPHILUS LINDSEY was bornat Middlewich, in Cheshire, on the20th of June, 1723. He had, for hisgodfather, Theophilus, Earl of Huntingdon; and the Ladies Anne andBetty Hastings took him under theirimmediate patronage in his childhood.He commenced his education at anacademy in his native place, from whichhe was removed to the grammar-school,at Leeds, where he continued untilMay, 1741, when he was admitted ascholar at St. John's college, Cambridge.After having taken the degreeof B. A., he obtained a fellowship in1747. About the same time, he enteredinto holy orders, and was presented,through the interest of his noble friends,to a chapel in Spital-square. On therecommendation of the Earl of Huntingdon,he, soon after, became chaplainto Algerian, Duke of Somerset j and,in 1754, accompanied Lord Walworth,afterwards Duke of Northumberland,to the continent, in the capacity oftutor. On his return to England, hewas presented to the valuable rectoryof Kirby VVhiske, in Yorkshire ; which,three years afterwards, he exchangedfor the living of Middletown, in thecounty of Dorset.In or about the year 1762, he beganto entertain grave doubts relative to thedoctrine of the Trinity; and, aftercarefully examining the Scriptures, aswell as the arguments of various theologicalwriters on the subject, he is statedto have become firmly convinced, thatGod the Father alone ought to beworshipped. Having arrived at thisconclusion, he appears to have felt somescruples as to the propriety of retaininghis preferment ; but, as his biographersassert, from honourable motives, which,however, are left unexplained, he determined,for the present, not to relinquishit.During the same year, he declinedbecoming chaplain to his former pupilthe Duke of Northumberland, then lord-lieutenantof Ireland, although he wasdistinctly promised considerable promotion,if he thought proper to acceptthe offer. In 1763, he exchanged hisliving for the less valuable vicarage ofCatterick, in Yorkshire, which, however,he preferred, because it wasnearer to the residence of his immediateconnexions. On this occasion,it became necessary for him to subscribeagain to the Thirty-nine Articles,an assent to which, notwithstandinghis opinions with regard to the Trinity,he deemed a minor point ; his chief difficulty,as to remaining in the churchof England, being the form of publicworship. He thought, that if Scripturecould be, in any way, reconciled withthe ritual, he might, without scruple,hold his preferment, which he felt deterredfrom resigning, by a fear oflosing his opportunities to be useful ;and considered himself warranted inretaining it, by the example of manyeminent men, who, although theythought as he did, still remained in thechurch.These arguments not being sufficientto satisfy his conscience, he attemptedto persuade himself, that the Trinitywas a mere allegorical representationof the Deity, and constantly preachedthe Unitarian doctrine. Priestley, it issaid, advised him to alter the liturgy, soas to accord with his own opinions, andto convert his church into a meetinghouse; but this he declined to do; and,at length, after having officiated atCatterick for several years, his scruplesas to the honesty of acting as a ministerof the church of England, essentiallydiffering, as he did, on oneof its most important tenets, becameso formidable, during a severe fit ofillness, that he determined on resigningthe vicarage. " Upon the most calmand serious deliberation," he observes,after weighing every circumstance, Iam obliged to give up my benefice,whatever I suffer by it, unless I wouldlose all inward peace and hope of God'sfavour and acceptance in the end."He still, however, procrastinated hisresignation, in the hope that an applicationto parliament, from a strongparty in the church, for substituting aDISSENTERS.general assent to scriptural doctrines,instead of the usual subscription tothe Thirty-nine Articles, would provesuccessful. On this subject he felt soanxious, that he is said to have travelledmore than two thousand miles, in thedepth of winter, for the purpose ofprocuring signatures to the petition ;which, on its being presented to thehouse of commons, in the session of1772, was rejected by a large majority.He still clung to his preferment, on thegroundless expectation, that an appealto the legislature, in the next year,would meet with a different fate. Theproject of a second petition being, however,abandoned, he resolved at onceto terminate the long struggle betweenhis conscience and a sense of his necessities,by resigning his benefice. Onstating his intention, for the first time,to his patrons and connexions, theyappear to have doubted his sincerity.Nobody," he observes, " will believeany one can be in earnest to take such astep."But Lindsey was, by this time,firmly resolved, although penury appearedto be the necessary consequence,to obtain that serenity of mind to which,for many years, he had, doubtless,been a stranger. Nearly at the closeof 1773, he tendered a deed of resignationto the Bishop of Chester, who,after having, earnestly, but in vain,attempted to dissuade him from quittingthe church, emphatically declared, thatin him lie should lose the most exemplaryminister in his diocese.His wife, a step-daughter of ArchdeaconBlackburne, whom he hadmarried in 1760, entirely concurredwith him, in the propriety of relinquishinghis pastoral office atCatterick;whence they departed, at the latter endof December, 1773, depending solelyon an income of about *25 per annum,and with the most dreary prospects as totheir future fate. They were treatedwith marked coolness by their formerintimates ; some of whom unkindlyoffered to provide for Mrs. Lindsey, oncondition that she would abandon herhusband ; a proposal which she indignantlyrejected. For their temporarysupport, he was compelled to disposeof his library ; and, to vindicate hisconduct in seceding from the church,he produced his celebrated Apology,which, in a few years, passed throughseveral editions.He now formed a design of collectingan Unitarian congregation in the metropolis; for the use of which, he preparedwhat he considered to be a reformedversion of the liturgy. In April, 1774,he began to perform divine service inatemporary chapel, at a house inEssex-street, Strand, for which, in consequenceof a misconception of histenets, he had found considerable difficultyin procuring a license. Hedeparted in a slight degree only fromthe forms of the established church,and wore the clerical dress, exceptingthe surplice. His reformed liturgy,and the first sermons which he preached,were published with great success ; andhis congregation, among whom weremany persons of rank and influence,rapidly increased.In 1776, he produced a sequel tohis Apology, in which he replied to theanimadversions that had been made onhis conduct, with admirable candour andmanliness. On the 29th of March,1778, he opened a new and commodiouschapel, which had been erected forhis hearers, in Essex-street, where hecontinued to officiate, almost unremittingly,until 1783; when his strengthbeing much reduced by a severe illness,he thought fit to receive Dr. Disney ashis colleague. He now devoted muchof his increased leisure to the preparationof his Historical View of the UnitarianDoctrine and Worship, which isreputed to be his most valuable work.In 1787, he published a new editionof the Reformed Liturgy, from whichhe excluded the Apostle's Creed, inconsequenceof his having become aconvert to the sceptical opinions ofPriestley, with regard to the miraculousconception. In 1792, appeared hisConversations on Christian Idolatry;and, in the following year, an affectingfarewell address to his congregation,which, it is said, his feelings wouldnot permit him to deliver from thepulpit. Shortly after the close of hisministerial labours, Messieurs Palmerand Muir having, as he thought, beenunjustly condemned to seven years'transportation, for publishing somepolitical works which were offensiveto government, he furnished them withbooks and money, and did all in hisTHEOPHILUS LINDSEY.power to alleviate the severity of theirsentence. In 1795, appeared his vindicationof Priestley, prefixed to a republicationof that eminent author'sreply to Paine's Age of Reason ; and,in 1802, he printed his Considerationson the Divine Government. Besidesthe works already mentioned, and someminor pieces, he wrote two dissertations; the one entitled, On the Prefaceto St. John's Gospel ; and the other,On Praying to Christ. Two volumesof his sermons were published after hisdecease, which took place on the llthof November, 1808.Although it would be difficult tojustify the renewal of his subscriptionto the Thirty-nine Articles, after hehad ceased to be a believer in the doctrineof the Trinity, and notwithstandingthe impropriety of his continuingto act as a minister of the church ofEngland, while he dissented from itstenets in a fundamental point, yet, onthe whole, the character of this eminentdivine appears to have beenworthy of much admiration. Had hebeen a mere worldly-minded man, hemight, by concealing his scruples, haveprocured considerable preferment : sucha course he scorned to adopt, althoughwith a weakness, which many deemvenial, he permitted himself, for severalyears, to retain a benefice, the incomeof which was necessary for his support.There seems to be no doubt but that,had his means been more ample, hewould have abandoned the establishedchurch, even before his removal toCatterick. But his fear of poverty inducedhim, for many years, to temporizewith his conscience, the powerof which he was, however, unable tosubdue ; and, at length, he sacrificedevery motive of interest to its dictates.Nor did he procrastinate the relinquishmentof his vicarage until, by an accumulationof its revenues, he could,as it were, afford to be honest : on thecontrary, he had expended so much ofhis income, in gratifying his desire tobe extensively benevolent, that, notwithstandinghis frugality, he possessedlittle or nothing, except his books ; andhe tendered his resignation at a periodwhen his prospects were so dreary, thathe could not, in the most remote degree,have foreseen the brilliant successof his subsequent career.Of his theological opinions, thereader is necessarily left, in accordancewith the plan of the present work, tojudge entirely for himself: his talents,both as a writer and a preacher, werecertainly far above mediocrity ; and hisconduct in private life was decidedlyadmirable. Pelham, his biographer,and successor as minister of the Unitarianchapel, in Essex-street, and whorestored his reformed liturgy, whichDisney, the colleague of Lindsey, had,after the death of the latter, discarded,describes him as having been " one ofthe most upright, consistent, and eminentlyvirtuous men, that ever adornedhuman nature."Although differing so essentially fromthe doctrines of the church of England,he appears to have entered into onlytwo controversies ; the one with Robinson,on some doctrinal points; and theother with Price, which originated inamisconception of those opinions whichwere advocated by the latter. On hisdeath-bed, he is described as havingbeen a singular pattern of meeknessunder suffering. When one of hisfriends suggested, " that he doubtlessbore his sufferings .patiently, becausehe felt, more than ever, the truth ofhis favourite maxim, that ' whateveris, is right' he replied, with unexpectedanimation, ' Whatever is, isvest'" This, according to his biographers,was the last sentence whichhe distinctly articulated.ROBERT ROBINSON.ROBERT, the son of Michael Robinson,an exciseman of indifferent character,was born at Swaffbam, in thecounty of Norfolk, on the 8th of June,1735. His mother, the daughter of arespectable gentleman, who, though incensedby her marriage, afforded heroccasional assistance, states that at sevenDISSENTERS.years of age, he was l; a pretty scholar,and had been at a Latin school a yearand a half. His master," she adds,was very fond of him, and used to saythat he never knew a child that discoveredso much capacity." At thisperiod he was removed to a grammar-schoolat Seaming, under the superintendenceof a clergyman named Brett.His mother now entirely lost the .aidof her father, on account of the profligacyof her husband, who becomingmuch involved, fled, with a view toavoid his creditors, from Scorning toWinchester, where he soon afterwardsdied. .His widow, though much distressed,contrived, out of the proceeds ofa small lodging-house, and her earningsas a needle-woman, to keep her son atthe grammar-school; where, at the ageof thirteen, he is said to have acquireda very respectable knowledge of theclassics. He had also become tolerablyconversant with French, in studyingwhich he had the advantage of frequentintercourse with the French usher ofthe grammar-school, who lodged at hismother's house. This excellent womanappears for some time to have entertaineda hope, that he would have beensent to college by her father ; who,however, died without making any provisioneither for his grandson or herself.His master then endeavoured to procurehim a situation, but failed, it issuspected, on account of the youth'signorance of arithmetic. Under thesecircumstances, Mrs. Robinson was gladto accept of an offer, made by a hairdresser,named Anderson, residing inCrutched Friars, the brother of one ofher female friends, to receive him as anapprentice without a premium. Sheaccompanied him to London, early inMarch, 1749, and contrived to supportherself and provide him with clothes,by labouring with great assiduity atneedle-work.At this period he began to keep adiary, in which he recorded the mostminute circumstances that occurred tohim. By this we learn, that, althoughhis master denied him the use of acandle, he constantly rose between fourand five o'clock in the morning; diligentlystudied the Scriptures ; and tookgreat delight in attending the pulpits ofcelebrated divines of all denominations.To Whitefield, whom he termed " hisspiritual father," he wrote several letters,which, according to his biographer, Dyer,breathe the genuine spirit of a dutifulson, and the self-abasing language of asincere Calvinist. One or two of theseepistles, were accidentally read in hispresence, by Whitefield, a circumstancewhich appears to have afforded him themost intense delightReligious subjects, at length, engrossednearly the whole of his attention,and he began to entertain thoughtsof devoting himself to the diffusion ofthe Gospel. At this time he was inthe habit of preaching, alone, in hisown room, a practice to which has beenattributed his subsequent " facility incolloquial address." His master, bywhom he appears to have been greatlybeloved, having consented to cancel hisindentures, he proceeded to Milderin Norfolk, where, at the age oftwenty, he delivered his first discoursebefore a small congregation of Methodists,from Job c. ix. v. 2. The innocenceof his youth, the agreeablenessof his manners, and the enthusiasm ofhis genius, says Dyer, all conspired torender him popular; and, in a shorttime, he received an invitation to preachat the Tabernacle, in the city of Norwich; where he continued to officiate,until the immorality of one of itsministers induced him to secede fromthe society with thirteen of its members.He now became pastor of a smallcongregation in St. Paul's, Norwich ;and, according to the practice of theindependent churches, drew up his confessionof faith, which comprehendedthe various points of doctrine supportedby the Calvinistic methodists. Thissolemn avowal of his adherence to dissentingtenets, it is said, deprived himof the regard of an opulent relative,who had previously intended to havebequeathed him a considerable legacy.In 1759, he married a farmer'sdaughter, named Ellen Payne. On the8th of July in the same year, he preachedfor the first time at Cambridge, (whichsubsequently became the scene of hismost brilliant efforts,) from Corinthiansc. xv. v. 3 ; and in 1761, he accepted aninvitation to become pastor of a smallcongregation there ; the members ofwhich could scarcely afford him jasperannum. His ministry was, however,so successful, that, in the courseROBERT ROBINSON.of a few years, the society includedabove two hundred highly respectablefamilies ; and a commodious place ofworship was erected for him at theirexpense. The younger collegians aresaid to have frequently attended hischapel for the purpose of ridiculinghim ; until, at length, two of them wereprosecuted for their indecorous conduct,and one of them was compelled to insertan apology in the papers; theother being excused on account of hisprevious good character. The seniormembers of the university appear, however,to have formed a just estimate ofhis merits; they not only treated himwith marked respect, but allowed himfree access to the libraries, and evengranted him the uncommon privilegeof taking books away with him toperuse at his own residence.In 1773, his salary, though much increased,being still inadequate to thesupport of his already numerous family,he took a small copyhold estate, which,with assistance, he was subsequentlyenabled to purchase, at Chesterton,near Cambridge ; where, with a viewto better his circumstances, he engagedin business as a farmer, a concealed,and a coal merchant. At thesame time, but without diminishinghis exertions as a divine, he began todistinguish himself as an author. In1774, he published a work, for whichhe received twenty guineas, entitledArcana ; or, the Principles of the latePetitioners to Parliament, for Relief inthe matter of Subscription. In this production,which materially advanced hisreputation among the dissenters, he issaid to have displayed great penetration,lively reasoning, and a happy facilityfor simplifying and illustrating his subject.He had previously (in 1770)printed, by way of specimen, two sermonsfrom the French of Saurin, andthese being favourably received, hepublished a volume, translated from theworks of that celebrated preacher, in1775; which was followed, at intervals,by four others, including an able prefatorydissertation on the Reformationin France, Memoirs of Saurin, and Reflectionson Deism, Christian Liberty,Human Explication of a Divine Revelation,&c. &c.Cotemporary with the first volumeof his translations from the eminentFrench divine, appeared his curioustreatise, appended to The Legal Degreesof Marriage Stated and Considered, byJohn Allen, barrister-ate law, in whichhe maintained that it was lawful for aman to marry his wife's sister. In 1776,he produced A Plea for the Divinity ofour Lord Jesus Christ, in reply toLindsey's Apology for resigning hisvicarage of Catterick, and to Jebb'sShort State of Reasons for abandoninghis benefice, a work of great ability, forwhich he was honoured with the thanksand compliments of Bishops Hinchcliffeand Halifax, Dean Tucker, and othereminent churchmen. In the followingyear, he printed a tract, entitled, TheHistory and Mystery of Good Friday ;in which it is observed, he attackedwith great learning, and still more pointand humour, the folly of those religionistswho observe festival days.Shortly afterwards, he supplied Kippiswith materials for the life of Baker, theantiquary, to be inserted in the BiographiaBritannica; and in 1778, heproduced A Plan of Lectures on thePrinciples of Non-conformity ; containingoutlines of the entire differencesbetween the church of England and thedissenters ; the object of which, was toconfirm the latter in their principles, andto furnish them with reasons for secession.This work obtained the commendationof Lord Shelburne, in the house ofpeers, and was ably defended by Fox,against an attack that had been made onit by Burke, during a debate in the commons,on the test and corporation acts.About the same time, he produced *translation of Claude's celebrated Essayson the Composition of a Sermon, intwo volumes, octavo, with notes ; whichhe afterwards more extensively illustratedby curious and often humorousanecdotes, sensible reflections on thebeauties, and caustic observations onthe defects, perceptible in the discoursesof many celebrated modern preachers.For this work he is said to have received400.In 1780, he visited Oxford, and proceededthence to Scotland, where hewas offered a diploma of D. D., whichhe modestly declined. In the followingyear, with a view to produce a morecharitable spirit among his brethren,the Baptists, he published The GeneralDoctrine of Toleration applied to theDoss ENTERS.particular case of Free Communion.About this period he formed a design offounding a Baptist college ; which, however,he was compelled to abandon, butsucceeded in establishing a society atCambridge, for the relief of dissentingministers, their widows, and children.In 1782, he was solicited, by a societyof Baptists, to undertake a completeand authentic history of their sect, forwhich he began forthwith to collectmaterials. Shortly afterwards, he waseminently instrumental in the establishmentof a society at Cambridge, forthe promotion of constitutional information,to advance which, he publishedA Political Catechism, familiarly expoundingthe principles of civil government.For this production, he is saidto have received only twenty guineas.In 1784, he published Sixteen Discourses,which he had delivered extemporeto illiterate congregations in theneighbourhood of Cambridge: these,with Six Morning Exercises, chiefly onpractical subjects, evinced so much liberalityon doctrinal points, that " hewas furiously preached against as anArian and Socinian ;" and being nolonger regarded as a sincere Calvinist,he lost much of that popularity which hehad previously enjoyed. In the summerof the same year, he was visited by a distinguishedAmerican j who, he says,came on Saturday evening, spentthe Lord's day with us, departed onMonday afternoon, and left me the choiceof the cabin of the Washington, and asmuch land in the States as I would wishto accept. Happiest of countries!Peace and prosperity attend you ! Ishall never see you ; but if I forget theability and virtue that struggled toobtain, and actually did obtain, all thatmankind hold dear, let my right handforget her cunning !"For the purpose of opening new minesof information, and thereby increasinghis utility, he now began to study theSpanish, Portuguese, Italian, and Germanlanguages ; but the strength of hisbody was no longer capable ot sustainingthe energy of his mind ; a constitutionaldecay, attended by a lamentabledepression of spirits, was the consequenceof his mental exertions; and, atlength, he became so reduced, that hisfamily, trusting that the journey mightrestore him to health, encouraged adesire which he had long entertained, ofpaying a visit to the celebrated Priestley.He accordingly set out for Birmingham,on the 2nd of June, 1790, and preachedtwo sermons there on the followingSunday. Two days afterwards he spenta social evening with a few friends, andretired to rest in as good health as hehad been for some time past. He was,however, found dead in his bed thenext morning, having, apparently, departedthis life, as he had often wishedthat he should do, suddenly, and alone.This event took place on the 8th ofJune, 1790, in the fifty-fifth year of hisage, in the house of a Mr. Russell, thefriend of Dr. Priestley, at Howell Green,near Birmingham.In the same pulpit from which, onlya week before, this eminent pastor hadaddressed a numerous and admiringcongregation, his funeral sermon waspreached by Dr. Priestley, who describedhim as "one whose benign dispositionand gentle manners, had entitledhim to the character of an amiable man ;whose genius, whose learning, whosesteady opposition to every species oftyranny, as well among protestant dissentersas established hierarchies, hadentitled him to the character of a greatman."In a discourse delivered elsewhere,on the same occasion, Dr. Flees said ofhim : " When he was in his prime, heused, without any art, or ostentation oforatory, perfectly to command the attentionof his audience; and, alwaysspeaking extempore, he would varyhis style and address according to hishearers, in a manner that was trulywonderful. His writings discover equalpowers of imagination, and of judgment.His sermons, preached in thevillages near Cambridge, are remarkablefor their plainness and their propriety.But at the time they werecomposed, he had not acquired all thesentiments that he did before he died."To illustrate the last observation, it isnecessary to state, that some time beforehis decease, he had embraced theUnitarian doctrines of Priestley with regardto the divinity of Christ. Dr. Treesobserves that towards the close of hiscareer, " his discourse was unconnectedand desultory ; and his manner oftreating the Trinity savoured rather ofburlesque than of serious reasoning."WILLIAM HUNTINGTON.At this period he is described as havingattacked orthodox opinions with extraordinarypoignancy and sarcasm ; althoughhe had previously, on accountof his Plea for the Divinity of Christ,been very much caressed by the friendsof the established church. " On this account,"says Priestley, " I believe itwas, that he had the offer of considerablepreferment in the church ofEngland; which, with great magnanimity,he rejected."His good sense and generous spirit,"says Dr. Toulon, " would not sufferhim to go into the trammels of anyparty. Religious liberty, if I may beallowed the expression, was his idol."A writer in the Scotch Encyclopaedia,after allowing his great abilities as awriter and pastor, adds, " He appearsto have been of an unsteady temper;and, in our opinion, acquires but littlecredit from the frequency with whichhe changed his religious creed, for wehave reason to believe he died a Socinian."He did not live to complete his Historyof the Baptism; one part of whichappeared in 1790, and his collectionsfor the remainder, in 1792, under thetitle of Ecclesiastical Researches. Inaddition to these, and his other literarylabours already noticed, he appears tohave published some theological translations,a discourse on Proper Behaviourat Relative Assemblies ; Slavery inconsistentwith the Principles of Christianity; Early Piety to Young Persons,and other minor pieces on religioussubjects.WILLIAM HUNTINGTON.A HIS extraordinary man was born inthe weald of Kent, in 1744. His parentswere married, but not to eachother, and his early years were passedamid scenes of miserable indigenceand shocking depravity. While yet amere lad, he was thrown upon theworld, without a friend to guide orassist him. Naturally destitute, as heappears to have been, of moral principle,and without the benefit of educationor good example, it would havebeen rather remarkable if he had notbecome precociously wicked. In thedifferent occupations to which he resortedfor support, being, successively,an errand-boy, a day-labourer, a coal-heaver,and a cobbler, he displayed astrong tendency to evil, without a singleredeeming good quality. At an earlyage, pilfering had grown habitual tohim ; he became hardened in vice as hegrew up; and, almost on the thresholdof manhood, he absconded from hisnative place and changed his name, forthe purpose of eluding detection, fromHunt to Huntingdon, in order to avoidmaintaining the illegitimate child of ayoung woman, whom, after havingseduced, under a solemn promise ofmaking her his wife, he had brutallydeserted, with the utmost indifference.Proceeding to Thames Ditton, he theremarried, although in a state of the mostabject poverty, and soon had a largefamily.In the twenty-seventh year of his age,a remarkable alteration took place inhis conduct. He ceased to be a daringblasphemer and a notorious drunkard ;abandoned the depraved society inwhich he had previously rejoiced, andbecame a frequent attendant at Methodistmeetings. He soon felt an irresistiblelonging to preach the Gospel;and, although perfectly sensible of hiscoarse, provincial dialect, his utter wantof education, and his harsh, uncouthmode of expressing himself, he atlength yielded to what he deemed asupernatural impulse, and began, atsuch times as his avocations wouldpermit, to hold forth in the open air,on religious topics, to the country people; by some of whom he was reviled,and by others actually maltreated.This change in his conduct was attendedwith a great improvement in hisworldly affairs. He never afterwards,as he solemnly states, was allowed towant for anything needful. On one occasion,although he had no tea in thehouse, he told his wife to put the kettleon, feeling assured that ProvidenceDISSENTERS.would provide them with some sufficientlysoon t and before the waterboiled, as he asserts, he received aparcel of tea, and several pounds ofsugar, from some unknown friend. Atanother time, having no food, or themeans of procuring it, for his family,he went to a field, with the intentionof stealing some turnips; so that hisproneness to sin was not yet overcome,nor did he place such implicit relianceas he affected, on the goodness of hisMaker: on arriving at the field, hefelt some strong scruples of conscienceagainst committing the offence whichhe had meditated, and immediatelyreturned home ; where he found hiswife occupied in cooking some muttonand turnips, which a charitable personin the neighbourhood had senther during his absence. One day,while riding on horseback, towards aplace at some distance from Thames Dittonn,where he had promised to preach,he was stopped at a turnpike-gate, nothaving any money to pay the toll. Aswas his usual custom, when in difficultyor distress, he prayed for relief,and then, casting his eyes to theground, perceived a small parcel, which,on examination, proved to contain theexact sum of which he was in need !If we can suppose these, and a greatnumber of similar circumstances, whichhe relates, to be true, they must havehad an important influence on his character; and have largely increased thatenthusiasm by which he was enabled toovercome the numerous obstacles thatimpeded the prosecution of his religiousstudies. Having constantly to preachfive times a week, he was compelled,as he states, to lay the Bible in a chairby his side, and now and then to reada little, in order to furnish himself withmatter for the pulpit. " It sometimeshappened," he adds, " that I was undersore temptations ; the Bible would seema sealed book, so Chat I could not furnishmyself with a text: nor durst Ileave my work to study it ; if I did, mylittle ones would soon want bread ; mybusiness would also run cross ; and myearnings did not exceed eight shillingsa week."Even when a considerable improvementhad taken place in his circumstances,he had still to contend withsuch difficulties as would have completelydisheartened an ordinary man.His little cot, he observes, was placed inavulgar neighbourhood ; and the windowswere so low, that he could notsit down to his Bible without being seenby his enemies, who often threw stonesthrough the glass, or saluted him withimprecations. His memory being naturallybad, although, to others, itseemed amazingly retentive, he wasthus, as he adds, prevented from storingit sufficiently with Scripture textsand phrases.After having spent some years initinerant preaching, he determined onquitting Thames Ditton, where, hethought, " God had no more for himto do;" and proceeded, with his family,to the metropolis. From the accountwhich he has given of his journey, itappears that, in his worldly affairs, hehad, by this time, become rather prosperous." Some years," says he, " beforeI was married, all my personaleffects used to be carried in my hand,or on my shoulders, tied up in one ortwo large handkerchiefs. After marriage,for some years, I carried all ourgoods in a large sack ; but now, whenwe moved to London, we loaded twolarge carts with furniture and householdnecessaries ; besides a post-chaisewell filled with children and cats."For many weeks after his arrival,he appears to have laboured under greatdistress of mind, respecting his wantof abilities to preach in London. " Ihad," he says, " no learning, andfeared I should not be able to delivermyself with propriety ; and, as I knewnothing of Greek or Hebrew, or evenof the English grammar, that I shouldbe exposed to the bitter tongues of thecritics." But his natural boldness ofcharacter soon returned, and he becameassistant minister at Margaret-streetchapel. After having preachedthere, with considerable success, forabout three years, he grew weary, asherelates, of the errors which werecontinually broached from its pulpit,and longed to have one of his own.Yet," he adds, " I could not ask Godfor such a favour, thinking it too greatfor one so mean as myself. However,God sent a person unknown to me,to look at a certain spot, who afterwardstook me to look at it ; but Itrembled at the very thought of suchWILLIAM HUNTINGTON.an immense undertaking. Then Godstirred up a wise man to offer to builda chapel, and to manage the wholework, without fee or reward. Goddrew the pattern on his imagination,one Sunday, while he was hearing mepreach. I then took the ground ; thisperson executed the plan, and the chapelsprung up like a mushroom."Of his great influence, even at thisperiod, some idea may be formed fromthe following extract, relative to the assistancewhich his congregation affordedhim : " My regular hearers first offeredeleven pounds in money, and laid iton the foundation of the building. Agood gentleman, of whom I knew butlittle, and of whom I bought a load oftimber, sent it with a bill and receiptin full. Another friend came, andblessed me fervently, and begged topaint my pulpit, desk, et cetera. Anothergave me half-a-dozen chairs forthe vestry ; and my friends, Mr. andMrs. Lyons, furnished me with a tea-chestwell stored, and a set of china.Mr. and Mrs. Smith gave me a goodbed, a handsome bedstead, and all therequisite furniture, that I might nothave to walk home after sermon, of coldnights. A dear daughter in the faithgave me a glass for my chapel study.Another gave me a pulpit cushion, anda book-case for my private study. Akind lady gave me a similar conveniencefor the vestry ; while Mr. E. determinedto vent all his anger againstthe devil, and presented me with thesword of the spirit, for he gave me anew Bible, bound in morocco, with silverclasps."Soon after he had opened the chapel,which, it is proper to .remark, wasbuilt in Lichfield-street, he attracted sonumerous a congregation, that it becamenecessary to enlarge its dimensions.The proprietors of an adjacentpiece of ground, which would havesuited Huntington's purpose, refusingto let it, except at what was deemedan exorbitant price, he says " I gaveup the earth, finding nothing could bedone with the earth-holders, and determinedto build my stories in theheavens, where I should find moreroom and less rent ; and to this mypeople agreed, namely, to raise thechapel a story, and carry a flight ofgalleries round it."He now took a small farm, situateabout four miles from his chapel; butfinding the distance inconvenient, hedetermined, as soon as he could obtainsufficient money, to buy a horse andtilted cart, in which he and his familymight ride to and fro on Sundays andlecture-nights. The day after he hadcome to this conclusion, he found thatsome of his hearers had not only purchaseda coach and pair of horses forhis use, but had raised, in addition, asufficient sum to pay the assessedtaxes to which he would become liableby accepting their present. Otherluxuries were zealously thrust uponhim. " Still," he says, " my pocket wasbare, and many things were wanting,both in the house and farm; besides,there was a place to fit up for my bailiffand dairy woman to live in. In a fewdays, a country gentleman called, andsaid, ' My friend, I have often told you,that you would keep your coach beforeyou died, and I always promised togive you a pair of horses when youdid ; nor will I be worse than my word.I have asked father Green, and he saysthe horses cost 45: there is themoney.' In a few days, the coach,horses, and harness came ; and havingmoney in hand, I wrote to a friend tosend me twelve ewes and a ram, andhe sent them, but would not be paid,they were a present to the farm."Shortly after the erection of hischapel, in Lichfield-street, he publishedseveral tracts, " which," as he states,were almost universally exclaimedagainst, and by these means God sentthem into all winds; so that I soonrubbed off one hundred, and, soon after,another, of my chapel debt; and in ashort time I had reduced it from 1,000to 700."In 1796, he lost his first wife; and,some time afterwards, married thewidow of Sir James Sanderson, baronet,lord mayor of London, who had formany years been a constant attendantat his chapel. The addition of herfortune to the property which he had,by this time, acquired, rendered himopulent. He now became more ostentatiousin his style of living; divestedhis harness and coach-pannels of theletters W. H. S. S. (signifying WilliamHuntington, Sinner Saved,) which, inthe days of his comparative humility,DISSENTERS.he had adopted, instead of armorialbearings ; and seemed to regret havingdisclosed the particulars of his earlyhistory, in a singular production, entitledThe Bank of Faith, which he had sometimebefore published.His chapel in Lichfield-street was accidentallydestroyed by fire in 1810 : butits ruins were scarcely cold, when thewealthy portion of his hearers began toerect a larger and more handsome edificefor him, in Gray's-inn-lane, whichwas completed at an expense of nearly10,000, early in 1811. A day hadalready been appointed to open it, whenHuntington refused to officiate, unlessthe absolute freehold were conveyedto him, in fee simple. His infatuatedfollowers, eager to gratify him, immediatelyresigned their shares in his favour,and a stone was placed in thefront wall, bearing the following inscription: " Providence Chapel, Erectedby William Huntington, M.D.CCCXI."He had now reached the zenith of hisreputation and power. His followersalmost idolized him : he was the autocratas well as the pastor of his congregation,which had become one of the mostnumerous in the metropolis ; and hepossessed all the means of worldly enjoymentthat affluence could procure.Age had not much impaired his healthor intellect, and his pulpit labours, orrather, triumphs, were continued up towithin a short period before his death.He preached, for the last time, on the16th of June, 1813 : in a few days afterwards,being attacked by indisposition,he proceeded, in the hope of a speedyrecovery, to Tunbridge Wells ; where,however, he rapidly grew worse, anddied on the 1st of the following month.He was buried at Lewes, and on histombstone is inscribed the followingextraordinary epitaph, which he dictateda few days before his death:Here lies the Coal-heaver j who departedthis life, July the 1st, 1813, in thesixty-ninth year of his age ; beloved ofhis God, but abhorred of men. Theomniscient Judge, at the grand assize,shall ratify and confirm this, to theconfusion of many thousands; for Englandand its metropolis shall know, thatthere hath been a prophet among them.W. H., S. S."Towards the close of his career,Huntington is described as having beena fat, burly man, with a red face,which just rose above the cushion ;and a thick, guttural, and rather indistinctvoice." A contributor to ThePulpit of 1809, says of him, at thatperiod, " He is beginning to impair :once he was lean, but now he is fat;once he had teeth, but now he has lostteeth ; once he brought a bulky Bibleinto the pulpit, now he brings a smallone ; and once he could read his textwithout glasses, but now he uses them.Now, too, he no longer appends S. S. tohis name ; and his black wig is surmountedby the slouched beaver of theclericus. His pulpit prayers are remarkablefor his omitting to pray forthe king or his land. He excels in extemporeeloquence, and is distinguishedfrom all other preachers. Having formallyannounced his text, he lays hisBible at once aside, and never refers toitagain. He has every possible textand quotation at his ' fingers' ends.'He proceeds directly to his object, andexcept such incidental digressions asTake care of your pockets !' ' Wakethat snoring sinner ! ' ' Silence thatnoisy numskull!' ' Turn out thatdrunken dog !' he never deviates fromhis course. Being of the metaphoricaland allegorical school, as well as havinghis citations by rote, there are few textsthat may not be made to bear someaffinity to his subject. Hence the varietyas well as fertility of his eloquence,his astonishing talent of reconciling incongruoustexts, and of finding difficultieswhere none had been discoveredbefore. Nothing can exceed his dictatorialdogmatism. Believe him, nonebut him, that is enough. When hewishes to bind the faith of his congregation,he will say, over and over, ' Assureas I am born, 'tis so ;' or, ' I believethis;' or, ' I know this;' or, ' I am sureof it;' or, ' I believe the plain Englishof it to be this.' And then he will add,by way of clenching his point, ' Now youcan't help it ;' or, ' So it is ;' or, ' It mustbe so in spite of you!' He does this witha most significant shake of the head,with a sort of beldame hauteur, withallthe dignity of defiance. He willthen sometimes observe, softening hisdeportment, ' I don't know whether Imake you understand these things, but/ understand them well.' He is fancifulin his application of Scripture ; puts hisWILLIAM Huntington.own sense on all he quotes, and givesit as such. Intermingling his experiencewith his commentaries, no soonerdoes he thus begin to elucidate themysteries of faith, than most of his auditors,all eye and ear, will rise fromtheir seats, eager to learn what thepreacher has still to say of himself. Inpreaching, as in writing, he seems tolaugh in his heart. He rambles sadly,and strays so completely from his text,that you often lose sight of it. Thedivisions of his subject are so numerous,that any one of his sermons might bedivided into three. Preaching is, withhim, talking ; his discourses are asstory-telling. Action he has none, exceptthat of shifting his handkerchieffrom hand to hand, and hugging hiscushion."Nature," says the same writer,has bestowed on him a vigorous,original mind, and he employs it ineverything. Even his colloquial vulgarityis in his favour. Survey himwhen you will, he seems to have rubbedoff none of his native rudeness or blackness.He is eminently calculated togain an ascendancy over the million.Instead of trying to teach the Bible, hehas left the Bible to teach him. Erroritself is original in him. All his notionsare his own, as well as his mode of impartingthem. Religion has not beendiscovered by him through the telescopesof commentators."His works consist chiefly of controversialpieces, plentifully seasoned withbitter personalities and allegorical dissertationson the more mystical partsof Scripture. His style, though coarseand incorrect, is often vigorous. Totallydestitute of taste, he introduces amonghis most serious arguments, passages oflow humour, which, however, are notin themselves without merit, and rudeattacks upon his clerical brethren, regularand irregular, the whole of whomhe denounced as being, " weak vesselsof error." In one of his tracts he thusevinces the contempt he felt for severalother ministers : " As to the secretlashes these gentlemen have given me,it is little grief to me. I know thatGod the Saviour revealed the doctrinesI preach to my soul ; and I defy eitherHill or dale, 'Scot or lot, Parsons orparson-makers, Groves or avenues,Wiles or muscles, Wills or testaments,Kinsmen or uncles, Towers or castles,Watts or whims, Knights or days, toprove that God's word points out eitherlaw or rule, that Mount Zion does notfurnish the believer with."One of his productions he entitled,The Arminian Skeleton, or the ArmeniansDissected and Anatomise. Whencompelled to change his name, he statesthat he added the syllables ing and ton,to Hunt, because ing ends several wordsof a bad meaning, as lying", swearing-murdering;and because ton signifiestwenty hundred weight, or a large andcapacious vessel. He parodied thepompous string of titles which oftenfollow the names of dignified clergymen,by frequently styling himself,William Huntingdon, Ses. minister ofthe Gospel, at Providence chapel, Tich-field-street, at Monkwell-street meeting,at Horsleydown, and at Richmond, inSurrey."His conduct towards his children wasbase and cruel in the extreme. At atime when he was opulent, he cast themupon the world, to struggle for the verymeans of existence. To one of them,whose weak intellect demanded morethan a common share of paternal protection,he refused to render the leastassistance, even when absolutely starving; and the wretched young manwas at length convicted of a petty theft,which extreme want, perhaps, haddriven him to commit.That Huntington possessed extraordinarynatural talents is admitted : thathe was not without ambition, or a love ofmoney is equally evident ; but whetherhe was a penitent sinner, an enthusiast,or a contemptible hypocrite, appears bythe statements of our unprejudiced predecessorsto be somewhat doubtful. Fromwhat we find recorded of him, he seems,however, to have been destitute of allthe nobler qualities of human nature.In the course of his career he displayedmany revolting vices, but not a singleactive virtue, except perseverance inpreaching repentance and faith; andin this, it may be said, his conduct wasconducive to his temporal interest. Noproof exists of his piety ; benevolencehas never, on good grounds, been attributedto him ; and he was far lesscharitable than stern and censorious.No one ascribes to him the merit ofencouraging talent, forgiving an enemy,DISSENTERS.or relieving a friend in distress. Powerand pelf seem to have been the objects ofhis idolatry: when he had attained theone, he boldly ventured to display hislove for the other, by insolently demandingthe freehold of the meetinghouse,which his enthusiastic followershad, at their own expense, erected forhis use. It would be unfair to denyhim the praise of unflinching resolution,at the commencement of the better partof his career; but, plunged into thelowest abyss of poverty, as he was, it isdoubtful if he did not desperately attemptto qualify himself for preaching,merely with a view to better his forlorncondition. The cases he states, inwhich Providence is described as speciallyinterfering for his relief, are incredible; and are rather the fictions ofone who is desirous of displaying himselfas having been the special objectof divine favour, than sober realities.In his progress towards opulence anddominion, he displayed a contemptiblehumility, which he threw off the momenthe had acquired importance, andassumed the arrogant tone of a fortunateupstart. If he were not a penitentsinner, or a religious enthusiast, (andit is difficult to admit him to have beeneither of these characters, with suchnumerous instances before us of hiscold-hearted selfishness, and graspingcupidity,) he was not only a despicablehypocrite, but a gross blasphemer.What practical proofs did he afford ofthe sincerity of his conversion? Orwhat good did he do besides preachingthe Gospel, according to his own interpretation; if, indeed, that might betermed a good ? None. He was a badcitizen ; an avaricious and domineeringpastor; a man who evidently marriedagain, late in life, for money ; a stonyheartedfather ; and, on the whole, oneof the most selfish characters that everexisted.ROWLAND HILL.Rowland, son of the late SirRichard, and brother of General LordHill, was horn about the year 1748.He studied first at Eton, and afterwardsat Oxford, whence he was expelled, withsome other young men, in 1768, forpreaching in unauthorized places. Hesubsequently obtained admission to St.John's college, Cambridge, and succeededin getting himself ordained, butnot without considerable difficulty, inconsequenceof his having previouslyrendered himself conspicuous as a fieldpreacher. It is related that, on receivinga remonstrance for his partial secessionfrom the church, in which, onaccount of his family influence, he wassure of preferment, he replied, " Mydesire is to win souls, not livings ; andif I can secure the bees, I care not whogets the hives." For some time heappears to have occupied himself chieflyin advocating Toady, and in writingpamphlets which are characterized bygreat controversial bitterness. In 1783,he commenced building the chapel inBlackfriars-road, and soon became thepastor of a large congregation. Aboutthe same period he married a ladynamed Cud way ; by whom, however,he has had no family.For the popularity, which, during along series of years he has enjoyed, asapreacher, he appears to be chiefly indebtedto his singularities. Withoutimpeaching the motives of by far thegreater part, if not the whole of hisregular congregation, who, perhaps, admirehis ministry, and endeavour toemulate his virtues, it may safely besaid, that to vast numbers of those multitudesby whom he has been heard,the curious eccentricities of his stylehave formed the sole attraction to hischapel. The bad jokes and undignifiedobservations which he is said to haveuttered from the pulpit, are as discreditableto his judgment, as his strenuouslabours for the relief of distress arehonourable to his heart. It is relatedthat once, while his wife was sitting inher pew, he pointed her out as a livingillustration of the transitory nature offeminine beauty, commenting in veryhomely terms on the change whichyears had wrought in her appearance.ROWLAND HILL.Ladies," said he, on another occasion," love fine caps ; so does Mrs.Hill. Yesterday came home a five-guineaone ; but she will never wear it,for I poked it into the fire, bandboxand all!" One Sunday morning, justas she was entering the chapel, he exclaimed" Here comes my wife with achest of drawers on her head! Shewent out to buy them, and spent allher money in that hoity-toity bonnet !"In allusion to the fact of his havingcaused many of the hymns of his chapelto be set to the music of God Save theKing, Rule Britannia, and other popularcompositions, he is said to haveobserved that he saw no reason why thedevil should engross all the best tunes.Instead of a scriptural text, he hasbeen known to select, as the subject ofhis discourse, a newspaper paragraph.He once commenced a sermon, byshouting," Matches! matches! matches!You wonder," he continued, in hisusual tone, " at my text ; but this morning,while I was engaged in my study,the devil whispered me, ' Ah ! Rowland,your zeal is indeed noble ; and how indefatigablyyou labour for the salvationof souls !' At the very moment a manpassed under my window, cryingMatches!' very lustily ; and consciencesaid to me, ' Rowland, Rowland ! younever laboured to save souls with halfthe zeal that this man does to sellmatches !' " " Charity, my brethren,"said he, in a discourse, which hepreached in aid of a benevolent institution,at Napping, " charity covereda multitude of sins ; and you have needto be charitable, for you are all greatsinners, and some of you are whoppingsinners."As much singularity has been attributedto him in private life, as in thepulpit. Hearing a dispute between twoof his servants, as to which of themshould wash the hall, each declaringthat it was not her business," he sentthem both out on errands, and assumedthe mop himself. On their return, theywarmly protested against his being engagedin so menial a task. " Pio ! pio !"said he, " 'tis not your business, Peggy ;nor your's either, Jane : so it must bemine, I suppose."Some of his numberless benevolentactions are described as being tingedwith that eccentricity which pervadesthe whole of his conduct. While visitingthe sick, on one occasion, in the neighbourhoodof his residence, he found apoor emaciated creature, stretched ona miserable bed, in a garret, and withouta shirt; the kind-hearted divine immediatelystripped, and forced his ownupon the reluctant invalid ; for whom,he speedily procured a supply of othernecessaries, and the assistance of amedical man, who soon restored thepatient to health.One night, after he had been in bedfor some hours, he felt an impulse toget up and take a walk. Wanderinginto the Strand, he was there accostedby an unfortunate woman, with whomhe entered into conversation ; and, findingher, as he thought, weary of herevil course of life, and inclined to repent,he took her to his house, and prevailedupon Mrs. Hill to receive her, as a domestic.A similar anecdote has beenrecorded of the celebrated Burke.Being robbed by a footpad, whoseagitation of manner excited his interest,he asked him how long he had followedthe perilous trade of a robber : " Thisis my first offence," replied the man ;extreme distress has driven me to it :I have a wife and children in a state ofstarvation." " If what you state betrue," said the divine, after mentioninghis name, " you need not fear to callupon me tomorrow." On the followingday, the man presented himself to Mr.Hill, who thought proper to take himinto his service, at the same time declaringthat he would never divulge thecircumstances of their first meeting,until the death of the offender. Hefaithfully kept his promise, and neverhad cause to regret this romantic act ofbenevolence, the object of which, aftertwenty years of honest servitude, diedunder his roof. He preached his funeralsermon, wherein he related theabove particulars. An anecdote, whichappears to be identical with the present,has, it is proper to remark, been relatedof Dr. Fothergill.His partial secession from the formsof the established church, (which, however,is sufficiently marked to justifythose who deem him a dissenter,) hasnot precluded him from the pulpits oforthodox divines; by whom, his assistance,on a great number of occasions,appears to have been earnestly solicited,DISSENTERS.on account of his singular success as apreacher of charity sermons. The collectionsmade at the doors of his ownchapel, for benevolent purposes, arestated to be proverbially great ; and, inallusion to this notorious fact, he issaid, on one occasion, while preachingelsewhere, for the benefit of some distressedpersons, to have concluded hisdiscourse in the following terms : " Putyour hands into your .pockets, and besure there is something in them whenthey come out; let us have a good,round, Surrey chapel collection !"Age, while it has rendered his appearancevenerable, has broken hisvoice, rendered his enunciation indistinct,and even deprived him of thosefew graces of action, with which, in hisprime, he was accustomed to adorn hishomely, yet, notwithstanding the eccentricitieswith which they abounded,sensible and practical discourses.About the year 1805," says a gentlemanto whom the writer of this sketchis largely indebted, " he was a remarkablyhandsome man ; of a tall, commandingstature ; with highly expressivefeatures, a keen searching eye, anda singularly fine nose, which was bold,and aquiline, but in exact proportion tohis face. His voice, too, was very powerful,and, at times, extremely melodious.When he first entered his pulpit, hisnervous agitation was often extreme,and every member of his body seemedto shake ; he gave his text indistinctly,and almost inaudibly ; and it was onlyas he proceeded that his tones rose, andhe became colloquial or humorous.He had the art of instantly arrestingthe attention of his hearers; and as heseemed to address them from the fervourof his own feelings, he often produceda strong effect on theirs. Hisaction, too, though often ludicrouslydistorted, would, sometimes, when heleant forward on the sconces of thepulpit, become truly graceful and dignified."ADAM CLARKE.ADAM CLARKE was born at Mag-heartfelt,about thirty miles from Londonderry,in 1763 ; and acquired therudiments of learning under the tuitionof his mother. He displayed considerableaptitude for study, and had madesome progress in the classics, when hisfather, who was a schoolmaster, placedhim in the linen manufactory of a Mr.Bennett. A . mechanical occupationbeing, however, uncongenial to his disposition,he soon obtained leave to quithis master, and devoted the whole ofhis attention to religious subjects. Atthe age of sixteen, he commencedpreaching to small congregations of thepoor; and, shortly afterwards, obtainedthe notice and patronage of JohnWesley, who brought him to England,and employed him as an assistant, inthe school which he had then recentlyestablished at Kingswood, near Bristol.The treatment he received from thehead master is said to have been neitherencouraging nor courteous ; andpartly on this account, but principallyowing to an extraordinary obtuseness ofperception, and lamentable weaknessof memory, he added but little to hisprevious acquirements for a considerabletime. At length, he felt a brief,but violent sensation, in his head,as though some part of his brainhad burst or exploded ;" and from thatmoment he is described as havingpursued his studies with uncommonsuccess.In 1782, Wesley appointed him anitinerant preacher. He commenced hislabours at Penzance, whence he proceededto Bristol, Liverpool, Jersey,and various other places, tending materially,wherever he went, by his talentsand zeal, to the augmentation of hissect. In the performance of his duties,he appears to have suffered much fromthe persecution and violence to whichthe Wesleyan itinerants in generalwere, for a long period, exposed ; buthis temper and courage enabled him totriumph over all the difficulties of hisstation, and he gradually became oneof the most eminent and influentialpreachers in the connexion. On oneADAM CLARKE.occasion, after having been roughlyexpelled from the town of St. Hillier,in the island of Jersey, and threatenedwith death if he dared to preach thereagain, he determined, at all hazards,to make the attempt ; and his zeal andintrepidity produced such an effect onhis persecutors, that, instead of beingvisited with their vengeance, he obtainedtheir applause.Although particularly active in hisvocation, he still prosecuted his studieswith remarkable energy. About theyear 1785, he began a most carefulexamination of the Septuagint, which,as he states, expanded and illuminedhis mind more than all the theologicalworks he had ever consulted. Someyears afterwards, he undertook a translationof the Bible ; and such was therapidity of his progress, that he completedhis Old Testament in the shortspace of fourteen months; having,during that period, as he states, notonly translated every sentence of Hebrewand Chaldee, but compared andexamined all the original texts andversions, especially the Samaritan,Chaldee, Targets, Septuagint, andVulgate. He next commenced his remarkson the Four Gospels, which heconcluded in a year and a half; and,proceeding to the consideration of theother books in the sacred volume, graduallycompleted his admirable Commentaryon the Bible ; in addition towhich, he has published a BibliographyDictionary, in six volumes; AConcise View of the Succession of SacredLiterature ; The BibliographicalMiscellany, in two volumes ; A Translationof Sturm's Reflections ; A Treatiseon the Use and Abuses of Tobacco ;an edition of Fleury's Manners of theAncient Israelites ; Harmer's Observations; Butterworth's Concordance ;Bunyan's Pilgrim's Progress ; &c. Hehas also written, but not published, anarrative of Person's last illness ; andcontributed, anonymously, to the pagesof many periodicals and miscellanies.In figure, Dr. Clarke is tall and commanding; his voice possesses morestrength than melody ; his style is copiousbut not elegant ; and his mannerimpressive though not animated. Asapreacher, he seeks to convince ratherthan to excite; and, as an author, toedify rather than to delight. As acommentator, he displays great erudition; and, though occasionally fanciful,he is, on the whole, eminently instructive.On account of his biblicallearning, and scientific acquirements,he has obtained a diploma of LL. D.,and honorary degrees from various scientificsocieties. The Wesleyan methodistshave evinced their respect forhis merits, by choosing him presidentat three of their conferences ; and themembers of the British and ForeignBible Society are said to entertain adeep feeling of gratitude towards himfor the zeal and diligence with whichhe has constantly promoted the diffusionof the Gospel. Although so voluminousa writer, he has constantly discharged,in a most exemplary manner,all his active duties as a divine. Evenwhen engaged on his laborious commentary,he is said to have continuedpreaching publicly, and from houseto house." He was enabled to do thisby his constant habits of " rising early,and late taking rest ; avoiding all visitsof ceremony, and journeys of merepleasure and recreation ; restrictinghimself to the most wholesome diet andtemperate beverage, and not allowingunnecessary intrusions on his time."Dr. Clarke was married early in life,and has had several children, one ofwhom is a clergyman of the establishedchurch.ROBERT HALL.THIS eminent preacher, the son of arespectable Baptist minister, was born atAmnesty, in Leicestershire, on the 2ndof May, 1764. He received the earlypart of his education at Northamptonschool, whence he was removed to aBaptist theological seminary at Bristol,where he rendered himself conspicuousby his talents and industry. His extraordinaryabilities were more fullyDISSENTERS.developed at King's college, Aberdeen,whither he proceeded when in theseventeenth year of his age. He tookthe degree of M. A. in 1784, and soonafterwards became classical tutor at theBristol seminary, where he had beenpartly educated, and colleague, in thepastoral office, to the head master, Dr.Caleb Evans.In 1790, he succeeded the celebratedRobert Robinson as minister of theBaptist congregation at Cambridge ; inwhich capacity he laboured, with increasingreputation, as a pulpit orator,until 1804, when he was afflicted by amental aberration, from which, however,he recovered sufficiently to dischargehis pastoral duties, in the springof 1805; but, towards the close of thatyear, he, unfortunately, suffered a relapse; and it was deemed essential, forhis perfect restoration, that he shouldpass a considerable time in tranquilseclusion. He, accordingly, resignedhis office at Cambridge, on the 6th ofMarch, 1806; when his congregationtestified their deep sense of his merits,by purchasing him an annuity for life.His mental faculties being completelyrestored, he was appointed minister ofHarvey-lane chapel, at Leicester, wherehe continued for a number of years, belovedand admired by all who knew him.His congregation gradually increased,to such extent, that it became necessary,from time to time, to enlarge hischapel ; which, at length, in 1826, he wasprevailed upon to quit for that of Broad-mead,Bristol, where he soon acquiredalmost pre-eminent distinction amongthe preachers of his day. Some idea ofhis splendid powers, as a pulpit orator,at different periods of his life, may beobtained from the following extracts :A writer in The Pulpit, who heard himpreach on the power of God, observes,It was, without exception, the mostwonderful sermon I ever heard. Everyquality which could have been calledinto exercise en such an occasion,seemed concentrated in this one sermon.Profoundly metaphysical, withoutbewildering himself, or his hearers,and elegant, without the shadow ofaffectation rapid in delivery, withoutconfusion energetic, without rant devout,without enthusiasm commanding,without austerity affectionate,without cant argumentative, withoutpedantry ; the whole effect was beyondwhat it is possible to conceive of pulpiteloquence."Another periodical writer has thusdescribed him : " His figure was notcommanding ; the general cast of hiscountenance was heavy ; his voice wasfeeble and tremulous, and incapable, initself, of expressing or conveying anydeep emotion. About action or gesture,he was perfectly indifferent ; he usuallybegan in so low a tone as to be scarcelyaudible ; and preserved, to the last, onefixed though unconstrained position.As he was warmed with his subject, hiscountenance became animated, and hisvoice, still retaining its character ofbreezy softness, swelled into a volumeof delightful melody. While he waspreaching, such was the unassumingsimplicity of his style and manner, andthe natural fervour with which he carriedhis hearers along, that they entirelylost sight of the man for themoment. As he approached the endof his discourse he became peculiarlyanimated, though not declamatory,his audience were interested, and, witha rapidity of utterance which fixed thereporter, like a statue, in admiration,and frequently defied all attempts atwriting, he poured forth the variedstores of his vast imagination, andproduced an effect of which few canconceive, who have not witnessed itthemselves."When he began," says Mr. Bosworth,(we still extract from The Pulpit,)he was usually calm and collected ;speaking in a low tone, and lookingonward as he went, as if to surveyafresh the region of thought he wasabout to traverse, but not often givingan indication of those torrents t>f eloquencethat were soon to be pouredfrom his lips. Sometimes, at the commencement,he hesitated, and seemedperplexed, as if dissatisfied with whathe had intended to say ; at others,when he was about to establish a truth,or enforce a general principle, he wouldenter upon a course of clear and powerfulreasoning, rendered equally attractiveand astonishing by the delectablePurity and beauty of his style. In thisutter case, his sentences were finishedwith such exquisite care, that he appearedto have selected, not merely themost appropriate, but the only wordsROBERT HALL.which served his purpose, and yetdelivered with such freedom and ease,that they seemed the first which cameinto his mind. As he proceeded, heincreased in animation and strength ofutterance: in the application of theprinciples he had advanced, or the doctrinehe had discussed, he grew moreintense and ardent ; and when he hadrisen to a certain pitch of holy excitement,his brow would expand, his countenancebrighten, and, drawing backhis majestic form in the pulpit, he wouldcome forward again, charged with thefullness of his message to his hearers,and address them in tones and languagewhich made every heart vibrate. Butit was not with his lips only that hespoke his eloquence was more intellectualand spiritual than audiblesounds could make it. His speakingeye told volumes : whether beamingwith benignity, or lighted up with intelligence,or blazing with intense andhallowed feeling, that eye indicatedsentiments and emotions, which wordswere not made to express."Another clerical critic observes, that,although Mr. Hall possessed considerablelearning, he rarely displayed it;generally preferring the most simplephrases he could select, to express hismeaning, to those of a less familiar andmore ambitious class. On one occasion,being called upon to conclude aservice with prayer, after a sermon byDr. Chalmers, who had been evenmore than ordinarily brilliant, heclothed his address to the Deity withsuch affecting plainness of style, that thecongregation, who had been wroughtup to a painful pitch of admiration bythe dazzling eloquence of the preacher,felt a delightful repose in the chaste,natural, tender simplicity of language,in which Mr. Hall embodied his supplications."The richness, variety, and extent ofhis knowledge," says the author of apaper on pulpit oratory, printed in theLondon Magazine, of February, 1821,are not so remarkable as his absolutemastery over it. He moves about inthe loftiest sphere of contemplation, asthough he were ' native and enduedto its element' He uses the finestclassical allusions, the noblest images,and the most exquisite words, as thoughthey were those which came first to hismind, and which formed his naturaldialect. There is not the least appearanceof straining after greatness inhis most magnificent excursions, buthe rises to the loftiest heights with achild-like ease. His style is one of theclearest and simplest the least encumberedwith its own beauty of anywhich ever has been written. There isnothing very remarkable in Mr. Hall'smanner of delivering his sermons. Hissimplicity, yet solemnity of deportment,engage the attention, but do not promiseany of his most rapturous effusions.His voice is feeble, but distinct ; and,as he proceeds, it trembles beneath hisimages, and conveys the idea that thespring of sublimity and beauty in hismind is exhaustless, and would 'pourforth a more copious stream if it had awider channel than can be suppliedby the bodily organs."A very high degree of merit hasbeen generally attributed to his productionson miscellaneous subjects, publishedanonymously, as well as to suchof his sermons and charges as havebeen printed. It has been said, thatfew compositions of this age excel hisReflections on the Horrors of War,either in grandeur of conception, orfelicity of execution ; and his most celebrated,and truly admirable work, Onthe Influence of Modern Infidelity onSociety, is exhibited at the college ofAberdeen, (from which he received adiploma of D. D., but modestly declinedusing it,) as the finest model of style inthe English language. " His diction,"it has been observed, " displays anunlimited command, and an exquisitechoice, of language. His copious use ofScripture phrases bestows upon his stylean awful sanctity. The same purity oftaste, which appears in his choice ofwords, is equally apparent in the formsof expression into which they are combined.The turn of his phrases isgracefully idiomatic. In the constructionof his periods, he is, perhaps,superior to any other writer. Heseems to have employed every elegantand harmonious form of which the languageadmits ; always gratifying, oftenravishing the ear, but never cloyingit." " The originality with which heviews every subject," says a writer inthe Christian Observer, " and the with which he grasps it, areDISSENTERS.altogether remarkable. He followsin no track of other men ; neither histhoughts nor his language are borrowed.A prodigious power of memoryin the use of Scripture, anexquisite judgment in the dispositionof his materials, are united with a boldnessof conception, and a creative forceof imagination, which stamp an impressof originality and independence on allhis reasonings." " We know no one,"observes a writer in the Church ofIreland Magazine, " whose style is sostrictly after the classic model. Likethe ancient statuary, its high finishproves that it must have been elaborated;but all art is hidden."The works of this great preacher,"observes the author of the paper onpulpit oratory before quoted, " are, inthe highest sense of the term, imaginative;as distinguished not only fromthe didactic, but the fanciful. He possesses' the vision and the faculty divine,'in as high a degree as any of ourwriters in prose. His noblest passagesdo but make truth visible in the formof beauty, and ' clothe upon ' abstractideas, until they become palpable inexquisite shapes. The dullest writerwould not convey the same meaning inso few words as he has done in themost sublime of his illustrations." Thesame writer bears testimony to " thegreat and various excellence" of Mr.Hall's Discourses on War ; on the Discouragementsand Supports of theChristian Ministry ; on the Work ofthe Holy Spirit ; on the Death of thePrincess Charlotte ; and on the Prospectof an Invasion by Napoleon ; apiece, in which the critic remarks, Mr.Hall has blended the finest remembrancesof the antique world, the dearestassociations of British patriotism, andthe pure spirit of the Gospel, in a strainas noble as could have been poured outbyTartarus.Dugald Stewart has described him, ascombining the beauties of Johnson,Addison, and Burke, without their imperfections; adding, " whoever wishesto see the English language in itsperfection, must read his writings."Mr. Hall, like Bishop Taylor," saysDr. Parr, " has the eloquence of anorator, the fancy of a poet, the acutenessof a schoolman, the profoundnessof a scholar, and the piety of a saint;"and Bishop Porteus, on presentinghim with & copy of Kennicott's works,designates the gift, on the fly-leaf ofone 1 of the volumes, " as an appositeintimation of that applause, veneration,and gratitude, that are dueto the acute detector, perspicuous impugner,and victorious antagonist, ofthe sceptical infidels and the antichristiansophists of modern times."Although afflicted, from his childhood,with a most acute and irritatingmalady, to which the paucity of hispublications has been attributed, thelabour of composition increasing hispain, he has been held up as a patternof mildness in his domestic circle. Ofthe splendour, appositeness, and originalityof his familiar observations, it isimpossible, perhaps, by the followingspecimens, to convey a just idea.On going, for the first time, into YorkMinster, with a party of friends, hewas asked what he thought of its sublimearchitecture. " Sir," said he, " itwould awe a bacchanal I"When shewn the monument of Robinson,in which that celebrated pastoris sculptured erect, as if in the act ofreceiving the Bible from the hands ofChrist; instead of applauding, as hadbeen expected, the skill of the artist,he exclaimed, energetically, " The mansir, ought to have been prostrate atthe feet of his Maker 1"Being asked, by an ultra-Calvinist,if he thought he should see JohnWesley in heaven, he replied, " I fearnot ; for I think he will be so near thethrone of God, and I so distant fromit, that I shall scarcely be able to obtaina glimpse of him. He said, onanother occasion, " Whoever gets toheaven, will there find more womenthan men."Being asked if Cambridgeshire were,in his opinion, so devoid of the picturesqueas it had been described, hereplied, " Yes, sir ; it is, indeed, tothe eye, dreary : it is naked, withoutfoliage, without trees, except that, hereand there, a stunted willow astonishesthe traveller, as though nature wereputting up signals of distress."It would appear, from the followinganecdote, that as a tea-drinker, Johnsonscarcely excelled him : " Returningfrom a party at rather a late hour,weary and unwell, the lady, at whoseWILLIAM JAY.house he was residing, proposed to gethim a cup of tea : he gladly availedhimself of her offer ; and she, withgreat kindness, after he had emptiedthe kettle, asked if she should order itto be filled again. " Why, no, madam,"replied he, "I ought, perhaps, to beashamed for having taken so much :and yet, on consideration, I need not ;for it has brought two fine qualities intoexercise; great patience, madam, on yourpart, and great perseverance on mine."Hall, the celebrated and highly-talentedpreacher of Leicester," says aperiodical writer, in 1825, " is wonderfullyfond of his pipe. He interlards hisdomestic discourse with more ' poohs 'and 'sirs than any man breathing ; parexample: ' Scotchmen, sir, (pooh!)I believe I am, sir, (pooh ! pooh !)pestered, sir, (pooh !) with 'em, sir,beyond Christian credence, sir, (pooh !pooh ! pooh ] Here I have 'em, sir(pooh !) daily, sir, and hourly, sir,(pooh!) all sorts and sizes of 'em,sir, (pooh ! pooh !) sir, (pooh !)from tadpoles to big animals, sir,(pooh l)sir, (pooh !)' "WILLIAM JAY.THIS celebrated pastor was born atDisburse, in Wiltshire, on the 8th ofMay, 1 769. Being of humble parentage,he was educated at a school in his nativevillage, until, having, through theavidity he had displayed in the pursuitof knowledge, obtained an introductionto the Rev. Cornelius Winter, as a youthpossessing abilities which, if cultivated,might render him useful, he was admittedto that gentleman's establishmentfor younger intended for the dissentingministry. In this seminary, his progressas a student was so rapid, and his conductso exemplary, that, at the age of sixteen,he was encouraged to enter the pulpit;and so successful were his juvenile effortsas a preacher, that he was invitedto the metropolis, where he officiated,for two months, at Rowland Hill's chapel,in Blackfriars-road.Modestly declining a regular pastoralcharge, on account of his youth andinexperience, he now retired to a villagenear Chippenham, where he zealouslyprosecuted his theological studies, andoccasionally preached to the poor inhabitants,for about two years ; at theend of which period, having, then,although scarcely of age, deliveredupwards of one thousand discourses,he was, with some difficulty, persuadedto officiate at the Hope chapel, Hot-wells;whence, after the expiration ofa few months, he removed to Bath,having, at the earnest recommendationof his predecessor, when at the pointof death, been chosen minister of theIndependent congregation in that city,on the 31st of January, 1791. Argylechapel, the meeting-house of his hearers,has, since that period, on account ofhis popularity, been repeatedly enlarged; and whenever he has officiatedat other places, great crowds have invariablybeen attracted to his pulpit.In 1798, at the request of the EvangelicalSociety, he preached, for a fewweeks, in Ireland ; and it appears tohave been his custom, since his firstessay in Rowland Hill's chapel, to officiatethere regularly once a year; onthese occasions, it is said, above sixtyministers and students in divinity havesometimes been counted among hishearers. In 1810, the college of PrinceTown, in America, is reported to haveconferred on him the degree of D. D. onaccount of his reputation as a pulpit orator,and the great merit 'of his literaryproductions : these consist of A FarewellSermon, preached in 1789; A Tokenof Respect to the Memory of theRev. G. Tuppen, his predecessor atArgyle Chapel; The Mutual Duties ofHusbands and Wives ; An Essay onMarriage, or the Duties of Christians tomarry religiously, with a few Reflectionson Imprudent Marriages, (writtenand printed at the request of the WiltshireAssociation of Dissenting Ministers;) Reflections on Victory ; Memoirsof the Rev. Cornelius Winter, and theRev. John Clark ; The Domestic Minister'sAssistant, or Prayers, for the Use ofFamilies ; The Christian contemplated ;DISSENTERS.Morning Exercises for the Closet; twovolumes of sermons, and some otherpieces. He has obtained a high degreeof reputation, both as a preacher andan author. In his discourses, many ofwhich have been frequently reprinted,he is said to display a deep ana chastenedspirit of piety, combined with anextraordinary power of so revealing thedeceitfulness of the human heart, as toarrest the progress of religious delusion.He always brings home his subjects, itis added, to every man's business andbosom ; and never leaves truth in a stateof speculation, but renders it practicaland experimental in all its bearings.According to a writer in the EuropeanMagazine, his eloquence is sometimeshighly animated, but more commonlytender and pathetic. His voice is describedby the same writer, as possessingsuch peculiar " witcheries," that, bythe enunciation of a single sentence, hehas often been known to produce themost singular emotions in his hearers ;yet he appears to be so utterly destituteof affectation, that Sheridan characterizedhim as being the most perfectlynatural orator he had ever heard.His general observations are, on accountof the practical and perspicuousstyle of his preaching, so frequently applicableto individuals among his congregation,that he has been accused ofdescending to undignified personalities ;a charge, as it is stated, totally destituteof foundation, nothing being atgreater variance with the tenor of hisconduct and life than such a practice. Ithas also been excepted against him, thathe is too textual, in his sermons ; butinreply, it has been triumphantly observed,that his intimate knowledge ofthe sacred writings enabled him to clothehis own ideas in scriptural language,than which nothing, under such circumstances,from the lips of a divine, can hemore powerful, or in better taste. Hissermons, of which he merely sketchesthe outline in manuscript, and adds thedetails extemporaneously, are frequentlyembellished with appropriate anecdotes ;but, it is remarked, that " in his anxietyto be simple and familiar, and his wishto be understood by the common people,who form the mass of his hearers, he,perhaps, occasionally descends too muchfrom a very refined taste." In theMonthly Review, it is observed, thathis discourses are regular, withoutbeing formal ; animated, without beingrhapsodical ; and explanatory withoutbeing paraphrastical. " His principles,"it is added, " may be described as tincturedwith Calvinism, rather thanrigidly Calvinistic ; and while he boldlyavows his own convictions, he evincesthe greatest liberality of sentiment."EDWARD IRVING.EDWARD IRVING was born atAnna, in Dumfries-shire, in 1792, andafter having acquired the rudiments oflearning at some private schools, wassent, for the completion of his education,to the university of Edinburgh,where, before he had obtained hisseventeenth year, he is said to havedistinguished himself by an intrepidattempt to defend the rights of hisclass, in some polemical dispute withthe presiding authorities. In or aboutthe year 1809, he was appointed tosuperintend the mathematical school atHaddington, whence he was removedto instruct the higher classes at .Being, soon afterwards, qualifiedto preach, he became a probationer, andofficiated at various churches in Scotland; until, at length, a gentleman,named Thompson, recommended himto the notice of Dr. Chalmers, whoengaged him as his assistant preacherat Glasgow ; where he gained so muchreputation, that, on the death of Dr.Mac Naughty, he was elected ministerof the Caledonian chapel, in Cross-street,Hatton garden, although, by hisignorance of Gaelic, he was not qualifiedfor the office, a considerable sumof money having been left to the elders,with a proviso, that their pastor shouldpreach in that language as well as inEnglish. For the purpose, however, ofensuring his services, a parliamentarydispensation on this point was obtainedEDWARD IRVING.by the elders ; and, in the month ofAugust, 1822, the new minister tookpossession of his pulpitEarly in the following year, theDuke of York having attended, aspatron of the charity, to hear the anniversarysermon of the London CaledonianSchool, preached at the chapelin Cross-street, he was so struck withthe peculiarities of Mr. Irving, that hementioned him to many persons ofrank as being a most extraordinaryman. The chapel, consequently, soonbecame the resort of great numbers ofthe nobility ; his fame rapidly increased ;and the greatest orators and statesmenof the day hurried to hear him. Atlength, it became necessary to excludethe public from the chapel, and toadmit only such persons as had previously,by letter, applied for, and received,per post, tickets of admission.During the hours of divine service, thechapel was constantly thronged, andsuch crowds were assembled round thedoors, that the ticket-holders could not,without considerable difficulty, obtainan entrance. Curiosity was excited tothe utmost ; and, to use the words of acotemporary writer, " a most feverishanxiety prevailed to hear and see theastonishing preacher at Cross-streetchapel ; who, in person, manner, andstyle, was said to be an admirable nondescript."The spectator, on effectingan entry, found himself in a chapel ofmoderate dimensions, surrounded bythe gay, the noble, and the talented ofboth sexes. The character of the buildinginformed him that he was in a placeof worship ; the looks and manners ofthe assembly were such as are displayedat a theatre, on the stage of which someextraordinary performer is about toenter. Soon after every part of thechapel had become densely and mostoppressively crowded, the preacher appeared,tall, athletic, and sallow ; arrayedin the scanty robe of the Scotchdivines ; displaying a profusion of jet-black,glossy hair, reaching even to hisshoulders, which were ample, but instrict proportion to his figure ; with asingular obliquity in one of his eyes ;and a sterns calm, solemnity of aspect,somewhat debased by an expressionindicative of austere pride, and conscioussanctity. His strong northernaccent added to his singularity; whichwas still further increased by theviolent, yet energetic, the ungraceful,but impressive, style of his gesticulation.His diction had an imitative affinity tothat of Milton and Jeremy Taylor; itwas unusual and startling. He embellishedhis discourse with the languageof poets and philosophers; headded to the interest of his sermonsby indulging in personalities, and spokesuch homely truths to his noble andtalented auditors, as they had but rarelybeen accustomed to hear. His variouspeculiarities increased his popularity ;his name constantly filled the publicear ; his portrait appeared in variousperiodicals ; he was gazed at, as a wonder,in the streets ; and the curiosity ofall classes to hear him preach appearedto be insatiable.His immediate followers, proud ofhis success, now began to erect for him acapacious church at the back of ; but, by the time it wasfinished, he had ceased to be attractive.Like other novelties, after having " hadhis day," he had gone out of fashion.His eccentricities had become familiar,and lost their charm. He had publisheda work, entitled, For the Oracles of God,Four Orations ; For Judgment to Come,an Argument in nine parts ; which hadbeen reviewed with just severity by theperiodical writers. The book was fatalto his already fast-waning reputation.It abounded in obsolete epithets, bombasticmetaphors, and illogical conclusions; a singular want of taste andjudgment prevailed throughout its pages.The style was a grotesque imitation ofthat of the old divines, of whom, however,he had imbibed none of the eloquence,or argumentative power. Hiscompositions were evidently of a characterthat would not bear the ordealof critical examination. By submittingthem to the press, their author gavethe death-blow to his fame. It becameevident, that his mode of delivery, hisstrong northern accent, his peculiaraction, and, above all, the imposingsingularity of his appearance, had, incombination with fortuitous circumstances,raised him to an elevation,which, by his talents, he could neverhave attained. A violent reaction ensued; and, in a few months, his hearers,on an average, scarcely equalled innumber those of his predecessor.DISSENTERS.In 1827, he contributed a preliminarydiscourse to a work, translatedfrom the Spanish, entitled, The Comingof the Messiah in Glory and Majesty,by Juan Josafat Ben Ezra, a convertedJew ; which exposed him to an attackfrom a writer of the name of Cole, forhaving supported " the awful doctrineof the sinfulness, mortality, and corruptibilityof the body of the Messiah."A controversy ensued on the subject,which, at length, attracted the seriousnotice of the Presbytery, to whom thetenets of Mr. Irving appear to havebeen, in a high degree, offensive. In1828, he printed A Letter to the King,on the Repeal of the Test and CorporationActs, a measure which he strenuouslyopposed : during the sameyear, appeared his Last Days, and Discourseson the Evil Character of theseour Times; also, three volumes of hissermons, lectures, and occasional discourses;and, in 1829, he publishedhis Church and State responsible toChrist and to one another, a series ofdiscourses on Daniel's vision of thebeasts.In a work, entitled The Trial of theRev. Edward Irving, he has been copiouslyabused ; in other cotemporaryproductions, he has met with but littlemore favour ; and, it is probable, thatto posterity his reputation will be thereverse of enviable. " The peculiarcharacteristic of Mr. Irving's style,"says Flavel, " is a straining after originalityof ideas, and the expressingthem In the language of the time ofMilton, Jeremy Taylor, and otherwonderful divines of those days; butwhat in them was allowed ornamental,in him is perfect absurdity. They wereconsummate reasoners ; and the strangeand beautiful metaphors, which wemeet with in the perusal of theirwritings, are admired and dwelt on,because they spring up naturally onthe paths of the argument; besides, itwas the custom of the age to employsuch language. Had he shewn himselfas good a logician as his great prototypes,we could have borne with hisoverstrained, inflated diction ; but, as itis, his arguments and orations remindus of those wooden figures, in whichdress-makers are accustomed to exhibittheir newest and most splendid paraphernalia."" He came to London,"observes a periodical writer, of the year1824, " with the idea, that he was destinedto convert the fashionable worldfrom the error of their ways ; a beingraised up on purpose to evangelize thearistocracy of Britain. But we shouldbe glad to hear," the writer adds, " thatone convert has been brought over topractical Christianity ; that one Sundayevening conversazione has been droppedthat one pack of cards the less hasbeen soiled at the Sunday card-tablethat one duke the less has travelledon the Sabbath that one shilling themore has been given to the poor. Hehas been called another Paul preachingat Athens; but where is the Agrippawhom he' has convinced, or the Felixwhom he has made to tremble, exceptat the elevated tone of his vociferation ?He has preached, to be sure, preachedmuch, and vehemently ; but his languageha been ' full of sound andfury, signifying nothing,' ' vox, etpraeterea nihil.' He had better haveadhered closely to Dr. Chalmers andthe good men of Glasgow, and havemade himself a light to enlighten thepoor, instead of setting himself up asabeacon, in the world of wealth, forweak men to flock to, and witty mento laugh at. It is within Mr. Irving'sgrasp," continues the writer, " to becomeone of the lights of the age, andto acquire a character amongst theworthies of his time, which it will bethepleasure of future generations toadmire, and their pride to imitate.This, we affirm, is within his reach;but if he perseveres in his present eccentricities,he will be as easily forgottenas he has been elevated."He has distinguished himself as awarm supporter, to the utmost extentof his power, of various charitable andreligious institutions. At a meetingof the society for the conversion ofthe Jews, he is said to have placed hiswatch in the hands of the chairman,exclaiming, " Silver and gold have Inone ; but such as I have, I give untothee ;" adding, " that he wished thebauble to be retained, until, the profitsof a work, which he intended to publish,should enable him to redeem it."In October, 1823, Mr. Irving married,at Kirkaldy, in Scotland, a young ladynamed Martin, to whom, it is said, hehad long been attached.APPENDIX.THE ROYAL FAMILY.GEORGE WILLIAM, (PRINCE,)second son of George the Second, wasborn on the 2nd of November, 1777,and died when only three monthsold.ELIZABETH CAROLINE, (Princess,)daughter of Frederick, Prince ofWales, born on the 30th of December,1740, is described as having been deformedin person, but superior in mindto either of her brothers or sisters. Shedied, on the 4th of September, 1759.FREDERICK WILLIAM (PRINCE)son of Frederick, Prince of Wales, wasborn on the 30th of May, 1750. He isrepresented as having been singularlygraceful in person, amiable in temper,and remarkably eager for the acquirementof knowledge. He died on the29th of December, 1765.ELIZABETH, (PRINCESS, Landgravineof Hesse Homberg,) thirddaughter of George the Third, was bornon the 22nd of May, 1770. In herchildhood, she was lively, intelligent,and remarkably beautiful ; and, onreaching maturity, she is said to havebeen elegant, agreeable, and accomplished.On the 7th of April, 1818, shewas married to the Landgrave of HesseHomberg, whom she accompanied toGermany, where he died, without issueby the princess, early in 1829.SOPHIA MATILDA, (PRINCESS,)daughter of William Henry, Duke ofGloucester, was born in May, 1773.Although no splendid qualities havebeen publicly displayed by this princess,her private character is said to benot only above impeachment, but decidedlycommendable.CAROLINE AUGUSTA, (Princess,)daughter of William Henry,Duke of Gloucester, was born on the24th of June, 1774, and died in herinfancy.SOPHIA, (PRINCESS,) fifth daughterof George the Third, was born on the3rd of November, 1777. Her demeanouris said to be agreeable, and her dispositionbeneficent.Octavia, (PRINCE,) eighth sonof George the Third, was born on the28th of February, 1779; and died, rathersuddenly, on the 3rd of May, 1783.ALFRED, (PRINCE,) ninth son ofKing George the Third, was born onthe 22nd of September, 1780, and diedon the 20th of August, 1782.ELIZABETH ADELAIDE, (Princess,)daughter of the Duke of Clarence,was born on the 4th of March,1819, and lived only a few hours.GEORGE WILLIAM, (PRINCE,)son of the Duke of Cambridge, wasborn on the 26th of March, 1819. Heis said to possess an excellent temper,and rather superior talents.VICTORIA, (PRINCESS,) onlydaughter of Edward, Duke of Kent,was born on the 23rd of May, 1819.She is described as being amiable, lively,and intelligent.GEORGE FREDERICK, (PRINCE)son of Ernest Augustus, Duke of Cumberland,was born on the 27th of May,1819. His abilities appear to be good,and his moral qualities, so far as theyhave been developed, unexceptionable.ELIZABETH, (PRINCESS,) daughterof the Duke of Clarence, was born,prematurely, on the 2nd of December,1820, and "died on the 4th of March,1821.CAROLINE, (PRINCESS,) daughterof the Duke of Cambridge, was bornon the 19th of July, 1822, and christenedCaroline Charlotte Elizabeth Maria SophiaLouisa.THE PRETENDERS' ADHERENTS.Bernard, (JOHN,) the son of aGenoese consul, who settled in Worcestershire,was born at Evesham, andabandoned his home at an early age, tobecome a common soldier, in one of theEnglish regiments in the Dutch service.Being possessed of considerable talents,he gradually rose to the rank of captain ;but precluded himself from further pro -motion, by giving some offence to thePrince of Orange, afterwards Williamthe Third ; on whose elevation to thethrone, Bernard! followed James theSecond to Ireland. A mission, on whichhe had been despatched to Scotland,proving fruitless, he made his escape toHolland ; whence he ventured to returnto this country, in 1695, and, being discovered,was committed to Newgate,on a charge of having taken part in aplot against the life of King William.By six express enactments, of as manydifferent parliaments, he remained aprisoner for a period of forty years ; hiscaptivity terminating with his life, inthe month of September, 1736. Thereason why a man of so little importancewas thus detained in confinement byauthority of the legislature, under foursuccessive sovereigns, without beingbrought to trial, was, it is surmised,that some unpleasant exposures mustnecessarily have attended his conviction.He is described as having been smallin person, brisk, vivacious, and endowedwith extraordinary fortitude. Duringhis imprisonment, he married and hada large family.Woman, (NICHOLAS,) was born inIreland, about the year 1667, andhighly distinguished himself on the continent,in his younger days, as a soldierof fortune. " He joined Forster," saysPatten, " at the first meeting, and wasindefatigable in forwarding the successof the cause. His self-devotion wastruly chivalrous ; and in the action atPreston, his intrepidity was remarkablyconspicuous. His generosity onthe same occasion, was even morenoble than his courage ; for he succeededin bringing off prisoner CaptainPreston, of Preston's regiment of foot,who was mortally wounded throughthe body, by a bullet from the rebels,and just at the point of being cut inpieces. He hazarded his life amonghis own men, if possible, to save thatgentleman, though an enemy, and waswounded in doing it." Having beentaken prisoner, he was brought to trial,and convicted of high treason ; but receivedthe royal pardon on the 16th ofAugust, 1716, and died in 1734.FITZJAMES, (james duke of Berwick,)an illegitimate son of James, Dukeof York, afterwards James the Second,by Arabella Churchill, sister to the greatDuke of Marlborough, was born on the21st of August, 1670, and educated withhis brother, subsequently Duke of Albemarle,at Tully, the college of Plessis,and Paris. At the age of fifteen, heentered the imperial army, and serveda campaign in Hungary, where heobtained the command of a regimentof cuirassiers. On his return to England,although still under eighteen,he was appointed governor of Portsmouth.In the next summer he wasmade colonel of a regiment of infantry,and, soon after, of Lord Oxford's horse-guards.At the time of the revolution,he surrendered Portsmouth to thePrince of Orange, by command of hisroyal father, with whom he embarked,at Rochester, for France. In March,1689, he landed, with James the Second,at Kindle, and highly distinguishedhimself against the troops of Williamthe Third, at Donegal, Enniskillin, andother parts of Ireland ; which he quittedin 1691, and, shortly afterwards, accompaniedLouis the Fourteenth, as a volunteer,to the seat of war in Flanders.During the campaign of 1693, he wasmade prisoner by his uncle, Brigadier-generalChurchill, brother to the Dukeof Marlborough. In 1695, he marrieda daughter of the Earl of Clanrickard ;PRETENDERS ADHERENTS.and, having become a widower in 1698,on his return from a tour in Italy,about two years after, formed an unionwith a niece of Lord Berkeley. In1702, he appears to have commandedpart of the French forces in Flanders,under the Duke of Burgundy andMarshal Boufflers ; and, in 1704, heserved a campaign in Spain, as captain-generalof the forces of Philip the Fifth,who invested him, for his services, withthe order of the Golden Fleece. Duringthe next year, being recalled by theKing of France, he held the supremecommand in Languedoc ; and, besiegingNice, then considered one of thestrongest places in Europe, compelledit to capitulate. In February, 1706, hewas created marshal of France ; and,shortly after, resumed the command ofthe army in Spain, the previous disastersof which, he had the honour, insome measure, of retrieving ; and obtained,as a mark of gratitude from theSpanish king, the title of Duke ofBerwick, with the towns of Lira,Erica, and their dependencies. In1708, he was appointed to commandthe French forces in Dauphine; butwas shortly afterwards removed to thearmy under the Elector of Bavaria, ofwhich, although second in command,he is said to have solely directed theoperations. In 1709, he obtained fromthe French king the dukedom of Warty ;and, after having, in the interim, addedmaterially to his reputation as a commander,he reduced, in 1714, the garrisonand city of Barcelona. Aboutthis time, he appears to have devotedmuch of his attention to the restorationof the Stuartss. By means of LadyBashan, he and his party succeeded,as he states, in procuring the dismissalof the lord treasurer, Harley ; " but,unfortunately," he adds, "before thenew ministry could have time to concerttheir measures together, every hopeof success was precluded by the deathof the queen, which happened on the12th of August, 1714, four days afterthe Earl of Oxford's dismission. TheElector of Hanover was instantly proclaimedking, and, by his orders, everythingwas changed. I was then inCatalonia, at too great a distance to actoreven to give advice ; and had I beenat Paris, I should have been much embarrassed,considering the position ofaffairs. It was not our fault that wehad not concerted any arrangements incaseof the event which had just happened; and France, however well inclinedshe might be, was not in a conditionto risk a new war to support theinterests of the young Pretender."The French monarch being either unwillingor unable to afford the Jacobitesany assistance, Berwick applied forhelp to the King of Sweden, who, as hestates, had eight thousand men encampedat Gothenburg, and severaltransports in the harbour, which mighthave conveyed the troops to Scotland ineight-and-forty hours. The Pretenderagreed to pay down fifty thousandcrowns, for the costs of embarkation ;the court of France encouraged theenterprize ; but the Swedish king, accordingto Berwick, who wrote somevery interesting memoirs of his life,missed a glorious opportunity of advancinghis affairs, or rather, of relievinghimself from oppression, by decliningto afford the expected aid, alleging,that he wanted the whole of his troopsfor the defence of his own dominions.In 1716, the Duke of Berwick wasappointed to a military command inGuienne; and, subsequently, distinguishedhimself, on various occasions,as a general of consummate skill, andextraordinary courage, until 1734,when he was killed by a cannon-ball,at the siege of Philipsburg. He is describedas having been fond of glory ;but to have sought it, chiefly, in theline of his duty, which no one knew orperformed better than himself. In thehurry of the most difficult operations,and the heat of the warmest actions,he is said to have preserved " thattranquillity and coolness, which is theeffect of natural intrepidity, and a perfectknowledge of that art, which, inshewing us all we have to fear from anenemy, points out, at the same time,what we have to oppose to him." Itis added, that no man of modern timesapproached so nearly, in character, toan heroic Greek.MURRAY, (WILLIAM, Marquess ofTullibardine,) son of the Duke of Athol,incurred forfeiture by engaging in therebellion of 1715 ; he,' however, avoidedcapture, and resided for a number ofyears on the continent. In 1745, heAPPENDIX.arrived in Scotland, with the youngPretender, whose fortunes he followedduring the whole of the campaign. AtCulloden, he fell into the hands of theking's troops, and was confined in theTower until his death, which took placeat the latter part of 1747.STEWART, (ANDREW, of Inver-hale,)one of the foremost in the chargeof the insurgents, on the Sir John Cope'stroops, at Preston-Pans, after havingsaved a colonel in the royal army, namedWhitefield, from being cut down by agigantic Highlander, with some difficultyprevailed on him to surrender,and, out of respect for the bravery heTied displayed, soon afterwards procuredhim his liberty on parole. Onthe ruin of the young Pretender'shopes, by the decisive victory obtainedover his adherents, at Culloden, ColonelWhitefield gratefully exerted himselfto procure his benefactor's pardon, bythe most urgent appeals to all thegreat officers of state in Scotland. Hisefforts proving fruitless, he waited onthe Duke of Cumberland, and entreateda protection for Inverhayle's family andestate ; which, however, he could notobtain, until he had intimated his desireto abandon a service in which noclemency was extended to the vanquishedand helpless. In compliancewith the protection thus wrung fromthe duke, Inverhayle's property wasspared, by a party of troops who wereencamped on his estate, for the purpose,if possible, of securing his person. Likethe Baron of Bradwardine, in the novelof Waverley, the leading incidents ofwhich are avowedly founded on anecdotesof the life of Inverhayle, the proscribedchief lay concealed in a neighbouringcave, whither provisions wereso adroitly conveyed, as to elude thevigilance of the English sentinels, by oneof his children, a girl about eight yearsof age. With much difficulty and somehair-breadth 'scapes," he succeededin avoiding detection, and was eventuallyincluded in the act of indemnity.The author of Waverley, who knewhim well, in addition to the foregoingcircumstances, states, that Inverhaylehad been out in the rebellion of 1715,as well as in that of 1745 ; that he hadfought a broadsword duel with Rob Roy ;and that, when Paul Jones entered theFirth of Forth, although then an oldman, he was " the only person whoseemed to propose a plan of resistance."MURRAY, (Lord CHARLES,) son ofthe Duke of Athol, was born in 1687,and distinguished himself as a zealouspartizan of the Stuartss, during the rebellionof 1715. " He had been," saysPatten, "a cornet of horse beyond sea,and had gained a mighty good characterfor his bravery, even temper, andgraceful deportment Upon all themarches he could never be prevailedwith to ride ; but kept at the head ofhis regiment (the 5th) on foot, in hisHighland dress, without breeches. Hewould scarce accept of a horse to crossthe rivers, which his men, in that seasonof the year, forded above mid-thighdeep in water." Being taken at Preston,he was tried by a court-martial for desertion,and sentenced to be shot ; butreceived a free pardon in September,1717, and died in 1729.KEITH, (JAMES,) the youngest sonof William Keith, Earl Marshal of Scotland,was born in 1696. On the breakingout of the rebellion, in 1715, heabandoned the law, for which he hadbeen destined, and joined the Pretender'sstandard. At the battle ofSheriff-muir, he was severely wounded,and, with much difficulty, escaped toFrance, where he devoted himself tothe study of military tactics. In 1717,he visited Italy, and thence proceededto Spain, where he obtained a commissionin Ormond's Irish brigade, throughthe interest of the Duke of Lira, whomhe shortly afterwards accompanied toRussia. Entering into the service ofthe Czarina, he obtained the rank oflieutenant-general, as well as the orderof the black eagle, and highly distinguishedhimself against the Turks andSwedes. He also took a conspicuous partin the revolution by which Elizabethwas raised to the throne ; but, at length,he retired in disgust to Prussia, where,he was received with great honour, and,immediately made a field-marshal, byFrederick the Great. After having acquiredthe highest military renown inthe service of that monarch, his careerwas terminated by a cannon-shot, atthe battle of Hochkirchen, on the 14thof October, 1758. His skill as a poli-pretendersADHERENTS.titian, is said to have equalled his talentas a commander.WHARTON, (PHILIP, Duke ofWharton,) son of the Marquess ofWharton, was born about the year1699. At the age of fourteen, he clandestinelymarried a daughter of Major-generalHolmes, and soon afterwardsproceeded to the continent, avowedlyfor the purpose of completing his education;but abruptly quitted his tutorat Geneva, leaving a bear's cub " as amore suitable companion" for the latterthan himself, and went to Avignon, atthat time the residence of the Pretender,who conferred upon him theorder of the Garter, and the title ofDuke of Northumberland. " Thus attached,"says Seward, " to the partyof that unfortunate prince, he cameto Paris, where he is thus described,in a despatch of that excellent minister,Sir Benjamin Keene : ' TheDuke of Wharton has not been sober,or scarce had a pipe out of his mouth,since he left St. Ildefonso.' " The DowagerQueen of James the Second,pawned her jewels, to raise him 2,000,which he promised to expend in furtheringthe Jacobite cause, but speedilysquandered in the most extravagantmanner. While yet a minor, he tookhis seat in the Irish house of lords,where he displayed so much zeal andtalent in favour of government, that hewas raised to the English peerage.Shortly afterwards, he abandoned theWhigs ; published a virulent oppositionpaper; and became an avowed Jacobite.When Atterbury was impeached, "actingcontrition," according to HoraceWalpole, " he professed being determinedto work out his pardon at court,by speaking against the bishop ; inorder to which, he begged some hints.The minister was deceived, and wentthrough the whole case with him,pointing out where the strength of theargument lay, and where was its weakness.The duke was very thankful,returned to town, passed the night indrinking, and, without going to bed,went to the house of lords, where hespoke for the bishop, recapitulating, inthe most masterly manner, and answering,all that had been urged againsthim." On account of pecuniary embarrassments,which are wholly to beascribed to his reckless extravagance,he once more visited the continent;where, being now a widower, he marrieda Spanish maid of honour. For his intriguesin behalf of the Pretender, hewas soon afterwards attainted of hightreason, and deprived of his estates.It is said, that his conduct had by thistime excited universal disgust ; yet, theexiled prince thought proper to sendhim 2,000, which he speedily dissipated.Rejecting an offer of Sir RobertWalpole, to reverse his attainder, hetravelled, for some time, on the continent,attended by a regiment of raggedservants ; and, it is stated, would haveperished in a state of destitution, hadhe not been charitably entertained bysome monks, of the order of St. Bernard;in whose convent, near Tarragona,he fell a victim to habitual intemperance,on the 31st of May, 1731; duringwhich year, two volumes of his poems,speeches, and plays, appear to havebeen published. He appears to havebeen a man of great abilities, singulareloquence, brilliant wit, and fascinatingmanners ; but without judgment, morality,religion, or common decorum.MACDONALD, (ANGUS, of Keppoch,)was born in 1711, and joinedthe standard of Charles Edward in1745, with the whole of his clan. Tothe bravery of Keppoch and hisfollowers, the success of the Jacobitesat Preston-Pans and Falkirk hasbeen chiefly attributed. The clan,however, acted in the most disgracefulmanner at Culloden ; having, in consequence,it is said, of being placedin the left wing of the rebel forces,retreated, when about twenty pacesfrom the royal troops, without strikinga blow. Indignant at the conduct ofhis countrymen, " Macdonald of Keppoch,"says Home, " advanced withhis drawn sword in one hand, and hispistol in the other : he had pot but alittle way from his regiment, when hewas wounded by a musket-shot, andfell. A friend, who had followed,conjuring him not to throw his lifeaway, said that the wound was notmortal ; that he might easily join hisregiment, and retreat with them. Keppochdesired him to take care of himself,and, going on, received anothershot, and fell to rise no more."APPENDIX.Coppice. (THOMAS,) sometimescalled Cappouch, who is stated to havebeen a native of England and a student,was created Bishop of Carlisle, byCharles Edward, whom he accompaniedin the march to Preston. Being takenprisoner, he was brought to trial, withseveral of the other insurgents, foundguilty of high treason, and executed,with revolting barbarity, at Carlisle, onthe 18th of October, 1746. It is stated,that when he and his companions receivedsentence, he said to the latter,as they were quitting the court, " Whatthe devil are you afraid of? We shan'tbe tried by a Cumberland jury in thenext world!"ANDERSON, (ROBERT,) of Whit-burgh,a gentleman of property, in EastLothian, was one of the persons whomLord George Murray consulted as tothe practicability of crossing the marshypiece of ground which divided the royaland insurgent armies, previously to thebattle of Preston-Pans. At first, hedeemed the morass impassable, but,after Lord George had dismissed him,he recollected that there was a circuitouspath, eastward, which led tothe position occupied by the king'stroops. At the suggestion of Hepburnof Keith, he returned to communicatethe fact to Lord George, who was nosooner apprised of it, than he hurriedwith the welcome intelligence to PrinceCharles, whom he found fast asleep onthe field, with a bunch of geese-haulmfor his pillow. In the course of thenight, all the rebel forces crossed themorass, and taking the royal troops bysurprise, obtained a brilliant victory.MACGREGOR, (MALCOLM,) son ofDuncan Macgregor, of Craigie, appearsto have been captain of a troop of theMacgregor, who, at the battle ofPreston-Pans, in 1745, armed withscythe-blades, fixed at the ends of poles,as it is stated, cut off the legs ofhorses, severed the bodies of men intwain, and contributed, materially, bythe dreadful execution they did, to thevictory obtained by Charles Edwardover Sir John Cope. At an early periodof the contest, while proceeding acrossthe field to join their clan-regiment,they were fully exposed to the fire ofthe royal troops ; and their gallantleader, Malcolm Macgregor, receivedno less than five gun-shot wounds, twobullets actually passing through hisbody. As the party marched on, Malcolm,though at the point of death,raised himself upon his elbow, and exclaimed:" Hark ye, my lads, I'm notdead : therefore, let no man think ofneglecting his duty, for, by G d ! myeye will be upon him."DICKSON, (Serjeant,) was madeprisoner by Charles Edward, at Preston,and enlisted into his service. Havinggot a day's march beyond the rebelforces, he entered Manchester, with hismistress and a drummer, on the 29thof November, 1745, and immediatelybegan to beat up for recruits. Greatnumbers of the populace soon surrounded,and attempted to take himprisoner, but he kept them at bay withhis blunderbuss, until he was rescuedby the resident Jacobites, under whoseprotection he paraded the streets forseveral hours, and, in the evening,marched off, undisturbed, to meetCharles Edward, at the head of onehundred and eighty followers, whomhe had enlisted at the trilling expenseof three guineas. On account of thisadventure, Manchester, with its thirtythousand souls, was jocosely said tohave been taken by three Jacobites,a serjeant, a drummer, and a girl !Johnston, (Chevalier de,) theson of a merchant at Edinburgh, wasborn in 1720. At an early age he appearsto have evinced an inclination foramilitary life ; and, being brought upin Jacobite principles, on the breakingout of the rebellion, in 1745, he privatelyquitted his father's house, and joinedthe insurgents at Duncrub. He wasimmediately appointed aide-de-camp toLord George Murray, and, afterwards,aide-de-camp to the prince. After havingfought at the battle of Preston Pans,he obtained a captain's commission,and raised an independent company,with which he served throughout thecampaign. Escaping from the fatalbattle of Culloden, he concealed himselffor some time in the house of LadyJane Douglas, whence he proceeded toEngland in the disguise of a pedlar. Atlength he reached the continent; andafter having, for some time, subsistedPRETENDERS ADHERENTS.on the slender allowance bestowed onthe Scotch exiles by France, enteredinto the service of that nation, andacted in the capacity of aide-de-campin Canada ; on the conquest of which,by the British forces, he returned toFrance, where he died at rather anadvanced age. Towards the close ofhis life, he composed, in French, Memoirsof the Rebellion in 1745 and1746 ; of which, a translation from themanuscript originally deposited in theScots' college, at Paris, appeared in1820. His person was short and slender;his demeanour elegant; his mentalcapacity respectable ; and his dispositionopen and impetuous. He issaid to have indulged in whateverpertained to enjoyment, spurning restraint,and evincing but little regardeither for morality or religion.GRANT, (COLQUHOUN,) one ofPrince Charles' body guards, had thesatisfaction, shortly before the battle ofPreston Pans, of saving two of hisfriends, (afterwards Lord Greenstoneand General Cunningham,) who werethen volunteers in the royal army, frombeing summarily executed as spies. Itappears that they had been employed,during the night, to patrole the coast-road,between Sir John Cope's camp,at Haddington, and that of the insurgents; but, being both bon vivants,had so neglected their duty, as to supat a tavern, (on oysters and sherry,) atthe opposite side of the Esse, whichthey had crossed at low water. Whilethey were regaling, a writer's apprentice,who was on his way to join theinsurgents, chanced to pass by thehouse. " He saw the two volunteers,"says a writer in the Quarterly Review,through the window; knew them,and guessed their business: he sawthe tide would make it impossible forthem to return across the sands, asthey had come ; he therefore placedhimself in ambush, on the steep, narrow,impracticable bridge, which wasthen, and for many years afterwards,the only place of crossing the Esse ;arid how he contrived it I could neverlearn but the courage and assuranceof his province are proverbial, and theNorland whipper-snapper, surroundedand made prisoners of the two unfortunatevolunteers, before they coulddraw a trigger." Roy Stuart, the commanderof the prince's bodyguard, intowhose hands they were placed, proposedto hang them both, as spies. Althoughin a state of dreadful consternation,they luckily recollected that theiracquaintance, Colquhoun Grant, wasone of Roy Stuart's corps, and boldlyasserted that he would prove their innocence.On being brought before Grant,he interfered successfully in their behalf,and, shortly afterwards, permittedthem to escape. At the battle of PrestonPans, after having, it is said, displayedextraordinary valour, he mounted "thehorse of a British officer, who hadfallen a victim to his prowess, and rode,alone, after a party of the royal dragoons,which fled at full speed towardsthe castle of Edinburgh. " In the rearof their long straggling troop," saysChambers, in his interesting History "ofthe Rebellion, " came the heroic Grant,so close in pursuit, that he entered theNetherbow port, ere the warders couldclose the gate which had been openedto receive them : notwithstanding allhis efforts, they got safe to the castle,and he was obliged to turn away disappointed."He might now, without muchdifficulty, have been taken or killed,by the citizens, whom, however, heseems to have perfectly intimidated byhis dauntless deportment. After havingcoolly ordered a full suit of tartan, at adraper's shop, in the Lawn-market, herode, sword in hand, to the Netherbowport. The guards, who had determinedon detaining him, were struck with somuch awe, by his athletic frame, terrificvoice, bloody weapon and habiliments,that they opened the gate ; and, on beingsubsequently taunted for having sufferedhim to escape, intimated that theythought it was very well of them toget rid of the fellow in the way theydid. Colquhoun Grant, subsequentlybecame a very respectable writer to thesignet, at Edinburgh.DAWSON, (JAMES,) the son of aLancashire gentleman, after havingnearly completed his studies at StJohn's college, Cambridge, abandonedthe university, on account of someyouthful excesses, and became an officerin the English regiment of insurgents,taken at Carlisle, in the rebellion of1745. Being found guilty of highAPPENDIX.treason, at the court-house, on St ,Southwark, on the 15th ofJuly, 1746, he was roused from hisslumbers, about six o'clock in the morningof the 30th of the same month, toprepare for immediate execution, onKennington Common, with eight of hisunfortunate associates. He had, for sometimeprior to his quitting college, beenattached to a young lady of fortune, towhom, it is said, he would have beenimmediately united, had he obtained anacquittal. In opposition to the wishes ofher friends, his intended bride went towitness his execution ; during the dreadfulpreparations of which, although thefire prepared to consume herlover's heartwas blazing before her, she retained aperfect mastery over her feelings ; but,according to Dough Graham, when theshouts of the multitude announced thetermination of his mortal career, she fellupon the neck of a female companion,exclaiming, ." My love, I follow thee!Sweet Jesus, receive our souls together!"and immediately expired.MACDONALD, (FLORA,) thedaughter of Macdonald, of Milton, inSouth Uist, who, dying while she wasan infant, her mother became the wifeof Macdonald, of Armadale, in Skye,senior captain of one of the companiesemployed, on the Long Island, to preventCharles Edward's escape; which,however, with her assistance, he succeededin effecting. The particularsof her romantic adventures with CharlesEdward, having been already stated inthe memoir of his life, at page 159of this volume, the residue of the presentnotice will be confined to a sketchof her subsequent career. On partingfrom Flora Macdonald, at Porter,Charles Edward is said to have tenderlyembraced her, and, after thanking herwarmly for the great services she hadrendered him, to have presented herwith his miniature as a token of hisgratitude. In consequence of informationextorted from the boatmen whohad rowed them from South Uist, shewas soon afterwards apprehended andsent to London ; where she was visited,in prison, by Frederick Prince of Wales;to whom, in reply to a question as toher motives, in delivering the youngPretender from his perilous situation,she stated, that should his royal highness,or any member of the reigningfamily, apply for her assistance undercircumstances equally distressing, withGod's blessing, it should be as cheerfullyafforded ; for that in saving theunfortunate adventurer, she had simplyobeyed the dictates of humanity. Theprince, it is said, greatly admired herreply, and, through his interest, afterhaving been imprisoned for about ayear, she obtained her discharge. Onbeing liberated, she went to reside atthe house of Lady Primrose, where shewas visited by a number of distinguishedJacobites, from whom she received themost flattering attention and many valuablepresents. After having exciteda high degree of admiration by the unassumingpropriety of her conduct, shereturned to her native island, and marrieda son of Macdonald, of Kingsburgh,with whom, many years after, she proceededto America. During the contestbetween Great Britain and thecolonies, she is said to have encounteredvarious misfortunes ; and before its termination,she returned with her familyto Skye, where she died at rather an advancedage. Boswell, who saw her atKingsburgh, during his tour with Dr.Johnson to the Hebrides, describesher as having been an uncommonlymild, well-bred, genteel, little woman.She was, however, so zealous a Jacobite,that, even when advanced in years,if any man, it is said, had dared tospeak of Charles Edward, in her presence,as the Pretender, she would havestruck him a blow with her fist. Duringher voyage from America, she gave asignal proof of that extraordinary courage,which had already rendered herso remarkable. The vessel, of whichshe was on board, being attacked by aFrench ship of war, she left her femalefellow-passengers trembling in thecabin, and bore a part in the action ondeck, until, being accidentally throwndown, her arm was fractured.THE CHURCH.CUMBERLAND, (RICHARD, Bishopof Peterborough,) was born in London,on the 15th of July, 1632 ; and educatedat St. Paul's school, and Magdalen college,Cambridge. He took the degree ofB. A. in 1653, and that of M. A. in 1656.Two years afterwards, having been incorporatedas M. A. at Oxford, in theinterval, he obtained the rectory ofBr.impton, in Northamptonshire. In1661, he was appointed a select preacherat Cambridge ; and, in 1663, proceededto the degree of B. D. In 1667, hewas appointed chaplain to Sir OrlandoBridgman, who presented him to theliving of All Hallows, Stamford ; and,in 1691, he was promoted, without anysolicitation on his own part, to thebishopric of Peterborough. He died onthe 9th of October, 1718- There appearsto have been scarcely a blemish inhis character. He was eminently pious,diligent, and charitable. He studied,and made himself master of Coptic, atthe age of eighty-three ; and, to thelast year of his life, effectively fulfilledhis episcopal functions ; declaring thathe would do his duty as long as hecould, for that a man had better wear outthan rust out. His perception was notacute; but his memory was retentive,and his application supplied the placeof talent. His principal works were:De Legions Naturae Disquisition philosophical,a treatise, directed against thePhilosophy of Hobbes, which was transitinto several European languages;An Essay on Jewish Weights and Measures;Origines Gentium Antiquissima;and The Phoenician History of Sancho-pathos,translated from Eusebius.CREWE, (NATHANIEL, Lord Creweof Stene, and Bishop of Durham), wasborn on the 31st of January, 1633. Hetook the degree of B. A., at Lincolncollege, Oxford, in 1655 ; and soonafterwards obtained a- fellowship. In1658, he became M. A. ; in 1663,Dec. L.; and, in 1668, he was electedrector of his college. In the followingyear, he was made precentor, raisedto the deanery of Winchester, andappointed clerk of the closet to Charlesthe Second. In 1671, he was promotedto the bishopric of Oxford; with whichhe held the living of Whitney, as wellas his rectorship, in commendam. Heresigned the latter in 1672; and, inthe next year, performed the marriageceremony between Maria D'Este andthe Duke of York ; at whose requesthe was translated, in 1673, to the see ofDurham ; of which, however, he couldnot obtain possession, it is said, untilhe had compromised a private grant tobe paid out of it, which the king hadmade to one of his mistresses. In1676, he was sworn of the privy-council; and, soon after the accession ofJames the Second, he was appointeddean of the chapel-royal, and became aleading member of a new ecclesiasticalcommission, the arbitrary conduct ofwhich proved exceedingly agreeable tothe king, to whose downfal it materiallycontributed. Among other acts ofdisgraceful subserviency to the wishesof James, he countenanced a prosecutionagainst the vice-chancellor of Cambridge,for refusing to admit a Benedictinemonk to the degree of M. A.without taking the usual oaths. It is alsostated, that he would have attended thepublic entry of the pope's nuncio into themetropolis, but that his coachman refusedto drive him. He was exceedinglyactive in promoting the severe proceedingstaken against Magdalen college,Oxford, for disobedience to the king'smandate, by which the society hadbeen commanded to elect, for its' president,a man of indifferent character,and who did not possess the indispensablequalifications required by thestatutes. When the ecclesiastical commission,of which he had been termedthe grand inquisitor, was abolished,and the approaching ruin of his royalpatron, to whom he had been mostdisgracefully servile, became evident,he attempted, by mean concessions, toAPPENDIX.ingratiate himself with the partisansof the Prince of Orange ; and, as it ispositively stated, was among the first tovote that James the Second had abdicated.He was, however, expressly exceptedfrom the pardon granted, byWilliam and Mary, to the followersof their predecessor ; he consequentlyabsconded, and offered to resign hisbishopric to Burnet, on condition ofreceiving 1000 per annum out of itsrevenues for life. Burnet declined theproposal ; and Crewe, in consequenceof Tillotson's intercession, was allowedto retain his see. Having venturedto return to England, he made hispeace at court, by voting for the newsettlement; and, on the death of histwo elder brothers, in 1691, becameBaron Crewe, of Stene. Almost thelast act of his public life, was an oppositionto the proceedings institutedagainst Sacheverell, of whose prosecutionQueen Anne avowedly disapproved.He died without issue, although thricemarried, on the 18th of September, 1721,aged eighty-eight. This despicably versatileprelate, who, towards the close ofhis career, became ostentatiously munificentand charitable, was not eminenteither for piety or erudition. Speakingof his employment as an ecclesiasticalcommissioner, Burnet says, " hewas lifted up with it, and said, now hisname would be recorded in history ;and when some of his friends representedto him the danger of acting in acourt so illegally constituted, he said, hecould not live, if he should lose theking's gracious smiles." It is relatedof him, that he would frequently takethe key of Stene chapel, where his lastwife was buried, and place himself nearher remains ; under which he directedthat his own coffin should be deposited.One day, in allusion to an alabasterskull at the bottom of the monument,he said to his chaplain, Dr. Grey, " Iwish that horrid death's head had notbeen placed there !" Grey, who wasmuch attached to the bishop, made noreply, but immediately sent f8r thesculptor, whom, after some consideration,he directed to convert the obnoxiousskull into a bunch of grapes !SOUTH, (ROBERT,) the son of amerchant, was born at Hackney, in1C33, and received his education underDr. Busby, at Westminster school ;whence, in 1651, he was elected toChristchurch, Oxford. After havingdistinguished himself by producingthree Latin poems, one of which wasaddressed to Cromwell, on the terminationof the Dutch war, he took the degreesof B. A. and M. A., and enteredinto holy orders. In 1660, he waschosen public orator of the universityof Oxford, and soon afterwards becamedomestic chaplain to Lord Clarendon ;who, in 1663, made him a prebendary,presented him to a living in Wales, andprocured for him, although of insufficientstanding, the degree of D. D.On the disgrace of his noble patron, hebecame chaplain to the Duke of York.In 1670, he was installed canon ofChristchurch ; and, three years after,attended the British ambassador, LawrenceHyde, to Poland, in the capacityof chaplain. On his return, in 1678, heobtained the living of Slip, in Oxfordshire; and, in 1681, he preached asermon before Charles the Second, onthe vicissitudes of human life; in which,after having illustrated his subject bythe examples of Agathocles and Ma-daniell,he thus proceeded : " Andwho that beheld such a bankrupt, beggarlyfellow, as Cromwell, first enteringthe parliament-house, with a threadbaretorn cloak and greasy hat, perhapsneither of them paid for, could havesuspected that, in the space of so fewyears, he should, by the murder of oneking, and the banishment of another,ascend the throne?" The king, it issaid, laughed heartily at the passage,and desired that, on a vacancy occurringon the episcopal bench , hemight be reminded of the preacher.Dr. South evinced his loyalty to Jamesthe Second, by refusing to join in theinvitation to the Prince of Orange ;to whom, however, he subsequentlytook the oath of allegiance, althoughhe is said to have declined the vacantsee of a non-juring prelate. In 1693,he engaged in a controversy on thedoctrine of the Trinity, with Sherlock,in which he displayed much humour,great learning, and abundance of zeal ;but, it may safely be said, to no goodpurpose. Each of the contending partiesprofessed to be strictly orthodox,although they differed materially inexplaining the text, which formed theTHE CHURCH.subject of their dispute. He exertedhimself most strenuously in favour ofSacheverell; and, on the accession ofhis party, the Tories, to power, at thelatter end of the reign of Queen Anne,to whom he was sincerely attached, hedeclined the offer of a bishopric, observingthat such a chair would be toouneasy for an infirm old man to sit in.His decease took place in July, 1716.In politics, he was a confirmed Tory;and, in religious principles, a furioushigh churchman. In abilities and erudition,he had not many superiors ;and but few of his contemporaries possessedso abundant a share of wit andhumour. He was intolerant, irascible,harsh, and unforgiving, yet eminentlycharitable. His love of the satiricaland ludicrous is frequently displayedin his most serious compositions, towhich, however, a high degree of praisehas been attributed. Six volumes ofhis sermons were printed during hislife ; and, after his death, appeared hisEnglish Posthumous Works, his OperaPosthumus Latina, an account of hisjourney to Poland, and memoirs of hislife. The following, among otheramusing anecdotes, have been recordedof him : On one occasion, a militaryofficer, whom he was presenting, inhis capacity of public orator, for anhonorary degree, having accidentallyturned his back, South appended to hisexordium of " Present vobis, hungbellicossissimum," the addition of'quinunquam antea tergiversation est."During his residence in Oxfordshire, hewas called out of bed, one cold morning,to perform the marriage ceremony for acouple, who had, for above an hour,been shivering in the church. On inquiringfor the bride and bridegroom,his clerk brought forward a man andwoman, the youngest of whom appearedto be at least seventy years of age.South inquired if it were possible thatthey had come to be married. " Tobe sure," replied the man ; " better wedthan do worse." " Get you gone," repliedSouth; " go home, you silly oldfools; go home and do your worst." Sosaying, he hobbled away, in a greatpassion with his clerk," for havingbrought him out on so ridiculous anerrand. Having accepted an invitationto dine with a clerical friend, at whosehouse he had called for the purpose ofpaying a morning visit, his host, onstepping into the adjoining room, wasseverely upbraided by his wife, forgivingher the trouble of providing arepast fit for such a guest. An altercationensued, which South overheard ;and, at length, the husband, in a violentpassion, exclaimed, " If the doctor werenot so near at hand, I would certainlygive you a beating." South immediatelyopened the door, which separatedhim from his host and hostess,exclaiming, " I beg pardon ; but praydon't let my presence be any impediment."The lady, it is added, at onceretired, and served up an excellentdinner ; but did not think proper toappear at the table.BURNET, (THOMAS,) was born atCroft, in Yorkshire, about the year1635, and concluded his education atChrist's college, Cambridge, where heobtained a fellowship. He made threetours on the continent, in the capacityof tutor: the first with the Earl ofWiltshire, the second with the Duke ofBolton, and the third with Lord Ossory,son of the Duke of Ormond, throughwhose interest he obtained, in 1685,the mastership of the Charter-house.During the same year, he took thedegree of L. L. D., and, shortly afterwards,rendered himself conspicuousby resisting the king's attempt to fix aRoman catholic as a pensioner on theCharter-house. By William the Third,he was made a royal chaplain, andclerk of the closet ; but he lost theseappointments, in 1692, by the publicationof his Archaeological Philosophical,sive Doctrina Antiqua de RerumOrigines ; in which he displayed suchlatitude of opinion as gave offence tomany influential divines. . He hadpreviously produced a work, entitled,Tellers sacra Theory, which he afterwardstranslated into English. He wasalso the author of two treatises, posthumouslypublished, De Fide et OfficiisChristiania, and De Statu Resurgentium. Addison haswarmly panegyrist one of his productions; all of which are eloquentand imaginative, but, for the mostpart, erroneous, and often glaringly absurd.His admirers have been toomuch dazzled by the splendour of hisstyle, to hesitate as to the truth of hisAPPENDIX.propositions or the strength of his arguments.Dr. Kill attacked him withconsiderable power and severity ; Flam-stead,the astronomer royal, declaredthat he could overthrow the TellersSacra Theory in one sheet of paper;and a satirical song-writer, in a balladon the controversy between South andSherlock, stigmatised him as an absoluteinfidel. He died in the month ofSeptember, 1715.WHITBY, (DANIEL,) a native ofNorthamptonshire, was born in 1638,and became a student at Trinity college,Cambridge, in 1C53. After having takenhis degrees of B. A. and M. A., andbeen elected to a fellowship, he publishedan attack on popery, to which hewas indebted for the appointment ofchaplain to Bishop Ward, a prebendalstall in the cathedral of Salisbury, aswellasforthepraecentorshipand rectoryof St. Edmund's, in that city; previouslyto obtaining which, he had proceededto the degrees of B. D. and D. D. In1674, he published A Discourse on theIdolatry of the Church of Rome ; in1679, The Absurdity and Idolatry ofHost Worship proved; and in 1683,The Protestant Reconciler. In the last-mentionedproduction, he strenuouslypleaded " for condescension to dissentingbrethren, in things indifferent andunnecessary, for the sake of peace:"but his doctrines proved so unpalatableto the high church party, that theywere not only termed false, impious,and seditious, but the university of Oxfordmade a solemn decree against hispropositions, and ordered the book tobe publicly burnt. He was also compelled,by his episcopal patron, torenounce two of the opinions which hehad ventured to avow, and to expresshis sorrow for having written such awork ; of which, however, before theconclusion of the year, he published asecond part, with a view to induce thedissenters to join in communion withthe established church. In 1687, heprinted a tract, entitled, The Fallibilityof the Roman Church demonstrated;and, in the following year, A Treatiseon Traditions, and two pieces in favourof the revolution. In 1703, he published,in two volumes, folio, his celebratedParaphrase and Commentary onthe New Testament, the result of fifteenyears' close application ; to which headded, in 1710, a Latin appendix. Healso wrote an essay On the Necessityand Usefulness of the Christian Revelation; A Discourse concerning theTrue Import of the words, Electionand Reprobation ; (in which he departedfrom his original Calvinisticcreed;) The Extent of Christ's Redemption; The Grace of God ; TheLiberty of the Will; The Perseveranceor Departibility of the Saints ; twotreatises in Latin, the one on OriginalSin, in which he denied that there wasany ground in Scripture, for imputingAdam's offences to his posterity ; andin the other, that the doctrine of theTrinity could be deduced, either fromthe fathers, councils, or catholic tradition;a Dissuasion from Inquiry intothe Doctrine of the Trinity ; and awork, posthumously published, entitled,The Last Thoughts of Dr.Whitby ; in which he states, " thatwhen he wrote his commentaries, hewent on too hastily in the commonbeaten road of other reputed orthodoxdivines ; conceiving, first, that theFather, Son, and Holy Ghost, in onecomplete notion, were one and thesame God, by virtue of the same individualessence communicated from theFather ; which confused notion," headds, " he is now fully convinced to beathing impossible and full of gross absurdities."He is described as havingbeen singularly ignorant of the world,simple in his manners, pious, charitable,industrious, and profoundly learned.He died on the 24th of March, 1725.HOOPER, (GEORGE, Bishop ofBath and Wells,) was born at Grimly,in Worcestershire, on the 18th of November,1640. He completed his educationat Christchurch, Oxford, wherehe successively took the degrees ofB. A., M. A., B. D., and D. D. Afterhaving obtained various subordinatepreferments, and greatly distinguishedhimself both as a writer and a divine,he was promoted, in 1703, to the see ofSt. Asaph ; from which, shortly afterwards,he was translated to that of Bathand Wells. He was hostile to the unionwith Scotland, and strenuously endeavouredto procure the acquittal ofSacheverell, against whose sentence heis said to have entered a protest. HeTHE CHURCH.wrote a treatise on Jewish, Greek, andRoman measures, to which was appendedAn Essay on English Coins; aLatin work on divorces; and a greatnumber of devotional 'and other tracts.The whole of his works were collectedand published at Oxford, in 1757. Whilea youth, Dr. Busby, master of Westminsterschool, where he was partlyeducated, is reported to have said ofhim, " This boy is the least favoured infeatures of any in the school, but hewill become more extraordinary thanany of them." At a subsequent period,but prior to his obtaining, the see of St.Asaph, the same learned man observedof him, that he was the best scholar, thefinest gentleman, and-would make thebest bishop that ever had been educatedat Westminster school. " Histalents," according to one of his biographers," were so great in everydistinct part of knowledge, that themasters of every faculty have thoughttheir profession to be the bishop's peculiarstudy. The lawyer might supposehim bred to the bar, and conversantin nothing but statutes and reports;the casuist might think his whole timespent in canonists and schoolmen ; andthe divine, in fathers and councils. Theantiquary might tie him down to medalsand charters ; and the linguist fancy himalways poring upon lexicons. Thephilosophers found no science out ofhis reach, nor the masters of politeliterature any graces of the classics thathad escaped his observance." He diedon the 6th of September, 1727, leavingseveral children by his wife, a MissAbigail Guildford, whom he married in1678.FLEETWOOD (WILLIAM, Bishopof Ely,) was born in the Tower of London,on the 21st of January, 1656 ; andreceived his education at Eton, andKing's college, Cambridge. Having enteredinto holy orders, he was appointedchaplain to William and Mary ; and,shortly afterwards, canon residentiaryof St. Paul's ; in which capacity, he presentedhimself to the rectory of St.Austin's, Watling-street. He was alsochosen lecturer of St. Dunstan's in theWest; and, in 1702, became a canon ofWindsor. After having passed a shorttime in retirement, at the rectory ofWrexham, worth only 60 a. year, forwhich he appears to have abandonedhis other preferments, Queen Anne, bywhom he had previously been appointedone of the royal chaplains, promotedhim, in 1706, without solicitation, to thebishopric of St. Asaph ; from which,soon after the accession of George theFirst, he was translated o that of Ely.He died, leaving one son, on the 4th ofAugust, 1723. He was an active prelate;an eloquent preacher; a dignifiedand spirited senator ; a man of obligingdisposition and strict integrity ; a goodantiquarian, and a learned, industrious,and able writer. Besides his celebratedEssay on Miracles, he produced TheLife of St. Winifred ; A Plain Methodof Christian Devotion, a translation,which reached its twenty-seventh editionin 1750; Inscription AntiquarySylloge, a work of much erudition ;Chronicon Pretium, or an Account ofthe English Money, the Price of Coin,and other Commodities, for the lastSix Hundred Years; The ThirteenthChapter of the Romans vindicated fromthe Abuses put upon it, in which he contended,inopposiuon to the advocates forpassive obedience and non-resistance,that St. Paul required of no people anymoresubmission to the higher powersthan the laws of their several countriesdemanded ; and several sermons, thepreface to some of which, published in1711-12, although voted a libel by thehouse of commons, and ordered to beburnt, was afterwards reprinted in theSpectator. A folio volume, containingthe whole of his productions, appearedin 1737.Durham, (WILLIAM,) was bornat Houghton, near Worcester, on the26th of November, 1657, and took thedegrees of B. A. and M. A., at Trinitycollege, Oxford. In 1682, he becamevicar of Hargrave, in Berkshire; and in1689, rector of Spinster, in Essex.In 1711, and the following year, hepreached a series of discourses at theBoyle lecture, which he published, withcopious notes, in 1713, under the titleof Physico-theology ; or, A Demonstrationof the Being and Attributes of aGod from the Works of the Creation. In1714, appeared his Astro-Theology; or,A Demonstration of the Being and Attributesof a God from a Survey ofthe Heavens. In 1716, he obtained aAPPENDIX.canonry of Windsor, and about the sametime became chaplain to the Prince ofWales. He revised and printed theMiscellanea Curiosa, in 1726; and, in1730, received the degree of D. D., bydiploma, on account of his learning, andthe service he had rendered religion bythe culture of natural knowledge. Inthe same year, he published his lastoriginal work, entitled, Christopher; or, A Demonstration of the DivineAuthority of the Christian Religion.In addition to these productions, he wasthe author of a treatise, entitled, TheArtificial Clockmaker ; and of numerousscientific papers communicated to theRoyal Society, of which he was a fellow.He also edited the learned Ray'sEpistolary Correspondence; and Alain'sNatural History of Birds and BritishInsects. He deservedly obtained considerablereputation, both as a divine anda philosopher: his theological productionsare characterized by great solidityof argument, and the scientific portion ofhis works, although modern discoverieshave convicted him of numerous errors,display his profound knowledge of naturalphilosophy, such as it was in theearly part of the last century. He madea valuable collection of British birds and 1insects ; and is said, like a primitivepastor, to have prescribed for the bodilyailments, while he sedulously strove toinsure the eternal welfare of his parishioners.He died on the 5th of April,1735, leaving a widow and severalchildren, the eldest of whom becamepresident of St John's college, at Oxford.TALBOT, (WILLIAM, Bishop ofDurham,) a native of Staffordshire,was born in 1659, and proceeded to thedegree of M. A. at Oriel college, Oxford,in 1680. During the reign ofJames the Second, he distinguishedhimself by preaching against popery ;and, as a reward for his zeal, obtainedthe deanery of Worcester, about twoyears after the revolution. In 1699,he took the degree of D. D., by diploma,on being raised to the see oaf Oxford ;from which, in 1715, he was translatedto that of Salisbury; and, in 1722, hewas advanced to that of Durham, ofwhich county he was also appointedlord-lieutenant. He died in October,1730, leaving several children, one ofwhom became lord-chancellor. Hispublications consist of two speeches,one on the trial of Sacheverell, and theother in favour of the union withScotland ; a volume of sermons ; andsome pieces against the validity of laybaptism ; the controversy on which subject,he appears to have originated.LOWTH, (WILLIAM,) a native ofLondon, the son of an apothecary, andfather of Bishop Loath, was born in1661, and proceeded from MerchantTailors' school, before he was fourteen,to St. John's college, Oxford ; wherehe took the degree of B. A. in 1680,that of M. A. in 1683, and that of B. D.in 1688. Being recommended, for hislearning and piety, to Bishop Mew,that prelate made him his chaplain,gave him a stall in Winchester cathedral,and, in 1699, presented him tothe rectory of Burton. He was a manof great diligence and extraordinaryacquirements. Many eminent writers,particularly Potter, Chandler, and Hudson,were indebted to him for valuablecommunications on ecclesiastical history,and other subjects. His ownworks consist of A Vindication of theDivine Authority and Inspiration ofthe Old and New Testament ; Directionsfor the profitable reading of theHoly Scriptures: Commentaries on theProphets ; and several sermons andtracts. This amiable and erudite divinedied on the 17th of May, 1732.WESLEY, (SAMUEL,) the son of anejected non-conformist divine, and fatherof the celebrated John Wesley, wasborn about the year 1662. At the age ofsixteen, he became a servitor of Exetercollege, Oxford, where he subsisted onthe fruits of his own industry until hegraduated and obtained ordination.After having served a curacy in the metropolisfor about a year, he obtained achaplaincy in his majesty's fleet, whichhe soon abandoned tor another curacyin London. For his merits as anauthor, it is said, he was shortly afterwardspresented to the living of SouthOrmesby ; and he, at length, became awriter of such importance, that thefriends of James the Second offeredhim high preferment if he would supportthe measures of that monarch infavour of popery. Wesley, however,not only rejected their proposals, lintTHE CHURCH.refused to read the king's famous declaration,and preached against it, onthe following text from Daniel iii.v. 17, 18." If it be so, our God,whom we serve, is able to deliver usfrom the burning fiery furnace, andhe will deliver us out of thine hand,O king ; but, if not, be it known untothee, O king, that we will not servethy gods, nor worship the goldenimage which thou hast set up." Forsome productions in support of the revolution,which he dedicated to QueenMary, he was presented to the rectoryof Epworth. In 1705, he published apoem on the battle of Blenheim, forwhich he was rewarded by Marlboroughwith the chaplaincy of a regiment :this, however, he soon afterwards lost,on a change taking place in the cabinet.In 1723, he obtained the rectory ofWrote, which, with that of Epworth,he held during the remainder of hislife. He died on the 30th of April,1735, leaving, besides his sons, Samuel,John, and Charles, a daughter, namedMehetabel, who possessed considerabletalents ; but, it is said, " married a lowfellow, who broke her heart." Dr.Whitehead says of the elder Wesley,that his last moments were as conspicuousfor resignation and Christianfortitude as his life had been for zealanddiligence. He was the author of avolume of poems, entitled Maggots ;Elegies on the Deaths of Queen Maryand Archbishop Tillotson ; The Life ofChrist, an heroic poem ; The Historyof the Old and New Testament attemptedin Verse ; and Dissertationsin Liberum Job. His house was twicedestroyed by fire, and, on the secondoccasion, he lost his original manuscriptof the last-mentioned production. He,however, resumed the subject, althoughin the decline of life, and oppressedwith gout and palsy ; and, by the aid ofhis sons and Maurice Johnson, he completeda second copy of the work,which was published after his decease.Garth ridiculed his poetical compositions,(which possess but little merit,)and in Swift's Battle of the Books, heis ignominiously slain by a kick fromHomer's horse. Pope says, in a letterto Swift, dated April 12th, 1730, " Ishall think it a kindness done myself, ifyou can propagate Mr. Wesley's subscriptionfor his Commentary on Jobamong your divines, (bishops excepted,of whom there is no hope,) and amongsuch as are believers, or readers, ofScripture. Even the curious may findsomething to please them, if they scornto be edified. It has been the labourof eight years of this learned man'slife : I call him what he is, a learnedman ; and I engage you will approvehis prose more than you formerly couldhis poetry. Lord Bolingbroke is afavourer of it, and allows you to doyour best to serve an old Tory, and asufferer for the church of England."SMALRIDGE, (GEORGE, Bishop ofBristol,) son of a dyer, at Lichfield,was born in 1663. Ashore, the celebratedantiquary, in 1678, sent him toWestminster school, where, in 1680,he wrote two elegies, one in Latin,and the other in English, in complimentto his patron, on the death ofthe astrologer, Lilly, to whom Ashorewas much attached. In 1682, he waselected to Christchurch, Oxford, andproceeded to the degree of B. A . in 1686.Shortly afterwards, he became tutor ofhis college ; and was selected as the associateof Aldrich and Atterbury,in thecontroversy with the celebrated ObadiahWalker, who had become a convert topopery. In 1687, he assisted in writingAnimadversions on a Discourse entitledChurch Government; in 1689, hepublished his Audio Divisions, and becameM. A.; and, in 1692, having takenholy orders, he was presented to Tothillfields chapel. In 1693, he obtained aprebendal stall, at Lichfield ; in 1698,he took the degree of B. D., and inMay, 1701, that of D. D. On accountof his acquirements, he frequently presidedin his university, about thisperiod, as regius professor of divinity.In 1708, he was chosen lecturer of St.Dunstan's-in-the-west ; and, in 1710,he became a canon of Christchurch,Oxford, and Dean of Carlisle. He obtainedthe deanery of Christchurch, in1713; and, in the following 'year, hewas consecrated Bishop of Bristol.Soon afterwards, he received the appointmentof grand almoner, xvhich heretained, until he refused, during therebellion of 1715, to sign the episcopaldeclaration in favour of loyalty. By theinterest of the Princess of Wales, hewas, however, soon restored to favour ;APPENDIX.although he obtained no further preferment.Shortly before his death, heheld a disputation with Dr. Clarke, onthe doctrine of the Trinity, in whichhe advocated orthodox opinions, but,according to Whiston, the evidenceadduced was in favour of his opponent.He died of apoplexy, on the27th of September, 1719, leaving awidow, two daughters, and a son, insuch a state of poverty, owing to thelimited revenues of his bishopric, thatWainwright, his registrar, pityingtheir condition, nobly insisted on presentingthem with the whole of hissavings, which amounted to about3,000; and Queen Caroline afterwardsprocured the widow a pension of300 per annum. Twelve of BishopSmalridge's discourses were published inone volume, octavo, during his lifetime;and sixty of his discourses, by subscription,for the benefit of his family, in1726. His acquaintance with Clarkeand Whiston exposed him to a charge ofbeing inclined towards Arianism ; which,however, he repelled, a few days beforehis death, in a letter to Bishop TreeNewton describes him ashaving been a truly worthy prelate, anexcellent scholar, a sound divine, aneloquent preacher, and a good writer,both in Latin and English; of greatgravity and dignity, but, at the sametime, of as great complacency andsweetness of manners. He was so notedfor his good temper, that on succeedingDr. Atterbury in the deaneries of Carlisleand Christen arch, he was said tohave carried the bucket wherewith toextinguish the fires which the other hadkindled.WILSON,(THOMAS,BishopofSodprand Man,) was born at Burton, inCheshire, at the latter endow 1663. Froma private school in his native country,he was removed to Trinity college,Dublin, where he took his degrees inarts, and obtained ordination. His firstpastoral employment appears to havebeen as curate at Winch, in Lancashire.In 1692, he became chaplainto the Earl of Derby, preceptor to thatnobleman's son, and, about the sametime, master of Nathan almshouse. In1697-8, " he was forced," to use hisown words, " into the bishopric of theIsle of Man," and had the degree ofL. L. D. conferred upon him by the primate.Although his episcopal revenuesdid not exceed 300 per annum, hecontrived, not only to support the dignityof his station, but to rebuild thepalace, at an expense of 1,400, to erectachapel at Carleton, to establish parochiallibraries, to improve the agricultureof the island, and to relievemany of the distressed among its inhabitants.Shortly after his appointmentto the bishopric, he was offered a richliving in Yorkshire, which he mighthave held in commendam, with his see,but, being hostile to pluralities and nonresidence,he declined to accept it. In1699, he published a small tract in Manxand English, the first work ever printedin the former tongue, entitled, ThePrinciples and Duties of Christianity.In 1703, he prepared his celebratedEcclesiastical Constitutions ; and so admirablewas his conduct as a prelate,that the universities of Oxford andCambridge honoured him with the degreeof D. D. and Lord Chancellor Kingdeclared that, " if the ancient disciplineof the church were lost elsewhere, itmight be found in all its purity in theIsle of Man." About the year 1721, hethought proper to denounce the IndependentWhig as a dangerous and immoralpublication, and to cause severalcopies of it to be seized. The officer, whoperformed this duty, having taken possessionof one belonging to the publiclibrary, the governor committed himto prison, and, it is stated, behavedwith some harshness to the bishop himself;who rendered the dispute moreserious, by interdicting the governor'slady from the communion table, becauseshe'd contumaciously refused to atonefor the offence of defaming a female acquaintance.The governor, in return,fined the bishop 50, and for default ofpayment, committed him to the dampand gloomy prison of Castle Rushing,from the grated windows of which, theincarcerated prelate is said to have exhortedhis indignant flock not to commitany breach of the peace. An appeal,on his behalf, being made to the privy-council,the governor's proceedings weredeclared to be irregular ; and the bishopwas soon afterwards offered the see ofExeter, which, however, he could notbe prevailed upon to accept; nor, it issaid, could he be induced to bring anTHE CHURCH.action against the governor for damages,although the rigour of his confinementhad produced a disorder which so disabledhis fingers that he was everafterwards compelled, when writing, tograsp the pen in the palm of his hand.After having conferred various importantbenefits on his diocese, he died onthe 7th of March, 1755, leaving one son,the offspring of a very early marriage.Besides the publications already mentioned,he printed A Short History ofthe Isle of Man ; several sermons onpractical subjects ; and a few religioustracts. At a late period of his life, atranslation of the Scriptures into Manxwas commenced under his auspices,which his successor, Hildesley, causedto be completed. He was a man ofrespectable scientific, and classical attainments;particularly tolerant; indefatigablein the performance of his dutiesas a prelate, and a most zealous friendto the labouring classes. Having, onone occasion, ordered a cloak with asingle loop and button, his tailor remarked,that if such a fashion shouldprevail, the poor button-makers wouldstarve. " Indeed !" exclaimed thebishop, " then button it all over." Hischarities, it is said, were dispensedjudiciously, and in the true spirit ofChristian benevolence. He once gavea friend directions to present 50 to apoor sick clergyman, who had a largefamily, in the most delicate mannerpossible, and with an intimation, thatthe donor had no wish to be known.I will wait upon him early tomorrowmorning," said the gentleman. " Youwill oblige me," replied the bishop,by carrying the money to him directly.Think, sir, of what importance a goodnight'srest may be to this poor man."Although he always declined taking hisseat in the house of lords, because, aslie said, Christ's kingdom not being ofthis world, he thought the church shouldhave nothing to do with the state, yet.while in London, prosecuting his appeal,he appeared on several occasions atcourt ; and it is related that, one day,Queen Caroline, perceiving him approach,thus complimented him, at theexpense of several prelates who werethen in her majesty's presence : " Here,my lords, is a bishop, whose object is nottranslation, and who will not part withhis spouse because she is poor."WELLS, (EDWARD,) was born in1663, at Cobham, in Wiltshire, andacquired the rudiments of education atWestminster school ; whence, in 1686,he was elected to Christchurch, Oxford ;where, after having taken his degrees ofB.A. and M. A., he became a college tutor,and, eventually, obtained the Greekprofessorship. In 1704, he proceededto the degree of D. D. ; and, in 1715,Browne Willis, the antiquary, who hadbeen his pupil, presented him to therectory of Blechley, in Buckinghamshire.His only other preferment wasthe rectory of Cottesbach, in Leicestershire; which, according to the historyof the county, he obtained in 1701-2,while his biographers state, that it wasgiven to him in 1717. Of his privatecharacter, nothing important appearsto be recorded, except a statement, containedin the Literary Anecdotes ofthe Eighteenth Century, that he tookan opportunity, from the pulpit, " tomark out. by slander, his benefactor ;the very man who, by mistake, in anuncommon manner, gave him thestand and opportunity of his misbehaviour."Besides having distinguishedhimself, as a theologian, in a controversywith Dr. Clarke, respecting theScripture doctrine of the Trinity, hewas the author of An Historical Geographyof the Old and New Testament,illustrated with Maps, &c. ; The YoungGentleman's Course of Mathematics,Arithmetic and Geometry ; A Paraphrase,with Annotations, on all theBooks of the Old and New Testament ;An Help for the right Understandingof the several Divine Laws and Covenants; An Exposition of the ChurchCatechism ; Harmonia Grammatical,or, A View of the Agreement betweenthe Latin and Greek tongues, as to thedeclining of Words ; Elementa Arithmeticalnumerous et speciosae ; TheDuty of being grieved for the Sins ofothers; Unworthiness no excuse fornot coming to the Sacrament ; andvarious other theological, geographical,and political works. He also producededitions of Dionysius, Perseveres, andXenophon, with Latin versions, maps,&c. His death took place in the monthof August, 1727.WELCHMAN, (EDWARD, Archdeaconof Cardigan,) was born aboutAPPENDIX.the year 16f5, at Banbury, irr Oxfordshire; and, having been admitted acommoner of Magdalen hall, Oxford,in 1679, he commenced B. A. in 1683 ;became a probationer fellow of Mertoncollege in 1684 ; and proceeded M. A.in 1688. Entering into holy orders, heobtained the rectories of Tamworth andSolihull, in Warwickshire, and thearchdeaconry of Cardigan. He was aman of high classical attainments, considerableabilities, and obtained greatreputation as an author. His worksconsist of A Vindication of the Churchof England against Heresy and Schism ;The Husbandman's Manual, directinghim how to improve the several Actionsof his Calling, and the most useful Occurrencesof his Life, to the Glory ofGod, and Benefit of his Soul; Dr.Clarke's Scripture Doctrine of theTrinity Examined ; A Conference withan Arian ; A Latin Treatise on theThirty-nine Articles, which has beentranslated into English, and frequentlyreprinted ; an edition of the Works ofNotitia ; and several occasional sermons.He died on the 28th of May,1739, leaving several children ; one ofwhom, a son, is said to have afterwardskept an inn at ." Whilst the coachman stoppedto water the horses," observes theauthor of the Spiritual Quixote, " mylandlord, out of civility, came to pay hiscompliments to Dr. Greville, who knewthe man to be the son of the learnedDr. Welchman, well known for his illustrationof the Thirty-nine Articles;which piece of history, as he had notmuch merit of his own to boast of, minehost never failed to acquaint his customerswith. 'Gentlemen,' hewouldsay,1 you have, doubtless, heard of my father;he made the Thirty-nine Articles.' "MOSS, (ROBERT, Dean of Ely,)was born in Norfolk, about the year1666 ; and, at the age of sixteen, proceededto Corpus Christii college, Cambridge,where he wrote some Latinand Greek verses on the deaths ofCharles the Second, and Mary, theconsort of King William, which wereinserted in the Cambridge collection.After graduating as B. A. and obtaininga fellowship, he commenced privatetutor, and was appointed one of thetwelve university preachers. He alsobecame a candidate for the office oforator, which he lost by three votes,those, it is said, of the university bells,who had taken offence at some paragraphin one of his speeches as prevaricate.He proceeded to the degreeof S. T. B. in 1696; and, subsequently,obtained the preachership at Gray'sinn, and the assistant preachership atSt. James's, Westminster. In 1701, hebecame a royal chaplain, and, fouryears afterwards, was created S. T. P.in the presence of Queen Anne. In1708, he accepted the lectureship of StLawrence, Jewry; and, in 1712, thequeen nominated him Dean of Ely ; onwhich occasion he resigned his fellowship,as he did his preachership atGray's inn, on being presented to theliving of Middleton, Hearts, hi 1714;and his lectureship in the city, on accountof his infirmities, in 1727. Heretained his royal chaplaincy after theaccession of George the First, but was,at length, dismissed, with Sherlock andHare, for the part he took in the Ban-doriancontroversy. After his death,which occurred in 1729, his sermonswere collected and published by Dr.Snape, who states that " he was of agraceful personage, a gentleman-likeaddress, a sweet, affable, and benevolentdisposition ; and had something sowinning and engaging in his conversation,that he was scarce ever knownto lose a friend that had been onceintimately acquainted with him." " Hedistinguished himself," says the samedivine, " by repeated proofs of veryuncommon abilities; and acquired thereputation of one of the most ingeniousperformers of any about his time, of allkinds of public exercises, whether inthe way of classical or academicallearning." Cutler, in a letter to Grey,says of his sermons : " their reputationmust last as long as learning, eloquence,or religion." One of his discourses,entitled, The Extent of Christ's Commissionto Baptise, was occasioned bythe controversy as to the validity of laybaptism. Besides his sermons, he publisheda defence of the lower house ofconvocation, " concerning their consultationsabout the Bishop of Bangor'swritings;" and is suspected to havewritten A Letter to Queen Anne on thePeace of Utrecht. He left a widow,but, as it appears, no children.THE CHURCH.Chisholm, (EDMUND,) a nativeof Worth, in Bedfordshire, was bornabout the year 1668, and proceeded tothe degree of M. A. in 1693, at CorpusChristii college, Oxford. He publishedan elegant Latin poem on the battle ofLa Hogue, in 1692, and another, on thedeath of Queen Mary, in 1694. Fouryears afterwards, he succeeded to atravelling fellowship, and visitedTurkey and the Levant. He thensettled at Smyrna, where he officiatedas chaplain to the English factory until1702, when he returned to England,and, three years afterwards, took hisbachelor's degree in divinity. In 1708,he became vicar of Walthamstow ; in1711, chaplain to the queen; in 1713,a lent preacher at St. Olave's, Hartstreet; and, in 1731, rector of South-church,Essex, in possession of whichhe died, leaving two children, on the18th of May, 1733. Besides numeroussermons and some controversial pieces,he published an account of his travels ;a dissertation on certain medals struckat Smyrna in honour of physicians,appended to Dr. Mead's Harleigh oration,in 1724; and Antiquities AsiaticChristian Ceram antecedents, ofwhich the manuscript of a secondvolume that appears to have been inthe press at the time of his decease, waspurchased by the trustees of the BritishMuseum, in 1785.Wollaston, (THOMAS,) son of arespectable tradesman, was born in1669, at Northampton, where he acquiredthe rudiments of learning. In1685, he was sent to Cambridge ; and,proceeding B. A., in 1688, was soonafterwards elected to a fellowship, andentered into holy orders. He took thedegree of M. A. in 1692 ; and, in 1699,that of B. D. Having imbibed a fondnessfor allegorical interpretations ofScripture, by reading the works ofOrigen, he produced, in 1705, The oldApology for the Truth of the ChristianReligion against the Jews and Gentilesrevived : in this tract he contended, thatthe ancient fathers had considered theactions of Moses as typical of Christand his church. In 1720, he printed aLatin dissertation, in which he asserted,that the letter from Pontius Pilate toTiberius, concerning the works of Christ,inserted in the writings of the fathers,was a forgery ; and two Latin epistles,in defence of Origen's allegorical modeof interpreting the Scriptures. Soonafterwards, he published a letter to Dr.Bennett, rector of Cripplegate, containingan inquiry, " whether the peoplecalled Quakers, did not, the nearest ofany other sect of religion, resembleprimitive Christians, in principles andpractice." .On account of the animositywhich he betrayed against the clergyin this production, and his refusal to resideat college, pursuant to the statutes,he was deprived of his fellowship. Inthe years 1723 and 1724, he producedhis Free Gifts to the Clergy ; and, in1726, A Defence of the Miracle ofthe Thundering Legion, against Mr.Moyle. Soon afterwards, he printedThe Moderator between an Infidel andan Apostate ; and, subsequently, twosupplements to that production, inwhich he not only contended for mysticalinterpretations of the miracles ofChrist, but insisted that they hadnever been wrought. The attorney-generalnow took proceedings againsthim as a declared enemy to Christianity,which, however, were stayed, principallyon the interference of Whiston.His next productions were Six Discourseson the Miracles, in which, it issaid, " he mixed up a vein of ridiculeand buffoonery, which could not fail ofstriking with horror all believers in thedivine mission of Christ." He nowlost the friendship of Whiston, andproceedings against him for blasphemybeing renewed, he was broughtto trial, found guilty, and sentenced toa year's imprisonment in the King'sBench, to pay 100 fine, and to findsecurity for his good behaviour. Onthe expiration of the year, not beingable either to procure bail, (as he wouldnot promise not to repeat his offence,)or to pay the fine, Dr. Clarke generouslyundertook to solicit his discharge.His exertions, however, werespeedily rendered needless by Wool-son'sdecease, which occurred in January,1732-3. A few moments before heexpired, he said, in contemplation ofdeath, " This is a struggle which allmen must go through, and which Ibear, not only patiently, but withwillingness." He was learned, industrious,and endowed with good talents,which, however, were deplorablyAPPENDIX.perverted by his tendency to mysticism.Although abusive to his opponents, indispositionhe is said to have beenamiable, and in moral deportment,proof against reproach ; but strongdoubts have been entertained of hismental sanity.Shape, (ANDREW,) son of the to Charles the Second,was born at Hampton-court, in 1670.After having passed some years atEton school, he was removed, in 1689,to King's college, Cambridge, wherehe took the degree of B. A. in 1693 ;that of M. A. in 1697 ; and, in orabout the latter year, obtained a fellowship.He soon afterwards becamelecturer of St. Mariin-in-the-fields ;and, subsequently, rector of St. ,and one of the royal chaplains.In 1705, he took the degreeof D. D. ; and, in 1707, attended, asone of the representatives of the universityof Cambridge, at the jubilee ofFrankfort. While on the continent, hepreached a sermon before the ElectressSophia, which was afterwards printedunder the title of The Just Prerogativeof Human Nature. In 1713, he wasinstalled a canon of Windsor; and, in1717, he took a conspicuous part againstHoadly, in the Bangorian controversy,which, however, led to his removalfrom the office of king's chaplain, atthe instigation of his opponent. In1719, he was elected provost of King'scollege, Cambridge ; and, in the followingyear, vice-chancellor of the university.Shortly afterwards, he obtainedthe rectory of Knebworth, in Hertfordshire;and, in 1737, that of Elderly, inBerkshire, which he held till his death.He was also, for some years, headmasterof Eton, and had the honour ofdrawing up the Cambridge address toGeorge the Second, on the institutionof the Whitehall preachers. He appearsto have been learned, acute,amiable, and a zealous supporter of thedoctrines of the established church. Asacontroversialist, he displayed so muchpower, that, according to Dr. ZacharyGrey, " he was by far the most powerfulopponent Bishop Hoadly had." Heedited the discourses of Dean Moss;and three volumes of his sermonswere published a few years after hisdeath, which took place on the 30th ofDecember, 1742. It is asserted, that amezzo tinto likeness of Dr. Snape, was,after the original had gone out offashion," imposed upon the public asaportrait of the famous Orator Henley.BOULTER, (HuoH, Archbishop ofArmagh,) was born in 1671, and studied,for some time, at Merchant Tailors'school, whence he removed to Christchurch,Oxford. After having beenelected demy of Magdalen, he proceededto the degree of B. A. in 1690 ;to that of M. A. in 1693 ; and, soonafterwards, obtained a fellowship. Hebecame chaplain to Sir Charles Hedges,in 1700 ; and, subsequently, through theinterest of Lord Sunderland, procuredthe living of St. Olave, Southwark, andthe archdeaconry of Surrey. In 1705,he took the degree B. D., and that ofD. D. in 1708. In 1719, he went toHanover with George the First, in thecapacity of chaplain, and was employedto teach Prince Frederick the Englishlanguage. During the same year, theking promoted him to the deanery ofChristchurch, and the bishopric ofBristol. He was nominated, in 1724,Archbishop of Armagh, and primate ofIreland, where he soon acquired greatpopularity by his extraordinary benevolence,and strenuous, exertions toameliorate the condition of the country.He expended 30,000 in the augmentationof small livings ; erected andendowed hospitals at Drogheda andArmagh, for the reception of clergymen'swidows; supported the sons ofmany poor divines at the university ;contributed greatly to the establishmentof the protestant charter schools ; and,during a severe scarcity of food, in1740, provided, at his own expense,two meals a day for upwards of twothousand five hundred distressed persons.In these and other equally laudableacts, he disbursed nearly the wholeof his archiepiscopal revenues. Hisdeportment was grave, his aspect venerable,his temper meek, and hismode of living remarkably frugal. Hedied, after having been thirteen timesa lord justice of Ireland, near the closeof the year 1742. A few of his sermonsand charges were printed duringhis lifetime ; and a collection of hisletters was published, at Oxford, manyyears after his decease.THE CHURCH.DAWES, (Sir WILLIAM, Archbishopof York,) the son of Sir John Dawes,Bart., was born near Braintree, inEssex, on the 12th of September, 1671,and received his education at MerchantTailors' school, and St John's college,Oxford. The family estate and titlehaving devolved on him, by the deathof his father and two elder brothers,he quitted the university, and passedsome time as a country gentleman ; butrural pursuits not being congenial to histaste, he entered himself of Catherinehall, Cambridge, of which, in histwenty-fifth year, he became master ;and, soon afterwards, filled the officeof vice-chancellor. Having takenorders, he was nominated chaplain toWilliam the Third ; and, in 1698, presentedto a prebendal stall at Worcester.During the same year, ArchbishopTenison collated him to the deaneryand rectory of Rocking, in Essex. Onthe accession of Anne, he was appointedone of her majesty's chaplains,and would, apparently, have been raisedto the bishopric of Lincoln, in 1705,but for the utterance of some offensivetruths, in a sermon, which he preachedbefore the queen early in that year.He soon, however, regained her majesty'sesteem ; and, in 1707, obtainedthe see of Chester ; from which, in1713-14, he was translated to the archbishopricof York. After his decease,which took place on the 30th of April,1724, his works were collected, andpublished in three volumes, octavo: theyconsist of a poem, entitled, The Anatomyof Atheism, dedicated to Sir GeorgeDarcy (whose daughter, Frances, hemarried, and by her had seven children);the preface to Bishop Blackball's works ;a discourse On the Eternity of HellTorments ; and a number of sermonson various subjects. As a preacher, heacquired great popularity, not so muchby his mental abilities, which, thoughrespectable, were far from splendid, asby the natural beauty of his elocution,and the dignified graces of his person.His moral character was altogether admirable: no man, it is said, could, withjustice, accuse him of ever having neglectedhis duty, violated his promise,or acted, in any respect, contrary tothe dictates of his conscience. Hisbehaviour is said to have been courteous,his conversation cheerful, andhis temper, on all occasions, perfectlyunruffled.SMALBROKE, (RICHARD, Bishopof Lichfield and Coventry,) was born atBirmingham, in 1672. He completed hiseducation at Magdalen college, Oxford,where he proceeded to the degree ofB.A. in 1691; to that of M. A. in 1694;to that of B. D. in 1706 ; and to that ofD.D. in 1708. He also obtained a fellowship;and, in 1712, became chaplain toArchbishop Tenison, and treasurer ofLlandafF. In 1717, he was made aprebend of Hereford ; and, in 1723,was consecrated Bishop of St. David's;from which see he was translated, in1730, to that of Lichfield and Coventry.He died on the 22nd of September,1749, leaving three sons and fourdaughters by his wife, Catherine, asister of Archdeacon Brooks. Hisportrait is preserved at Magdalen college,Oxford, to which, in 1730, hegave 100 towards the erection of somenew buildings. He published elevensermons, two or three charges, andabove twenty controversial pieces,chiefly against Whiston and Woolston.He became involved in a personal disputebetween Bosworth and the Methodists,and exposed himself, by someobservations in one of his charges, toa caustic attack from Warburton. Asapolemical writer, he possessed considerableability ; but, in A Vindicationof our Saviour's Miracles, he muchweakened the effect of his arguments,by entering into calculations, as to theprecise number of devils in the herdof swine at Gadarene.HARE, (FRANCIS, Bishop of Chichester,)was born about the year 1675,and admitted, in 1688, a scholar onthe foundation, at Eton; whence heremoved to King's college, Cambridge,where he took the degree of B.A. in1692, and that of M. A. a few yearsafterwards. Commencing tutor, thecelebrated Anthony Collins, and theMarquess of Sandford, eldest son of thegreat Duke of Marlborough, were,among others, placed under his care.Soon after the premature death of hisnoble pupil, which took place in 1702,he entered into holy orders, and becamechaplain-general to the army in Flanders.In 1707, he was appointedAPPENDIX.canon-residentiary of St. Paul's, andprebendary of Portpool; in 1708, lietook the degree of S. T. P. ; and, in1712, obtained a fellowship. In 1713,he was instituted to the rectory ofBarnes ; and, in 1715, nominated Deanof Worcester, and chaplain to Georgethe First, who, however, dismissed him,for political causes, in 1718. In 1726,he was preferred to the deanery ofSt. Paul's; in the following year, tothe bishopric of St. Asaph ; and, in1731, translated to the more valuablesee of Chichester, which, with themetropolitan deanery, he continued tohold during the remainder of his life.He died on the 26th of April, 1740,leaving one son, a prebendary of Winchester.His abilities were great, hisacquirements extensive, his mannersamiable, and his morals above reproach.From 1706 to 1712, his pen was frequentlyemployed in defending theWhigs against the attacks of Swift andother Tory writers. Shortly beforethe death of Queen Anne, he publishedan anonymous pamphlet, entitled,The Difficulties and Discouragementswhich attend the Study of theScriptures, in the Way of private Judgment.This production became remarkablypopular, but fell under the censureof the lower house of convocation,as being calculated to encourage scepticism.According to Whiston, who accuseshim plainly of not being a firm believer,Hare, finding that this pamphletmight probably be a hindrance to hispreferment, attempted, but in vain, toconceal the fact of his being the authorof it. In the Bangorian controversy, hetook rather a conspicuous part againstHoadly, who retorted upon him withconsiderable acrimony, in a tract, entitled,The Dean of Worcester still thesame ! He also published several sermons; a quarto edition of Terence,with notes ; and the Psalms, in Hebrew,restored, according to his assertion, totheir original metre. Bishop Loath,however, appears to have satisfactorilyconfuted his opinions on the Heroicalrhythm; and Bentley, whom, atone timehe eulogized, but, subsequently, opposed,on the appearance of that divine'ssuperior edition of Terence, has chargedhim with glaring inaccuracy as a critic.Warburton, on the other hand, whosewritings he had praised, and who wasindebted to his friendship for a recommendationto Queen Caroline, elevatesHare to a level with Bentley himself;terming them the two greatest criticsthe world ever produced. At the timeof his death, he was engaged on anedition of Plautus ; and the whole ofhis works were afterwards collected andpublished in four volumes octavo.DISNEY, (JOHN,) the son of a protestantdissenter, was born at Lincoln,in 1677, and after having been a ,and a very efficient justiceof the peace, determined, at the age offorty-five, on becoming a minister ofthe church of England. He was, accordingly,ordained deacon and priest,by Archbishop Wake, in 1719; and,during the same year, procured thevicarage of Croft, and the rectory ofKirkby, in Lincolnshire; both of whichhe resigned in 1722, on obtaining thevicarage of St. Mary, at Nottingham,in possession of which he died, on the3rd of February, 1719-20, leaving awidow and several children. He isdescribed as having been warm andimpatient, but generous and forgiving;orthodox in his tenets, but a friend totoleration ; indefatigable in the pursuitof knowledge, and particularly industriousas an author. Of his works,which are rather voluminous, the followingare the most celebrated :Primitive Sacra, or the Reflections ofa Devout Solitude; Flora, prefixed toa translation of the poem on Gardens,by Rapin ; An Essay on the Executionof the Laws against Immorality andProfaneness ; and A Genealogy of theHouse of Brunswick.BOLD, (JoHN,) was born at Leicester,in 1679, and, at the age of fifteen,had become matriculated at St. John'scollege, Cambridge, where lie took thedegree of B. A. in 1698. He soonafterwards accepted the superintendenceof a small endowed school atHinckley, in Leicestershire, at a salaryof 10 per annum ; and, having enteredinto holy orders, obtained, in1702, the curacy of Stony Stratford,the stipend of which was only ,30per annum. Although an elegantscholar, an active divine, an eloquentpreacher, a good practical writer on religioussubjects, and a most exemplaryTHE CHURCH.Christian, he never obtained any furtherpreferment, officiating, for nearly fiftyyears, contented and independent, onhis scanty income ; of which he savedone-sixth, and applied another to charitablepurposes. He breakfasted onwater-gruel ; dined on the food whichwas served up at the table of a farmer,with whom he boarded ; drank half apint of ale of his own brewing, daily ;took no tea, and supped on milk pottage.During the last six years of hislife, (which closed on the 29th of October,1751,) being unable to officiate, hedivided his salary with a neighbouringclergyman, who performed his parochialduties. Having always placed out hissavings at interest, he was enabled, athis decease, to bequeath 100 to hisrelatives, a similar sum to the familywith whom he had long resided, a smallannual gratuity to the poor of hisparish, and the yearly proceeds of aninvestment of 20 to the preacher of asermon, sometime in Lent, on the dutyof the people to attend to the instructions'of the minister whom the bishopof the diocese should set over them.Backhouse, (THOMAS,) wasborn in 1680. He obtained the degreeof M. A., but it is not known at whatuniversity he studied. Having enteredinto holy orders, he officiated, successively,as curate, at the Englishchurch at Amsterdam; at Richmond,Baling, and at Finchley, near London.In 1733, he was presented to the vicarageof Bentham Valence, in Lincolnshire,where he died, on the llth ofOctober, 1752. This learned, pious,diligent, but needy divine, was theauthor of A New History of the Bible,from the Beginning of the World tothe Establishment of Christianity ;Memoirs of Bishop Atterbury, from hisBirth to his Banishment; Miseries andHardships of the Inferior Clergy; AComplete Body of Divinity ; A FairState of the Controversy between Mr.Woolston and his Adversaries ; A Defenceof the Christian Religion fromthe several Objections of the Anti-scriptures; Reflections on the Natureand Properties of Languages ; AnAbridgment of Burnet's History ofhis own Times ; The Art of Shorthand;A System of Practical Duties;The Bookbinder, Bookbinder, andBookseller Confuted, or, the Author'sVindication of himself from the Calumniesin a Paper, industriously circulatedby one Edwin, (a tyrannical andmercenary man, who appears to haveill-used him with regard to the publicationof his History of the Bible) ; ANew and Practical Exposition of theApostle's Creed ; several occasional sermons; and a poem, entitled, VanDoctrine Emoluments, in which, it issaid, he deplores his miserable conditionin the language of disappointmentand despair.Langton, (GEORGE, Bishop ofExeter,) was born at Mildenhall, Wilts,'on the 18th of January, 1683. While ascholar at Winchester, where he wasplaced at an early age, he produced aGreek translation, after the manner ofTheocritus, of Virgil's Eclogues, whichis still preserved in manuscript. FromWinchester, he removed to New college,Oxford, where he graduated incivil law, and obtained a fellowship.In 1717, his college presented him tothe rectory of Afford Warren, andDr. Potter, some time afterwards, preferredhim to Hook Norton. He subsequentlybecame chaplain to EarlConingsby ; prebendary of Worcester ;canon residentiary of St. Paul's ; rectorof St. Mary, Aldermanbury, and St.Michael, Bassishaw; and bishop of Exeter.He died on the 13th of September,1762, leaving one child and a widow,the daughter of a gentleman who hadfled to England on the revocation ofthe edict of Nantes. In the dischargeof his episcopal duties, Bishop Lavingtoudisplayed considerable ability, and greatzeal for the established church. Hepublished a number of sermons ; a tractagainst the Moravians ; and a treatise,entitled, The Enthusiasm of the Papistsand Methodists compared ; of which,Warburton (after terming it a bad copyof Stillingfleet's work against the churchof Rome, though well enough to do theexecution intended.) says, in a letter tohis friend Hurd, " in pushing the Methodiststo make them like everythingthat is bad, he compares their fanaticismto the ancient mysteries; but, as themysteries, if they had ever been good,were not, in the bishop's opinion, badenough for this purpose, he thereforeendeavours to show, against me, thatAPPENDIX.they were abominations even from thebeginning. As this contradicts all antiquityso evidently, I thought it wouldbe ridiculous in me to take any noticeof him."Delay, (PATRICK, Dean ofDown,) a native of Ireland, and theson of a servant to an Irish judge, wasborn in 1686. At a proper age, he becamea sizar of Trinity college, Dublin,where he formed a strict intimacy withSwift, who is' said to have been muchattached to him, on account of his playfuldisposition. After taking his degrees,and obtaining a fellowship, heacquired considerable celebrity as atutor and as a preacher. In 1724, heincurred the displeasure of ArchbishopBoulter, by his unwarrantable interferencein some dispute relating to collegediscipline j for which he was afterwardscompelled to apologize to theprovost. This circumstance, and thetact of his being a Tory, excludedhim from preferment until 1725, whenhe obtained the chancellorship of Christchurch.In 1730, he was made a prebendof St. Patrick's cathedral, andwould have been instituted to theliving of St. John's, Dublin, had notthe primate, Boulter, prevented hisobtaining the necessary dispensationfor holding that preferment with hisfellowship. In 1727, he was presented,by the university, to a living worthabout 100 a year; and, in 1744, hewas raised to the deanery of Down.His works consist of The Tribuneand The Humanist, two unsuccessfulperiodicals ; Revelation explained withCandour ; Reflections upon Polygamy,and the Encouragement given to thatPractice in the Old Testament; AnHistorical Account of the Life andReign of David, King of Israel ; Essaytowards evidencing the Divine Originalof Tithes; Observations upon LordOrrery's Remarks on the Life andWritings of Dr. Jonathan Swift; Anhumble Apology for Christian Orthodoxy; and various sermons and discourses.He was twice married: first,to a widow of large fortune, namedTenison; and, secondly, to anotheropulent widow, the celebrated Mrs.Gendarmes, who is much praised for heringenuity by Lord Orrery, in constructingan imitative Flora, of great beautyand accuracy, with coloured paper.As an author, Dr. Delany is rather tobe applauded for his industry than admiredfor his talent : his best worksare his sermons, which have met withconsiderable approbation on account oftheir practical utility. He appears tohave been eminently pious, bountiful,and, although occasionally irritable, ofan excellent disposition. He once hadthe honour of being appointed to preachbefore the king, but did not enter thechapel-royal until after prayers hadcommenced ; and, as it is related, " notknowing where else to go, crowdedinto the desk by the side of the reader."The vesture soon after pulled him bythe sleeve, and begged him to comeout, " for that there was no text."Chagrined at having his devotions thusinterrupted, Delany resisted, and, atlength, kicked the intruder ; nor couldhe be prevailed upon to quit the desk,until he was apprised that he must gointo the vestry, and write down histext for the royal closet. His irritation,however, was so great, that he couldscarcely hold a pen. Mrs. Delany wasconsequently sent for, and no otherpaper being at hand, she transcribedthe text for the king and royal familyon the envelope of a letter. He diedat Bath, in May, 1768.Bally, (JOHN,) was born atSheffield, on the 12th of August, 1686,and completed his education at St.John's college, Cambridge. After havingtaken his first degree, " he wentto teach the free school in his nativeplace." In 1708, he was appointedtutor to the son of Mr. Banks ; andthis gentleman subsequently recommendedhim to the patronage of SirHenry Liddell, by whom he was presentedto a small benefice in Yorkshire.In 1726, he proceeded to the degree ofM. A. ; and, having previously renderedhimself conspicuous, by the zeal andtalent with which he had supportedthe opinions of Bishop Hoadly in theBangorian controversy, he was collatedby that prelate, early in the next year,to a prebendal stall in Salisbury cathedral,which gave him the right of presentationto several livings; two ofwhich, soon afterwards, falling vacant,he promoted his brother-in-law to one,and his son, afterwards Archdeacon ofTHE CHURCH.Winchester, to the other. His lastpreferment was to the vicarage ofNorthallerton, in Yorkshire, where heofficiated until his decease, which tookplace in 1748. Among his numerousproductions, besides those on the subjectof the Bangorian controversy, are,A Letter to a Deist, in which he attackedsome of the opinions advancedby Shaftesbury concerning virtue; anassize sermon, entitled The Foundationof Moral Goodness, in two parts,written, it is said, in a masterly andcandid manner, but full of the spirit ofparty ; Divine Rectitude, or, A BriefInquiry concerning the Moral Perfectionsof the Deity; The Law of Truth,or, the Obligations of Reason essentialto all Religion ; An Essay on Redemption; and two volumes of sermons, oneof which was posthumously published.He bore an unimpeachable character,and was respected for his talents evenby those who widely differed from himin opinion. Wanton relates, that he repliedto a person, who had warmly extolledone of his discourses entitled, Onthe Vanity and Vexation of our Pursuits,I borrowed the whole from ten linesin Pope's Essay on Man, at verse 259 ;and 1 only enlarged and commentedupon what the poet had expressedwith such marvellous conciseness andprecision."LAW, (WILLIAM,) was born in 1686,at Kingscliffe, in Northamptonshire,and became, in 1705, a student ofEmanuel college, Cambridge, where heproceeded to the degree of M. A., andobtained a fellowship; which, however,he vacated, by refusing to take theoaths, prescribed by act of parliament,on the accession of George the First.He had previously officiated as a curatein the metropolis ; but, on losing hisfellowship, he abandoned the pulpit,and became tutor to Edward Gibbon,Esq. of Putney, father of the celebratedhistorian. In 1727, while standing atthe door of a house in London, a sealedpaper was put into his hands, containinga bank-note for 1,000, with which,it is supposed, he founded, at his nativeplace, alms-houses for two aged females,and a school for the instructionof fourteen girls. During his residenceat Putney, he formed an intimacy withtwo ladies of fortune, named Mrs.Hester Gibbon, (a sister of his pupil,)and Mrs. Elizabeth Hutchinson, thewidow of Archibald Hutchinson, Esq.,of the Temple, who, having resolved onpassing the remainder of their lives incomparative seclusion, and on devotinga considerable portion of their incometo acts of charity, retired, in 1740, withMr. Law, whom they appointed theirinstructor, chaplain, and almoner, toKingsclifte, his birth-place, where theycarried their intention completely intoeffect. In the society of these benevolentwomen, he continued up to theday of his death, which took place onthe 9th of April, 1761. He is describedas having been rather abovethe middle size ; stout, but not corpulent;with broad shoulders, grey eyes,round visage, well-proportioned features,an open,' agreeable countenance,and rather inclined to be merry thansad. His works are numerous, andsome of them important : they consistof A Serious Call to a Devout and HolyLife ; A Practical Treatise on ChristianPerfection ; The absolute Unlawfulnessof Stage Entertainments; The Case ofReason, or, Natural Religion fully andfairly stated ; An Answer to Dr. Trapp'sDiscourse on the Folly of Sin, andbeing righteous over-much; The Spiritof Prayer; The Spirit of Love; AnAppeal to all that doubt or disbelievethe Truths of the Gospel ; An Answerto Hoadly on the Eucharist ; withvarious other theological and controversialpieces, including some translationsfrom his favourite, Behmen, allof which have been collected and published,in nine volumes, octavo. " Hislast compositions," says Gibbon, " aredarkly tinctured by the incomprehensiblevisions of Jacob Behmen ; and hisdiscourse on the absolute unlawfulnessof stage entertainments, is sometimesquoted for a ridiculous intemperance ofsentiment and language. But thesesallies of religious phrenzy must notextinguish the praise which is due toMr. William Law as a wit and a scholar.His argument on topics of less absurdityis specious and acute ; his manneris lively, his style forcible and clear;and, had not his vigorous mind beenclouded by enthusiasm, he might beranked with the most agreeable andingenious writers of the times." "Whenat Oxford," says Dr. Johnson, " I tookAPPENDIX.up Law's Serious Call to a Holy Life,expecting to find it a dull book, (assuch books generally are,) and perhapsto laugh at it. But I found Law quitean over-match for me ; and this wasthe first occasion of my thinking inearnest of religion, after I became capableof rational inquiry." The samework, it is stated, produced such aneffect on John Wesley, that no soonerhad he perused it, than he resolved ondevoting himself wholly to the serviceof God ; and to this circumstance, thesubsequent establishment of Arminianmethodism, may be chiefly attributed.GREY, (ZACHARY,) was born inYorkshire, in the year 1687, and admitteda pensioner of Jesus college,Cambridge, in April, 1704; but afterwardsmigrated to Trinity hall, wherehe became a scholar, in January,1706-7; and, in 1709, took the degreeof L.L.B. Having entered into holyorders, he obtained the rectory ofHoughton Conquest, in Bedfordshire,and the vicarages of St. Giles's andSt. Peter's, at Cambridge. In 1720,he took the degree of L.L. D., and publishedhis Vindication of the Churchof England, in answer to Pearce'sVindication of the Dissenters. Hesubsequently wrote An Impartial Examinationof Neal's History of thePuritans ; A Defence of our modernand ancient Historians; and a numberof other historical and polemical works ;among which, were Presbyterian Prejudicedisplayed ; A Century of eminentPresbyterians, or, a Collection ofChoice Sayings from the public sermonsbefore the two houses, from November,1641, to the 31st of January, 1648 ; ALooking-glass for Fanatics ; The Ministryof the Dissenters proved to benull and void from Scripture and Antiquity;The Spirit of Infidelity Detected,in answer to Barbeyrac, witha defence of Dr. Waterland; EnglishPresbyterian Eloquence; An Examinationof Dr. Chambers' History ofPersecution ; The True Picture ofQuakerism ; An Attempt towards theCharacter of the Royal Martyr, KingCharles; The Quakers and MethodistsCompared ; and Popery in its ProperColours, with a List of Saints invokedin England before the Reformation.In 1744, appeared his celebrated editionof Hudibras corrected and amended,with a preface and large annotations.In the following year, he publishedRemarks upon a late Edition of Shakspeare,with Emendations, borrowedfrom the Oxford edition, without Acknowledgment;in 1750, A free andfamiliar Letter to that great Refiner ofPope and Shakspeare, the Rev. Mr.William Warburton ; in 1752, A Supplementto Hudibras ; in 1755, Critical,Historical, and Explanatory Notes onShakspeare, with Emendations of theText and Metre ; and, in 1757, AChronological Account of Earthquakes.He is said to have assisted Halleyin his edition of Ben Jonson ; andPeck, in his second volume of DesiderataCuriosa. He also collected materialsfor a life of Baker, the Cambridgeantiquarian; and left, in manuscript,some original notes on Hudibras, Memoirsof Robert Harley, Earl of Oxford,and a Life of Dean Moss. He died atAmpthill, in Bedfordshire, on the 25thof November, 1766. He was twicemarried : first, to a Miss Tooley ; and,secondly, to a lady related to DeanMoss, by whom he had one son andtwo daughters. The most important ofDr. Zachary Grey's numerous worksare, his examination of Neal's History ofthe Puritans, and his edition of Hudi-bois; the latter of which proves him tohave been a man of great ingenuityand research. Although, on manyoccasions, rather acrimonious as apolemical writer and a critic, he obtained,in private life, the appellationof "Good Dr. Grey;" being, accordingto Nichols, of an amiable, sweet,and communicative disposition ; mostfriendly to his acquaintances, and neverbetter pleased than when performingacts of friendship and benevolence.BERRIM AN, (WILLIAM,) was bornin 1688, and completed his education atOriel college, Oxford, where he proceededto the degrees of M. A. and D. D.In 1722, he became rector of St. Andrew,Understand; and, in 1727, a fellowof Eton. He printed several singlesermons; a Concio ad Clerum ; CriticalDissertations, being the substance ofEight Discourses, delivered at LadyMoyer's Lecture ; three volumes of sermonspreached at Boyle's lectures; andtwo reviews of Winston's PrimitiveTHE CHURCH.Doxologies. After his death, which tookplace on the 5th of February, 1749-50.about sixty pieces on the Doctrines andDuties of Christianity, were publishedfrom his manuscript, in three volumes,by the Rev. John Ferryman, rector ofSt. Olave's, Silver-street. " His abilitiesas a scholar and polemical divine," saysNichols, " were universally acknowledged; and his high opinion of thepower, right, and dignity of the priesthood,is eminently conspicuous in allhis writings."CONYBEARE, (JoHN, Bishop ofBristol,) was born on the 31st of January,1691-2, at Pinion, in Devonshire.He was admitted a battle of Exetercollege, Oxford, in February, 1707-8;obtained a probationary fellowship in1710; graduated as B. A. in 1713;was appointed moderator in philosophyin 1714j and became M. A. in April,1716 ; when, he obtained a small curacyin Surrey. In 1717, he became a tutorin his own college; about 1722, Dr.Gibson appointed him a Whitehallpreacher; in 1724, he was presented tothe rectory of St. Clement's, Oxford ;and, in the following year, he waschosen senior proctor of the university.He took his degree of B. D. in 1728,and that of D. D. in 1729. In 1730,he was elected head of Exeter college; in 1732, he was promoted to thedeanery of Christchurch, and, in 1750,to the bishopric of Bristol. His deathtook place on the 13th of July, 1755.The revenues of his see were so slender,(never having amounted, it is said,to much above 300 per annum,) thathe died poor; and two volumes ofhis discourses were published, by subscription,for the benefit of his daughter,to whom George the Second granteda small pension. Dr. Conybearepreached a number of sermons onpublic occasions, which have justlybeen described as judicious and solidcompositions. His chief work, A Defenceof Revealed Religion, (publishedin 1732,) against Tindal's Christianityas Old as the Creation, was termed, byWarburton, " one of the best reasonedbooks in the world." He appears tohave been a man of superior abilities,and a most unexceptionable character.WESLEY, (SAMUEL,) brother ofthe celebrated dissenters, John andCharles Wesley, was born at Epworth,in 1692. He was sent to Westminsterschool in 1704, whence, having obtaineda king's scholarship, he waselected to Christchurch, Oxford, in1711. After having taken his degreesof B. A. and M. A., and entered intoholy orders, he became a tutor atWestminster school; and, in 1732, headmasterat that of Tiverton, in Devonshire.He died on the 6th of November,1739, without having obtained anypreferment, in consequence, chiefly, ofhis hostility to Walpole, and his attachmentto Atterbury. Being a rigidhigh churchman, and fearing, it is said,that they would bring about a separationfrom the church, he totally disapprovedof his brothers becomingitinerant preachers. He was the authorof a few poems and humorous tales, thewhole of which he collected and published,in one volume quarto, about theyear 1736. To the Spalding society,he left, as it is stated, an amulet whichhad touched the heads of the threekings of Cologne.THOMAS, (JOHN, Bishop of Salisbury,)son of a porter, was born atDoggedly, Merionethshire, in 1695. In1702, he became a pupil at MerchantTailors' school ; from which, at the expenseof his father's master, a brewer,he was sent to Catherine college,Cambridge, where he eventually proceededto the degree of S. T. P. Havingtaken holy orders, he went out aschaplain to the English factory atHamburgh ; and, while there, acquiredsuch proficiency in German as enabledhim to assist in the editing of a periodicalpublication in that language. Aboutthis period, he appears to have attractedthe favourable notice of Georgethe Second, who, it is related, havingexpressed great surprise at seeing himattending some theatrical performance,Dr. Thomas replied, " Sire, I am notashamed of appearing at any placewhere the head of the church thinksproper to be present." On account ofthe facility with which he spoke German,he attended the king on most ofhis visits to the electorate. Nichols relatesthat the deanery of Peterboroughhaving become vacant while George theSecond was abroad, his majesty gave itAPPENDIX.to Dr. Thomas, who soon afterwardsreceived a letter from the Duke ofNewcastle, then prime minister, entreatingthat he would relinquish thepreferment, his grace having positivelypromised it to Dr. Newcome, and promisinghim something in return moreworthy of his acceptance ; but withouteffect : the prudent divine " thinking,perhaps, that a deanery in possessionwas worth two in reversion." Handel,the musician, states, that during oneof the royal voyages to the Hague, Dr.Thomas's hat was blown into the sea ;and the king having uttered some jeston the occasion, Dr. Thomas observed,It is in your majesty's power to repairthe loss, by providing me withanother kind of covering for my head."Shortly afterwards, he had the satisfactionof obtaining a mitre. It appearsthat, on his return to England, he wasnominated to the see of St. Asaph;but, before his consecration could takeplace, he broke his leg by steppinginto a hole while crossing St. James'ssquare; and, while suffering from theconsequences of this accident, the kinggave him, in lieu of that of St. Asaph,the more valuable bishopric of Lincoln,which had become vacant by the deathof Dr. Reynolds. In 1761, he wastranslated to the see of Salisbury ; inpossession of which he died, on the 19thof July, 1766. " He is," says Cole,who wrote during the bishop's life-time,a very worthy and honest man, amost facetious and pleasant companion,and remarkably good-tempered. Hehas a peculiar cast in his eyes, and isnot a little deaf. I thought it rather anodd jumble, when I dined with him in1753 ; his lordship squinting the mostI ever saw any one ; Mrs. Thomas, thebishop's wife, squinting not a little;and a Dane, the brother of his first wife,being so short-sighted as hardly to beable to know whether he had anythingon his plate or no. Mrs. Thomas washis fourth wife, grand-daughter, as Itake it, of Bishop Patrick, a veryworthy man. It was generally said,that the bishop put this poesy to thewedding-ring when he married her :iriturrivr,1 will have fire , 'and she dying in 1757, he kept hisword." The Rev. Richard Southgatestates that, " though a good-temperedand a worthy man, he had his failings.He was pleased," continues our author,with the company of persons of rank,and had not firmness of mind sufficientto refuse what a great man asked as afavour." He married his first wife, aDanish woman, at Copenhagen, wherehe obtained the notice of the King ofDenmark, (with whom he subsequentlycorresponded,) and received the followingadvice from an old physician, whomhe had consulted as to the best methodof preserving his health : " Huge omnesmedicos, atque omnimoda medicaments."While he was at Hamburgh,a Lutheran minister having refused tobury a gentleman belonging to thefactory, because he had been a Calvinist,Dr. Thomas ridiculed him outof his absurd prejudices on the subject,by the following observations: " Jnobjecting to inter this departed Calvinistamong the deceased of yourLutheran congregation, you remind meof a woman, who, once while I was inthe middle of the burial service, pulledme by the sleeve, and, in a tone of graveremonstrance, informed me, that I wasactually interring a man, whose deathwas attributed to the small-pox, by theside of her husband, who never had hadthat disorder."BURTON, (JOHN,) son of the rectorof Wentworth, in Devonshire, wasborn there in the year 1696. He completedhis education at Corpus Christiicollege, Cambridge, where he took thedegree of B. A. in 1717; and, soonafterwards, was appointed to read theGreek lecture. In 1720, he proceededto the degree of M. A. ; and, afterhaving acquired great reputation as atutor, he took the degree of B. D. in1729, and, in 1733, obtained a fellowshipof Eton. About the same period,he was presented to the vicarage ofMaple Durham, in Oxfordshire ; and,apparently, from motives of compassion,permitted the relict and children of hispredecessor, Littleton, to reside withhim in the parsonage-house. Soon afterwards,a neighbouring clergyman, onpaying the new vicar a visit, discoveredMrs. Littleton in the act of shavinghim, and remonstrated with him sowarmly " on the indecency of thething, that Burton at once proposedTHE CHURCH.to marry the widow, and within a fewdays they were united. On the deathof "his wife, in 1748, he removed toEton college, and devoted the greaterpart of his time to literary pursuits. In1752, he took the degree of D. D., and,soon afterwards, published his cherub,delivered on that occasion. In 1766,he was preferred to the rectory ofWorplesdon, Surrey, in possession ofwhich he died, on the llth of February,1771. Dr. Burton's works consist ofsermons ; poetical pieces in Greek,Latin, and English ; Latin theologicaldissertations ; and a Preface and Notesto a valuable Selection of Greek Tragedies,entitled. Pentalogia. In his oldage, he published his fugitive pieces,under the title of Opuscula Miscellanea.His style was so peculiar, that it obtainedthe designative epithet of Bur-ionian.Some of his productions appear,however, to be by no means destituteof elegance; and the greater portion ofhis argumentative pieces are sensibleand convincing. He was rather eccentric,but particularly amiable. Thecompanions of his leisure hours, whileresiding at Eton, were, it is said, themost distinguished young students,whom it was his delight to instruct andamuse : careless of money, as he appearsto have been throughout life, thecontents of his purse, and the stores ofhis mind, were, it is added, alike attheir service.MADDOX, (ISAAC, Bishop of Worcester,)the son of humble parents, whoboth died during his childhood, wasborn in London, on the 27th of July,1697. After having been for sometimeat a charity-school, he was placedon trial with a pastry-cook, who, however,declined receiving him as an apprentice,alleging, that he did notappear to be fit for trade, " his sole delightbeing to read books of learning."By the aid of some dissenting friend,his aunt soon afterwards procured himan exhibition at the university of Aberdeen; on quitting which, he is said tohave officiated as pastor of a presbyteriancongregation, in one of thenorthern counties; but, on obtainingthe patronage of Bishop Gibson, hethought proper to conform, and wasadmitted of Queen's college, Cambridge.He soon obtained episcopalordination ; and, after serving, for ashort time, as curate of St. Bride's,London, became chaplain to BishopWaddington, whose niece he had married.In 1729, he was nominated clerkof the closet to Queen Caroline ; and,about the same time, took the degreeof D. D. by archiepiscopal mandate.He was presented to the rectory ofSt. Veda, Foster-lane, in 1731 ; promotedto the deanery of Wells, in1733; raised to the see of St. Asaph,in 1736 ; and translated to that of Worcester,in 1743-4. He died on the27th of September, 1759. Besides severalsermons, he published A Vindicationof the Government Doctrine andWorship of the Church of England,in answer to Neal's History of thePuritans. He was a zealous supporterof the British fishery, of the smallpoxhospitals, and other charitable institutionsin the metropolis. He is alsosaid to have been chiefly instrumentalin establishing the infirmary at Worcester,and to have regularly devoted200 per annum, to the augmentationof small livings in his diocese. Greatcourtesy, cheerfulness, and good-naturehave been attributed to him ; and it issaid, that, on several occasions, at table,after his elevation to the episcopalbench, he jocosely alluded "to his briefexperience as a pastry-cook."HILDESLEY, (MARK, Bishop ofSodor and Man,) was born on the 9th ofDecember, 1698, at Marston, in Kent,and educated at the Charter-house, andTrinity college, Cambridge. After havingtaken the degrees of B. A. andM. A., and obtained a fellowship, hebecame chaplain to Lord Cobham. In1725, he was appointed a Whitehallpreacher, and curate of Yelling, inHuntingdonshire. In 1731, his collegepresented him to the vicarage ofHitch ; and, four years afterwards,he obtained the neighbouring rectoryof Howell. On the death of BishopWilson, in 1755, he was raised, by theDuke of Athol, to the see of Sodor andMan ; the revenues of which were soslender, and his fees on consecration soheavy, that he was permitted, for sometime,to hold his rectory in commendam.This, however, he voluntarily resigned,as soon as he had cleared himself ofthe pecuniary difficulties consequentAPPENDIX.upon his acceptance of the bishopric.In 1767, he obtained the mastership ofHepburn hospital ; and, soon afterwards,a prebendal stall in Lincolncathedral. Under his auspices, a translationof the Scriptures into the Manxlanguage, which had been commencedby his predecessor in the bishopric, wascompleted and published towards theclose of the year 1772. He had repeatedlydeclared, that he only wishedto live long enough to see this laboriousand useful work in print ; and it is relatedthat, when the last proof sheetwas laid before him, he solemnlyand emphatically chaunted " Nunc,Domine, dimittis," &c. On the followingday, he preached on the uncertaintyof human life j in the course of thenext afternoon, he was deprived, in aninstant, of all apparent consciousness,by apoplexy ; and, about a week afterwards,he expired. This event tookplace on the 7th of December, 1772.He was, apparently, neither remarkablefor his learning nor his eloquence;yet few, if any, of his episcopal contemporaries,excelled him in piety, benevolence,or zeal for the advancementof religion.TUCKER, (JosiAH, Dean of Gloucester,)the son of a Welsh gentlemanwho farmed his own estate, was bornin 1711 ; and, after having received aclassical education, was sent to St.John's college, Oxford ; where, in 1736,he proceeded to the degree of B. A.;and, on the 7th of July, 1739, to thatof M. A. Having taken holy orders,he became, successively, curate of AllSaints', Bristol ; chaplain to Dr. Butler,his diocesan ; and rector of St. Stephen's,in that city. In 1747, he published Abrief Essay on the Advantages andDisadvantages which respectively attendFrance and Great Britain, withregard to Trade ; and, a few yearsafterwards, Reflections on the Expediencyof a Law for the Naturalizationof Foreign Protestants, a measure whichhe cordially recommended ; as he alsodid that of the Jews, in some lettersto a friend, printed in 1753, which excitedsuch angry feelings against him,that he was burnt in effigy by thepopulace. In 1755, he took the degreesof B. D. and D. D. ; and, duringthe same year, became a prebendary ofBristol. In 1758, he was advanced tothe deanery of Gloucester, through theinterest of Mr. Nugent, afterwardsLord Clare; in whose favour he hadinduced many of his parishioners tovote, at an election of members of parliamentfor the city of Bristol. In1772, he published An Apology forthe Present Church of England, and avolume of sermons on important subjects.In the following year appearedhis Letters to the Rev. Dr. Kippis, inwhich, although he advocated concessionto the dissenters, to a certain extent,he strenuously opposed a repealof the test and corporation acts. Hisnext productions were several tractsrelative to the American war, publishedat different periods: in these,while he condemned the opposition ofthe colonies, he insisted that a separationhad become absolutely necessary ; andrecommended that Great Britain shouldnot only recognize their independence,but protect them against foreign aggressors.In 1781, appeared his Treatiseconcerning Civil Government, inthe first part of which, he attempted torefute the arguments of Locke, on thatimportant subject. In 1782, he printeda pamphlet, entitled, Cui Bono? or, AnInquiry as to what Benefits can arise,either <o the English or the Americans,the French, Spaniards, or Dutch, fromthe greatest Victories or Successes inthe present War; in which he is accusedof having given a malignant estimateof the character of the Americans. Hewas also the author of a number ofother works on political, religious, andcommercial subjects ; the most importantof these were some tracts, relativeto the disputes with Ireland, in whichhe recommended that trade should befreed from all restrictions, and left toregulate itself. Particularly assiduousin the performance of his clerical duties,he is slated to have been much belovedby his parishioners, who, as itappears, sincerely regretted the resignationof his rectory, in favour of hiscurate, which he thought proper tomake, some time after he had beenappointed Dean of Gloucester. Althoughhe made but few converts to hisopinions, he was, in general, esteemedas an able, and, on account of his witanamusing and rather a brilliantwriter. Lord Mansfield designatedTHE CHURCH.him, in the house of peers, as a writerof the first class, for sagacity andknowledge; and Archbishop Herring,in a letter to Dr. Forster, dated inthe year 1755, says, " Tucker has sentme a very ingenious book, the forerunnerof a great work on the truepolity of government. But, I think,it is only a fine vision, and may suggesta right way of thinking uponmany subjects, and produce some partialgood ; but it fails in two mainpoints : for it supposes, that, some timeor other, governors of the world maystart up, who shall be disinterested andhonest in all their views, and have subjectsof the same turn of thought. Buthis essay is really admirable, clear, andmanly, and infinitely full of spirit andhumour." He died, without issue, ofa paralytic stroke, in 1799.BATE, (JuLius,) was born aboutthe year 1711, and proceeded to thedegree of M. A. at St. John's college,Cambridge. Having taken orders, hebecame chaplain to William, Earl ofHarrington; and, on the recommendationof Hutchinson, the Duke ofSomerset presented him to the rectoryof Sutton, in Sussex. He was an ardentadmirer of Hutchinson, whose opinionshe defended with considerable zeal,learning, and ingenuity. His productionscomprise, The Examiner Examined,with some Observations onHebrew Grammar ; An Essay towardsexplaining the ThirdChapter of Genesis,in answer to Warburton ; The PhilosophicalPrinciples of Moses asserted ariddefended ; Remarks upon Warburton'sRemarks, shewing, that the Ancientsknew there was a future state, &c. ;Faith of the Ancient Jews in the Lawof Moses, and the Evidence of theTypes vindicated; An Hebrew Grammar,founded on the Usage of Wordsby the Inspired Writers ; The Use andIntent of Prophecy and History ofThe Fall cleared ; A Defence of Mr.Hutchinson's Tenets ; The Scripturemeaning of Elohim and Berth ; Integrityof the Hebrew Texts, and manyPassages of Scripture vindicated fromthe Objections and Misconstructions ofMr. Kennicott : Critical Hebraae ; or,A Hebrew English Dictionary withoutPoints ; a posthumous volume, entitled,A New and Literal Translation fromthe original Hebrew of the Pentateuchof Moses, and of the Historical Booksof the Old Testament, to the end ofthe Second Book of Kings, with notes,critical and explanatory. Warburtonaccuses him, " in conjunction with oneRomaine, of betraying conversation,and writing fictitious letters ;" and termshim, in allusion to his efforts for theadvancement of the doctrines of Hutchinson," one Bate, a zany to amountebank." He died at Arundel,on the 7th of April, 1771.RUTHERFORTH,(THOMAS, Archdeaconof Essex,) the son of a clergyman,was born at Tamworth Everard,on the 13th of October, 1712, and becamea fellow and tutor of St. John'scollege, Cambridge, where he proceededto the degrees of M. A. and D. D. In1742, he was chosen a fellow of theRoyal Society ; and, in 1756, appointedregius professor of divinity. He appearsto have held, successively, the rectoriesof Barrow, in Suffolk ; Cranfield,in Essex; and Barley, in Hertfordshire.He also obtained the archdeaconry ofEssex ; in possession of which he died,on the 5th of October, 1771 ; leaving oneson, by his wife, Charlotte Elizabeth,daughter of Sir William Ably, of Cobham,Baronet. He was the author ofAn Essay on the Nature and Obligationsof Virtue ; A System of NaturalPhilosophy ; Ordo Institution Physical; The Credibility of Miraclesdefended ; A Conch ad Clerum ; AVindication of the Right of ProtestantChurches, to require the Clergy to subscribeto an established Confession ofFaith and Doctrine ; two letters to Kennicott; and several sermons, charges,and other pieces. Dyer terms him,a strenuous asserter of subscription tothe Thirty-nine Articles, in oppositionto the Unitarians; and Maurice Johnson,in a letter to Mr. Birch, saysof his Essay on the Nature and Obligationsof Virtue: " If you have notread that amiable work, I must not forbearrecommending it to your perusal."Warburton, however, speaks of himthus : " If he knows no more of theologythan he does of morals, he is themeanest pedant of the age. The affectationof being singular has made hima bad moralist: will the affectationof being orthodox make him a good.504APPEN DIX.divine ? Of the two, I think Stabbingthe more tolerable, who labours to supportother people's nonsense rather thanhis own."SHIPLEY, (JONATHAN, Bishop ofSt. Asaph.) was born in 1714, and afterhaving received a liberal education, wassent to Christchurch, Oxford, where hegraduated about the year 1735, and proceededto the degree of M. A. in 1738.While at the university, he wrote amonody on the death of Queen Caroline,which was inserted in the Oxford collection.He became a prebendary ofWinchester, in 1743; and, two yearsafterwards, chaplain to the Duke ofCumberland, whom he accompanied tothe continent. On his return to England,in 1748, he took the degrees ofB. D. and D. D., and obtained, successively,a canonry of Christchurch, Oxford,the deanery of Winchester, thelivings of Winchester and Chinbolton,(which he held by dispensation,) andthe bishopric of St. Asaph. He diedon the 9th of December, 1788, leavinga son (the celebrated Dean Shipley)and two daughters, one of whom wasmarried to Sir William Jones. He distinguishedhimself chiefly by his hostility-to the American war, which, it issupposed, precluded him from furtherpreferment. In 1774, he printed ASpeech intended to have been spoken onthe Bill for Altering the Charters of theColony of Massachusetts Bay ; and hiscollective works, comprising sermons,charges, and parliamentary orations,edited by Mainwaring, were publishedin 1792. In thesixth volume of Nichols'sAnecdotes of the Eighteenth Century,there is a curious letter from BishopShipley to Wanton, on the discovery ofthe coffin containing the remains ofHenry de Blois, brother to KingStephen.Johnson, (THOMAS, Archdeaconof Richmond,) was born in 1715, andcompleted his education at the universityof Oxford, where he was firstentered at Christchurch, but afterwardsbecame a demy at Magdalen. Afterhaving graduated as B. A., he obtaineda fellowship, and, in 1739, proceeded tothe degree of M. A. About the year1742, he made a tour on the continentwith Messieurs Drake and Wordsworth ;and on his return, in 1745, became atutor of his college. He subsequentlyserved the office of senior proctor; tookthe degrees of B. D. and D. D. ; andprocured, in succession, the livings ofHatfield, Several, Blithfield.and Malpas,and the archdeaconry of Richmond, witha prebend of Chester. He publishedsome treatises relative to the Confessional; A Dissertation on the Claimsof the Roman Catholics ; and Discourseson the Gospels. In addition to these, hewrote some other pieces, which wereprinted in a posthumous edition of hisworks, with a memoir of his life, byArchdeacon Wharton. He enjoyed thereputation of possessing great biblicallearning; and he might, in 1783, it issaid, had he thought fit, have obtainedthe divinity chair at Oxford ; which,however, on account of his age, he declinedaccepting. He died on the 15thof April, 1792.Bally, (THOMAS, Archdeacon ofWinchester,) was born on the 27th ofSeptember, 1716, and educated at St.John's college, Cambridge, where heobtained a fellowship, and proceeded tothe high degree of S. T. P. He became,successively, rector of NorthStoke, vicar of Alton, a prebendary ofWinchester, archdeacon of Salisbury,and archdeacon of Winchester. On thedeath of Warburton, in 1781, he wasoffered the bishopric of Gloucester,which, however, being aged, nearlyblind, and in bad health, he thoughtproper to decline. Among his publicationsare the following: A Sermon onChurch Government, which producedan answer from Priestley ; A Chargeto the Clergy of his Archdeaconry, onthe propriety of demanding subscriptionto articles of faith, which was censuredby Palmer, and other dissenting writers;A Sermon on the respective Duties ofMinisters and People, preached at theconsecration of Bishops Hurd andMore; an edition of the Sermons ofDr. Powell; a reprint of his father'sEssay on Redemption ; and DivineBenevolence Asserted and Vindicatedfrom the Reflections of Ancient andModern Sceptics. His death tookplace on the 19th of January, 1795.He appears to have been an exemplaryChristian, an able divine, and, to adoptthe words of Bishop Hurd, "a personof extraordinary parts and extensiveTHE CHURCH.learning." On one occasion, afterhaving preached from the text, " Allwisdom is sorrow," he received thefollowing compliment from the futureBishop Watson, who was then a studentat Winchester school:If what you advance, dear doctor, be true,That wisdom is sorrow, how wretched are you '."OGDEN, (SAMUEL,) was born atManchester, in 1716, and educated atthe free-school of his native place, atKing's college, Cambridge, and at St.John's college, in the same university,to which he migrated in 1736. Hegraduated as B. A. in the followingyear, and, eventually, proceeded to thedegree of S. T. P. In 1739, he becamea fellow of his college ; in 1744, masterof the free grammar-school at Halifax ;about 1753, vicar of Damerham, inWiltshire ; in 1764, Woodwards professorat Cambridge ; in 1765, an unsuccessfulcandidate for the mastershipof his college; and, in 1766, rector ofLawford, in Essex, and of Mansfield, inSuffolk. He also held the cure of St.Sepulchre's, at Cambridge, where heobtained considerable notoriety as apreacher. " His person, manner, andcharacter of composition," says Wakefield," were exactly suited to eachother. He exhibited a large, black,scowling, grisly figure ; a ponderousbody, with a lowering visage, embroiledby the horrors of a sable perriwig.His voice was growling andmorose, and his sentences desultory,tart, and snappish." His uncivilizedappearance, and bluntness of demeanour,were, according to the sameauthor, the grand obstacles to his elevationin the church. The Duke ofNewcastle, to whom he was indebtedfor his first preferment, would, it issaid, have taken him to court, with aview to his obtaining promotion, if hehad been what his grace termed, " aproducible man." Bishop Halifax observesthat, notwithstanding the sternness,and even ferocity, which he wouldsometimes throw into his countenance,he was one of the most humane andtender-hearted men ever known ; andCole, the Cambridge antiquary, describeshim as having been particularlyaffectionate to his aged parents, who,for a long period, were almost entirelydependent on his bounty for support.The same writer states, that Dr. Ogdenwas an epicure; that he loved a cheerfulglass, had a great turn for sneer andridicule, and used to sit in companyin his night-gown and slippers. Hisliterary productions consist of threevolumes of sermons, which, it has beensaid, if allowed to be elegant, are ofslight texture, and rather hortatorythan instructive or doctrinal. An editionof them appeared in 1780, with amemoir of his life, prefixed by BishopHalifax, who zealously, but, in theopinion of many, without success, attemptedto vindicate the author's style,against some severe remarks which hadbeen made upon it by Mainwaring.Dr. Ogden died on the 23rd of March,1778.POWELL, (WILLIAM SAMUEL,Archdeacon of Colchester,) was bornon the 27th of September, 1717, andcompleted his education at St. John'scollege, Cambridge, where he obtaineda fellowship, became head tutor, andproceeded to the high degree of S. T. P.He obtained his first preferment, theliving of Selkirk, in Norfolk, (whichwas subsequently consolidated withthat of Scabbard,) from Viscount Townshend,whose second son, Charles, afterwardschancellor of the exchequer, hadbeen his pupil. In 1759, a considerableestate in Essex was devised to him byone of his maternal relatives ; and heforthwith quitted Cambridge, but didnot abandon his fellowship until 1763.On the 25th of January, 1765, he wasunanimously chosen master of his college; and, in the following month ofNovember, he was elected vice-chancellorof the university for the ensuingyear. In 1766, he obtained the archdeaconryof Colchester ; and, two yearsafterwards, the rectory of Freshwater,in the Isle of Wight. In 1772, he reprinteda sermon which he had preachedand published some years before, indefence of subscription to the Thirty-nineArticles. On its first appearance,it had been severely attacked, by Dr.Jebb's wife, in the newspapers, underthe signature of Priscilla; and, in allusionto the circumstance, Paley is saidto have observed, " that the Lord hadsold Sisera into the hands of a woman."Soon after its republication, a letter,APPEN DIX.signed Camillus, bitterly satirizing thearchdeacon's doctrines, appeared in theLondon Chronicle, which was, bymany, confidently attributed to Jebbhimself, whose expulsion from the universityis said to have been chieflyowing to the hostility of Powell. Inaddition to his sermon in defence ofsubscription, the learned divine publishedObservations on MiscellaneaAnalytics, by Dr. Waring; A Discourseon the Vices incident to an AcademicalLife ; and some other pieces. A posthumousvolume of his Sermons, on varioussubjects, with a memoir of hislife, by Dr. Thomas Balguy, appearedabout a year after his death, whichtook place on the 19th of January,1775. " He was," says Cole, " rathera little, thin man ; florid and red ; withstaring eyes, as if almost choaked, oras if the collar of his shirt was too highabout his neck. He was a man of arugged and severe discipline ; but virtuous,learned, and by no means beloved: his manners were too rigid andunbending for the age he lived in. Ashewas a strict disciplinarian, so he wasby nature positive and obstinate, andnever to be beat out of what he hadonce got into his head ; yet, he wasgenerous in his temper ; and whenit was proposed improving the collegeand walks, at an expense of 800, hecalled the fellows together, recommendeda subscription among its formermembers of note, and set it a-going byputting down 500." He bequeatheda similar sum towards facing the collegewith stone; and, to his sister, withwhom he had never been able to agree,he left 150 per annum ; to twenty ofhis friends 100 each ; and to his niece,Miss Holland, 20,000. He hatedBaker, the Cambridge antiquary, whosebook he termed " a collection of lies,"and refused to allow a transcript to bemade of it for publication, because ithad been written, he said, " under theinfluence of partiality and resentment."He was once permitted to preach for acountry clergyman, whom he was visiting,with an express understandingthat he should adapt his language tothe capacities of the congregation. Atthe conclusion of the service, his friendremarked to him, that, notwithstandinghis promise, he had used many termswhich were beyond the comprehensionof his auditory, particularly noticingthe word felicity, for which, he said,happiness should have been substituted.Dr. Powell, however, contended,that his language must have been perfectlyclear to the meanest capacity ;and, for his justification, appealed toone of his friend's flock, whether everyman in the parish did not understandthe meaning of felicity. The rusticconfidently replied in the affirmative ;and stated, in other words, on beingrequired to explain it, that althoughhe could not tell exactly where it lay,he knew well enough that it was " summitinside of a pig."NEWTON, (JOHN,) a native ofLondon, and son of a shipmaster, wasborn in 1725. He received no regulareducation, having passed the chief partof his boyhood and youth at sea. Atthe age of fifteen, he obtained somecommercial situation at Valiant, whereashe states, he might have done well,had he behaved well. In 1742, he declinedthe offer of an eligible employmentat Jamaica, being averse, it issaid, to living at such a distance froma young lady, of whom he was enamoured,and who, eventually, becamehis wife. He soon afterwards made avoyage to Venice, as a common sailor,and indulged, to an excess, in somedepraved habits, which he had previouslycontracted. His sufferings were,however, fully equal to his turpitude ;aud he is said to have " almost drainedthe cup of human misery to the dregs,"when his father, in 1747, procuredhim employment on board a vessel engagedin the African slave trade. Evenwhen most wretched and abandoned,he had cherished a taste for learning,and acquired some knowledge of themathematics ; and he now began toimprove his previous scanty knowledgeof Latin. In 1750, his nautical skilland general good conduct had raisedhim to the post of commander ; but hesoon afterwards became weary of asea-faring life, and obtained the postof tide-waiter, at Liverpool ; where, bydint of severe application, he rapidlyacquired a considerable knowledge ofGreek and Hebrew. He now madesome attempts to obtain the appointmentof pastor to some dissenting congregation; but these proving abortive,THE CHURCH.he procured a title for holy orders, andpresented himself to the Archbishopof York for ordination ; which, however,that prelate refused him, on theground that he had been preaching,without authority, among the dissenters.Some years afterwards, he obtained,through the interest of LordDartmouth, the curacy of Olney, towhich, the Bishop of Lincoln thoughtproper to ordain him, in the month ofApril, 1764. At Olney, where he residedfor sixteen years, he formed aclose intimacy with Cowper, the poet,and the benevolent Thornton. Thelatter, for a long period, allowed him'200 per annum, in order that hemight be enabled to keep open housefor such as were worthy of entertainment,and to assist the needy membersof his congregation. In 1779, he waspromoted to the rectory of St. MaryWoolnoth, and St. Mary WoolchurchHaw, Lombard-street, where he officiatedduring the remainder of his life.He died on the 31st of December,1807 ; having survived his wife, a MissMary Cutlet, of Chatham, in Kent, bywhom he had no issue, about seventeenyears. He was the author ofCardiphonia ; A Review of EcclesiasticalHistory ; Messiah, A Series ofDiscourses; a narrative of his own life;several sermons ; and, in conjunctionwith Cowper, of A Collection of Hymns.Two editions of his works have beenprimed, one in six volumes, octavo ;and the other in twelve volumes,duodecimo. He was a popular preacher ;an original thinker ; a warm patron ofmeritorious young men, who weredesirous of entering the church ; andliberal, to the utmost extent of hismeans, in relieving distress. His principlesbeing decidedly Calvinistic, muchof that religious melancholy which embitteredthe existence of Cowper, hasbeen attributed to his influence, but,apparently, without foundation ; forNewton's disposition is stated to havebeen the reverse of gloomy ; and heis said to have been particularly successfulin consoling those who weredistressed by religious doubts or alarms.JONES, (WILLIAM,) was born atLowick, in Northamptonshire, in 1726;and proceeded, on a charter-house exhibition,to University college, Oxford,about 1744. After having graduated inarts, and obtained ordination, he becamecurate of Fined ; where he produced,in 1753, A Full Answer to BishopClayton's Essay on Spirit. In the followingyear he married, and gave uphis curacy for that of Wadenhoe ;where, by the advice of his friends, hesoon began to take pupils. In 1757,appeared his Catholic Doctrine of theTrinity, which soon ran through severaleditions ; and, in 1762, he publishedAn Essay on the First Principles ofNatural Philosophy. This work affordedso much satisfaction to LordBute, that the author received an orderto obtain whatever instruments he mightwant, for the further prosecution of hisinquiries, from the celebrated Adams,at his lordship's expense. In 1764,Archbishop Seeker presented him tothe vicarage of Bethesda ; and, inthe following year, to the rectory ofPlucked, both in the county of Kent.In 1769, he published A Letter to aYoung Gentleman at Oxford intendedfor Holy Orders; in 1770, Some Remarkson the Principles and Spirit ofthe Confessional, annexed to a newedition of his Answer to the Essay onSpirit; in 1772, Zoological Ethics, andThree Dissertations on Life and Death ;in 1773, A Volume of Disquisitions onScriptural subjects; and, in 1776, Reflectionson the Growth of Heathenismamongst the Christians. He now tookup his residence at Wayland, in Suffolk,of which he held the perpetual curacy ;exchanged his rectory of Plucked forthat of Pastor, in Northamptonshire ;and, having become a member ofSidney college, Cambridge, proceededto the degree of M. A. In 1781, heprinted his Physiological Disquisitions ;in 1788, Lectures on the FigurativeLanguage of the Holy Scriptures ; in1790, Two Volumes of Sermons, includingsome Discourses on NaturalHistory; and, in 1792, A Letter fromThomas Bull to his Brother John. Healso produced a collection of tracts byLeslie, Home, and others, entitled, TheScholar Armed against the Errors of theTimes; Memoirs of the Life, Studies,and Writings of Bishop Home, to asecond edition of which, he prefixedan exposition of the Hutchinsoniantheological and philosophical opinions ;A Discourse on the Use and IntentionAPPENDIX.of some remarkable Passages of theScriptures, not commonly understood ;and some minor pieces. The infirmitiesof age having, at length, compelled himto decline taking pupils, the Archbishopof Canterbury, in order that his incomemight suffer no diminution, presentedhim to the sinecure rectory ofHollingbourne, in Kent. He was soonafterwards deprived of the use of oneside, by a paralytic stroke, and diedon the 6th of February, 1800. Hisdisposition was benevolent, his knowledgeextensive, and his ability great.He practised medicine for the benefitof his parishioners ; and being a proficient,it is said, in music, composed amorning and evening cathedral service,ten church pieces, and four anthems.As an author, he principally distinguishedhimself by his zealous supportof the Hutchinsonian doctrines ; towhich, it is asserted, he made a convertof his friend, Bishop Home.EDWARDS, (THOMAS,) a native ofCoventry, and the son of a clergyman,was born in 1729. After having takenhis degrees in arts, and obtained afellowship at Clare hall, Cambridge, heproduced an English metrical translationof the Psalms, on the plan of BishopHare. In 1758, he was nominatedmaster of the free grammar-school, andrector of St. John, in his native city.In the following year, he printed hisDoctrine of Irresistible Grace proved tohave no Foundation in the New Testament.He subsequently proceeded tothe degree of D. D. ; and, in 1770, waspresented by the crown to the vicarageof Nuneaton, in Warwickshire, wherehe died in 1785. His productions, notalready mentioned, consist of two dissertations,the one against bigotry andpersecution, the other on the qualificationsnecessary for a correct interpretationof the New Testament; twoothers, in Latin, on various readings inScripture, and the doctrine of predestination; Select quaedam TheocritusItaly Ilia; and some controversial piecesin Latin, against Loath, relative toHare's system of Hebrew metre. Althoughdefeated on this subject, heenjoyed a high reputation for learningand talent ; and, according toNichols, " such were his assiduity andability in the instruction of youth, andso conscientious his discharge of hisparochial duties, that no praise couldexceed his merits."HINCHCLIFFE, (JOHN, Bishop ofPeterborough,) the son of a ,was born in Swallow-street,Westminster, in 1731. Afterhaving obtained the degree of B. A., in1754, at Trinity-college, Cambridge, hebecame usher of Westminster school,where he had been educated, and forsome time officiated as morningpreacher,at South Audley-street chapel. Heproceeded to the degree of M. A. in1757 ; and, three years afterwards, madethe tour of Europe with Mr. Crewe,who, on their return to England, madehim his chaplain, and gave him an annuityof 300 per annum. In 1764,the Duke of Grafton procured for himthe head-mastership of Westminsterschool ; which, however, on account ofthe state of his health, he was sooncompelled to resign. He then becametutor to the young Duke of Devonshire,with whom he subsequently resided inthe capacity of chaplain. In 1766, he waspresented to the vicarage of Greenwich ;and about the same period, marriedElizabeth, the sister of his friend, Mr.Crewe. This lady had, as it appears,been courted by an officer of the guards,whose attentions, however, being offensiveto her brother, the latter had requestedHinchcliffe to dissuade her fromreceiving his visits. The divine wasso successful, that she soon transferredher affections from her military suitorto himself; and Crewe so entirely approvedof their union, that on receivingthe surrender of the annuity, which hehad previously given to Hinchcliffe, headded the sum of 10,000 to his sister'sfortune. It is asserted that Hinchcliffewas offered the appointment of tutor tothe young Prince of Wales, and thathe declined it on account of his Whigprinciples. Through the interest ofhis patron, the Duke of Grafton, heobtained, in 1768, the mastership ofTrinity college; in 1769, the see ofPeterborough ; and, subsequently, thedeanery of Durham. That he procuredno further promotion, is attributed to hisuniformly acting with that party whichopposed the American war. He wasthe author of several discourses ; threeof which, on public occasions, appearedTHE CHURCH.during his lifetime, and the remainderwere published in one volume, twoyears after his decease, which tookplace on the llth of January, 1794. Heis described as having been a gracefulparliamentary orator, and a sensiblespeaker. The Rev. William Jones,after stating that " there was not acorner of the church in which he couldnot be heard distinctly ;" adds, that itwas his invariable practice, " to dojustice to every consonant ; knowingthat the vowels would be sure to speakfor themselves : and thus he becamethe surest and clearest of speakers ; hiselocution was perfect, and never disappointedhis audience." His productions,few as they are, possess but littlemerit; and, on the whole, his abilitiesappear to have been inferior to the highstation, to which he had the good fortune,by the accident of patronage, tobe exalted. His conduct in retainingthe mastership of Trinity college, afterhe had obtained the see of Peterborough,has exposed him to someanimadversion: "as a bishop," observesSimpson, "he ought, by every law ofhonour and conscience, and the Gospel,to have resided in his diocese, amonghis clergy and people ; as master ofTrinity, his presence could not, ingeneral, be dispensed with." Cole saysthat " he was a man of taste, but calledthe bloody bishop," because he was theonly one who, in 1774, spoke for severemeasures against the Armenians ; buthe turned coat with the Duke ofGrafton."SCOTT, (JAMES,) son of one of thedomestic chaplains to Frederick, Princeof Wales, was born at Leeds, in 1733.He was sent, in 1752, to the universityof Cambridge, where, after studying forashort time at Catherine Hall, hemigrated to Trinity college, of which,having previously taken the degree ofB. A., he became a fellow in 1757.Shortly afterwards, he obtained thelectureship of St. John's, at Leeds, whichhe held, until he proceeded to the degreeof M. A., in 1760. In the courseof the two next years, he gained threeprize medals: the first, for a poemon Heaven; the second, for a moralepistle on Purity of Heart ; and the third,for a Hymn to Repentance. He alsopublished some poetical compositions,the last of which, entitled Redemption,a Monody, appears to have provedunsuccessful. After having served thecuracy of Edmonton for about a year,he returned to Cambridge, where herapidly acquired extraordinary eminenceas a preacher. He frequentlyoccupied the university pulpit, and, onthese occasions, St. Mary's church isstated to have been invariably crowdedto excess. On one occasion, he is saidto have offended the under-graduatesby a sermon against gaming, and, it isadded, they evinced their displeasureby scraping the floor with their feet,an act of indecorum, for which thedivine severely censured them, shortlyafterwards, in a discourse on the text,Keep thy feet when thou goes to thehouse of God." In 1765, at the suggestionof the Earl of Halifax, he publishedsome political letters, signedAnti-senatus, in the Public Advertiser ;and, three years afterwards, he made anattempt to procure his election to theliving of St. John's, in his native place jwhich, proving unsuccessful, he was inducedto accept an afternoon lectureshipin the neighbouring parish of Trinity,where his popularity was so great, thatthe regular pew-holders, in order tosecure their places, usually obtained admissionby a private entrance to thechurch, an hour before the service commenced.After officiating at Leeds forabout a year, he returned to the metropolis,and wrote, in the public journals,a variety of political pieces, under thesignature of Old Slyboots. In 1771, hewas presented through the interest ofLord Sandwich, to the rectory of Simon-burn,in Northumberland, where hesoon became involved in litigation withhis parishioners. A suit which he commencedagainst them in 1744, afterhaving been carried on for twenty years,at an enormous expense on both sides,was at length disposed of by his consentingto relinquish the claim he hadset up for the tithe of agistment, on thedefendants undertaking to pay 2,400towards the costs which he had incurred.Pending the proceedings, his flock hadevinced the most rancorous hostilitytowards him ; and at length, a desperateattempt appears to have been madeupon his life, in consequence of which,he removed to the metropolis ; whereafterhaving materially added to hisAPPENDIX.high reputation as a preacher, he died,on the 10th of December, 1814. Hewas married, in 1772, to one of his relatives,named Ann Scott, by whom hehad three children. His virtues andtalents have been warmly extolled; andit is certain that his charities were extensive,and his abilities much abovemediocrity ; but the fact of his havingcarried on legal hostilities against hisparishioners, on the debateable subjectof tithes for agistment, during twice theterm of the Trojan war, will scarcely bedeemed by posterity consistent with themeek yet dignified character of a protestantdivine ; nor will the presentage, it is presumed, agree with those ofhis admirers, who pronounced his elocutionto have excelled that of any manof his time, either in the pulpit or thesenate ; and who declared his sermonsto have surpassed the finest compositionsof Porteus or Blair, whether consideredas elegant compositions, or persuasiveexhortations.HARRINGTON, (SHUTE, Bishop ofDurham,) sixth son of the first ViscountBarrington, was born at Becket, inBerkshire, on the 26th of May, 1734.After having studied for some time atEton, he was removed, in 1752, toMerton college, Oxford ; where he obtaineda fellowship, and proceeded tothe degrees of M. A. and D. C. L. Havingentered into holy orders, he was appointeda king's chaplain, on the accessionof George the Third ; a canonof Christchurch, in 1761 ; a canon ofSt. Paul's, in 1768 ; and bishop of Llandaff,on the 4th of October, in the followingyear. In 1777, he exchangedhis canonry of St. Paul's for the collegiatechurch of Windsor ; and on thedecease of Dr. Hume, he succeeded thatprelate in the see of Salisbury ; fromwhich he was translated to that ofDurham, in 1791. He died on the 25thday of March, 1826, leaving no issue,although he had been twice married :first, to Lady Diana Beauclerk ; and,secondly, to the daughter of Sir JohnGuise, baronet. In his senatorial capacity,Bishop Barrington renderedhimself conspicuous by his strenuoushostility to a petition for abolishingsubscription to the Thirty-nine Articles;and by his attempt, in 1779, to carry abill for the prevention of adultery. Hepublished a political life of his brother,William, second Viscount Barrington ;and a number of occasional sermonsand visitation charges, most of whichwere collected and reprinted, about theyear 1811. He was attacked, with someseverity, in 1783, for having animadverted,in one of his productions, onthe increasing substitution of Calvinisticdoctrines, by divines of the church ofEngland, for practical divinity ; andin 1806, he was accused of havingpreached up a holy crusade againstthe opinions and persons of the catholics,"in a sermon, entitled, The Groundson which the Church of England separatedfrom the Church of Rome.From this circumstance, a controversyarose between several eminent divines,in consequence of which, he published,as a supplement to his previous performancerelative to the separation ofthe two churches, but under the sametitle, reasons against the literal senseof the words, " This is my body, thisis my blood." In the performance ofhis various important duties as aprelate, he evinced uncommon piety,judgment, and zeal. He personally examinedall candidates for holy orders,and rejected those who appeared, fromany cause, unworthy of ordination,however strongly they might be recommended.One of his relatives, trustingto advancement through his patronage,having intimated a desire toenter the church, the bishop inquiredwith what preferment he would be contented." Five hundred a year willsatisfy all my wants," was the reply.You shall have that amount," saidthe conscientious prelate ; " not out ofthe patrimony of the church, but frommy private fortune." His charitabledonations were truly munificent. Inconjunction with Sir Thomas Bernard,he established the society for betteringthe condition of the poor ; that for thesupport and education of blind children,in St. George's fields ; and the feverhospital, in Gray's-inn-lane. He appropriatedone entire sum of 60,000,which he had recovered in a suit respectingsome mines in his diocese, to thefoundation of charity-schools, and therelief of poor clergymen and theirfamilies. Although particularly hostileto the doctrines of the church of Rome,the French bishops and clergy whoTHE CHURCH.sought refuge in England at the timeof the revolution, found in him a mostliberal benefactor ; as did the poorVaudois, when the misery they weresuffering was made known to the publicby Silly's Narrative of an Excursionto the Mountains of Piedmont. Itwould be difficult, perhaps, to point outany important charitable institution inthe kingdom to which he did not contribute,either by donations during hislifetime, or a bequest at his decease.He was a patron of learned men ; and,in addition to his other literary labours,is said to have contributed many valuablenotes to Bowyer's Critical Conjectureson the New Testament.Toady, (AUGUSTUS Montague,)the son of a captain, who died atthe siege of Cartagena, was born atFarnham, in Surrey, on the 4th ofNovember, 1740, and educated at Westminsterschool, and Trinity college,Dublin. After having taken the degreeof B. A. he entered into holy orders, andobtained the living of Broad Hamburg,in Devonshire, where he composedmany able works in support of theCalvinism of the church of England.Finding that the air of Devonshire hada detrimental effect on his constitution,after having, in vain, attempted to exchangehis living for another of equalvalue in the midland counties, he settledin London, and engaged the chapelbelonging to the French protestants,in Leicester-square, where he preachedtwice a week, so long as his healthwould permit ; but, for some time beforehis death, which took place on thellth of August, 1788, he was capableof officiating only at considerable intervals.His works, which appear tobe almost exclusively in support of predestination,are contained in sevenvolumes, octavo; the last of which wasposthumously published. It is generallyacknowledged, that he possessedextraordinary talent as a preacher, andwas, as a writer, one of the most giftedchampions of pure Calvinism, in moderntimes. Although reputed, by his disciples,in his lifetime, to be austere inthe extreme, and so absorbed in thecontemplation of eternity, as to look withcontempt, and even displeasure, uponthe innocent amusements of society, itappears, from the posthumous volumeof his writings, that he regarded theatrical,and other public amusements,with complacency, and did not scrupleto vindicate card-playing. The lastact of his life was to publish what hetermed his Dying Avowal, in whichhe contradicted a report, circulated byhis antagonists, that he had changedhis religious opinions. He was, forsome time, editor of the Gospel Magazine,in which the most virulent invectivesthat ever were publishedagainst John Wesley, who was the specialobject of his antipathy, are to befound.TRAVIS, (GEORGE, Archdeacon ofChester,) a native of Royton, in Lancashire,was born about the year 1740,and completed his education at St.John's college, Cambridge, where hetook the degrees of B. A. and M. A.After having been ordained deacon andpriest, he obtained the rectory of Handleyand the vicarage of East Ham ; heafterwards became a prebendary ofChester, and, finally, archdeacon of thatdiocese. In the fifty-second volume ofthe Gentleman's Magazine, he publishedseveral letters (which were afterwardsprinted separately, and wentthrough two or three editions) in oppositionto the statement made byGibbon, " that the three witnesses (seeJohn c. i. v. 7) had been established inour Greek Testaments by the prudenceof Erasmus, the honest bigotry of theComprehension editors, the typographicalfraud or error of Robert Stephens,in placing a crotchet, and the strangemisapprehension, or deliberate falsehood,of Theodore Bea." A controversyensued, in which Person 'andother eminent writers arrayed themselvesagainst Travis, whose celebrityappears to have entirely arisen fromthe zeal which he displayed on thissubject. He died on the 24th ofFebruary, 1797.CLEAVER, (WILLIAM, Bishop ofSt. Asaph,) was born about 1742 ; and,after having acquired the rudiments oflearning under the tuition of his father,the Rev. W. Cleaver, who kept aschool at Twofold, in Buckinghamshire,he became a demy at Magdalencollege, Oxford, where he graduated asB. A. in 1761. He was elected to aAPPENDIX.fellowship of Brazen-nose college in1764; and, during the same year, proceededto the degree of M. A. In1768, he became a candidate for theoffice of Bodleian librarian, which helost only through the seniority of hisrival, the number of their votes beingequal. About this period, he becametutor to the future Earl Temple,through whose interest he eventuallyobtained a mitre ; and, at a later period,he had for his pupil Lord Grenville,another distinguished memberof the same family. Being about tomarry a lady named Ashton, he exchangedhis fellowship for the living ofNottingham, in Northamptonshire ; inpossession of which he continued, withoutfurther preferment, until 1782,when he proceeded to Dublin withEarl Temple, who had been appointedlord-lieutenant of Ireland, in the capacityof chaplain. Through the interestof his patron, who was speedily deprivedof the vicegerency, he procured,in 1784, a prebend at St. Peter's, Westminster;in 1785, he was elected principalof his college ; and, in the nextyear, he accumulated the degrees ofB. D. and D. D. In 1787, his noblepupil, whose political friends were thenin power, procured for him the bishopricof Chester; in 1800, he was promotedto that of Bangor ; and, six years after,he succeeded Dr. Horsley in the see ofSt. Asaph, still retaining the headshipof his college. He died on the 15th ofMay, 1815, leaving two children. Heis said to have been " a man of stiffand scholastic manners, with little ofthe knowledge or pliability of theworld ;" learned, charitable, and pious ;an enemy to non-residents and evangelicalpreachers, steadfastly upholdingthe articles, in opposition to Calvinists;a strenuous supporter of the Society forpromoting Christian knowledge ; a dissenterfrom the Bishop of Lincoln'scensure on the damnatory clauses inthe Athanasian creed; and a zealoussupporter of the doctrine that the sacramentof the Lord's supper is a feastupon a sacrifice. He edited the celebratedGrenville Homer; and, besidesseveral sermons and charges, publishedDirections to the Clergy of the Dioceseof Chester, on the choice of Books;Animadversions on Dr. Marsh's Dissertationon the Origin of the ThreeFirst Gospels ; and an able treatise onGreek metres, entitled, De RhythmGraecorum.Miller, (JOSEPH,) the son of apoor weaver, was born near Leeds, onthe 2nd of January, 1744 ; and, forsome time, like his brother, DeanMilner, worked in the loom, both ofthem being originally destined to followthe trade of their father. Being placedat the grammar-school at Leeds, hesoon became so distinguished, " thatone of the masters was accustomed torecommend his pupils to apply to Mr.Milner's memory in cases of historyand mythology; observing, that he wasmore easily consulted than dictionariesor the Pantheon, and quite as much tobe relied on." Among the inhabitantsof his native village who used to gazeat him as a wonder, he obtained thesoubriquet of The Learned Lad ; andhis father became so desirous of promotinghis acquirement of knowledge,that, as he used to relate, he surprisedhis wife, one Saturday night, by purchasinga Greek book for his sonJoseph, instead of a joint of meat forthe next day's dinner. " It is tootrue," he would add; " for I could notsend home both." The father, unfortunatelydied, when young Milnerappears to have stood most in need ofhis slender assistance ; but, through theexertions of his tutor, the youth obtaineda situation as chapel clerk atCatherine hall, Cambridge ; whither heproceeded, at the age of eighteen, beingstill, according to his brother, in appearancea child, so much had hisgrowth been checked by ill-health.He took the degree of B. A. withmuch honour ; but, feeling that he hadlittle chance of obtaining a fellowship,he became, at first, usher, and afterwards,curate, to the Rev. Mr. Atkinson,of Thorparch, near Lancaster. Atthis time, being, as he states, "worldly-mindedand greedy of literary fame,"he devoted the whole of his leisure timeto the composition of a religious epicpoem, entitled, Divides, which hecompleted after he had been appointedhead-master of the grammar-school, atHull, where he also obtained an importantlectureship. He now successfullyexerted himself in providing forsome of his poor relatives, particularlyTHE CHURCH.his aged mother, " who," says DeanMilner, " must else have died of want."For a period of seventeen years, heofficiated as curate of North Ferry,of which, after proceeding to the degreeof M. A., he, at length, procured thevicarage, and where, it is stated, hisevangelical doctrines disgusted the rich,but delighted the poor. A few weeksbefore his death, which took place onthe 15th of November, 1797, he waspresented, by the mayor and corporationof Hull, to the vicarage of theHoly Trinity, in that town. Somegentlemen, who had been his scholars,erected a monument to his memory, inwhich he is justly described as havingbeen " a man of a vigorous understanding,extensive learning, and unwearieddiligence ; distinguished byprimitive purity of sentiment, and holinessof life." His works consist of AHistory of the Church of Christ ; Sermons,in two volumes, posthumouslypublished, with a memoir prefixed byhis brother ; Essays on the Influence ofthe Holy Spirit; and some minor pieces.Daubed, (Charles, Archdeaconof Sarum,) was born in 1744, and educatedat Winchester school and Newcollege, Oxford. He quitted the university,after having taken the degreeof B. C. L., and entering into holyorders, obtained, in addition to theliving of North Bradley, in Wiltshire,a prebendal stall in the cathedral ofSalisbury, in 1784; and the archdeaconryof that diocese, in 1804. Fiveyears before his death, which took placeon the 10th of July, 1827, the universityof Oxford, as a testimony of the serviceshe had rendered the church, conferredupon him the degree of D. C. L. Hisfirst and principal production was aGuide to Fine Church, in two volumes,printed in 1798-9; of which a secondedition appeared in 1804, with an appendix,containing an answer to someobservations on the work by Sir RichardHill ; in addition to which he publishedEight Discourses on the Connexion betweenthe Old and New Testaments,demonstrative of the Doctrine of Atonement; A Vindication of the English-Church, in reply to John Overtop'sTrue Churchman ascertained ; and varioussermons, charges, &c. He is alsosupposed to have been, for some time,one of the chief theological writers inthe Anti-Jacobin Review, and to havehad some share in the Brandon controversy.He was a man of considerablelearning, inflexible honesty, 'great benevolence,and, though occasionallyaustere, of an amiable disposition. " Itwas delightful," observes the author ofThe Living and The Dead, " to seehim come out in his grey reading-gown,and romp with his little grandchildrenon the lawn, the most noisyand riotous of the party." Amongother munificent acts, he expended upwardsof 15,000 in the erection andfoundation of alms-houses, &c. at NorthBradley. To his almoner he is statedto have given the following generaldirections as to the relief of distressedobjects: " Ask no questions of an applicantas to whether he goes to churchor to chapel ; but if he can look you inthe face like an honest man, and say, Iam in want,' and you have no reason todisbelieve his statement, give, withoutinquiry, and at once." By Dr. Baines,the catholic bishop, he was, however,termed, though, apparently, withoutfoundation, a bigot and a hypocrite;and by others he has been accused,(with more reason, perhaps, as he wasalways reluctant to form fresh acquaintances,)of having been deficient incourtesy towards the younger clergy inhis archdeaconry. His charitable donationswere, for the most part, judiciousas they were liberal ; but on manyoccasions he became the dupe of impostors.One day, as he himself statedto the author before quoted, a mostsingular-looking individual, miserablyclad, and the very picture of poverty,came to Bradley, and requested to seehim. " After a short preface, he toldme," continued the archdeacon, " thathe was a converted Jew. My mind misgaveme about the man ; but as I feltreluctant to turn him empty away, Ientered into conversation with him atsome length, and questioned him prettyclosely. His answers were so singularlywell expressed, and evinced such anintimate acquaintance with Scripture ;his account of himself was so plausible,and the change, which gradually tookplace in his mind, was so extremelynatural, and so ingeniously described,that I felt convinced I had done himinjustice. I kept him ten days, clothedAPPEN DIX.him, and gave him a draught for tenguineas. Forty-eight hours afterwards,I heard of his getting drunk at theRing of Bells, in the next village, andboasting how gloriously he had gulledold Daubeny !"BENNETT, (WILLIAM, Bishop ofCloyne,) was born in 1745, near London,and educated at Harrow school and Emmanuelcollege, Cambridge. Alternatingtaken the degrees of B. A. and M. A.,he obtained a fellowship, and becametutor of his college. Among his pupilswas the Earl of Westmoreland, who, onbeing nominated lord-lieutenant of Ireland,took him to Dublin, in the capacityof chaplain ; and, in 1790, promotedhim to the united bishoprics of Cork andHost; from which, having previouslytaken the degrees of B. D. and D. D.,he was translated, in 1794, to the see ofCloyne. He married a daughter of theRev. N. Mapletoft, of Northamptonshire,but died without issue, on the 16th ofJuly, 1820. Although a profound scholar,and a man of great abilities, hisliterary labours appear to have consistedchiefly of communications to the Societyof Antiquaries, of which he wasa fellow, and of hints to Nichols andPolwhele, for their respective historiesof Leicestershire and Cornwall Dr.Parr, who was his cotemporary atHarrow, after eulogising his pure andcorrect taste, extensive classical acquirements,powers of eloquence as apreacher, brilliancy of conversation,and suavity of manners, &c. thus continues: " He exhibited a noble proofof his generosity, by refusing to acceptthe legal and customary profits of hisoffice from a peasantry bending downunder the weight of indigence and exaction.Upon another occasion, blendingmercy with justice, he spared amisguided father for the sake of a distresseddependent family ; and provided,at the same time, for the instructionof a large and populous parish,without pushing to extremes his episcopalrights when invaded, and hisepiscopal power when defied."SHIPLEY, (WILLIAM DAVIES, Deanof St. Asaph,) son of Dr. JonathanShipley, bishop of that diocese, wasborn at Gingham, in Berkshire, on the5th of October, 1745. He received hiseducation at Westminster school, Winchestercollege, and Christchurch, Oxford.He took the degree of B. A. in1767, and that of M. A. in 1771 ; duringwhich year he was presented, by hisfather, to the vicarage of Wrexham, inDenbighshire ; and, in 1774, he obtainedthe deanery and chancellorship ofSt. Asaph. By circulating an obnoxiouspamphlet, which had been anonymouslypublished against the Tory ministers,by his brother-in-law, Sir William Jones,entitled, A Dialogue between a Farmerand a Country Gentleman, he exposedhimself to a long and vexatious prosecutionfor libel ; which, after havingbeen twice brought to trial in Wales,was removed by certiorari to the courtof King's Bench, and submitted to anEnglish jury, at the Shrewsbury assizes,on the 6th of August, 1784. Theverdict delivered was, " Guilty of publishingonly ;" which, however, at thesuggestion of counsel for the prosecution,was afterwards altered to the followingterms : " Guilty of publishing, butwhether a libel or not, we do not find."The matter was subsequently broughtbefore the Court of King s Bench, wherethroughan informality, the whole of theproceedings were quashed. It will not,perhaps, be deemed altogether irrelevantto add, that to this contest may be attributedthe enactment, by which juries,in cases of libel, were declared to bejudges of the law as well as the fact.In the preface to a collection of hisfather's works, published in 1792, thedean advocated the opinions promulgatedin the pamphlet, for the re-publicationof which he had been prosecuted.He died on the 7th of J une, 1826, leavingfour children, by his wife, Penelope,eldest daughter of Ellis Yonge, Esq. Bythose who knew him, he is described ashaving been intellectual, independent,and eminently charitable ; eloquent as apreacher ; diligent and acute, yet merciful,as a magistrate; and truly estimablein the more domestic relations ofhusband, parent, brother, master, andfriend."JACKSON, (CYRIL,) Dean of Christchurch,was born at Stamford, in Lincolnshire,in 1746. At the age oftwelve, he was sent to Westminsterschool; where, in 1760, he became aking's scholar. Four years afterwards,THE CHURCH.he was elected to Trinity college,Cambridge, and subsequently obtaineda studentship at Christchurch, Oxford.In 1768, he took the degree of B. A.,and that of M. A. in 1771; duringwhich year, he was appointed sub-preceptorto the young heir-apparentand his next brother. In 1777, he tookthe degree of B. D. j and, in 1778, becamepreacher at Lincoln's inn, andcanon of Christchurch. In 1781, heproceeded to the degree of D. D. ; and,in 1783, he was declared dean of hiscollege. After acting in that capacityfor twenty-six years, during whichperiod, he refused, on two occasions,to be raised to the episcopal bench, heretired to Pelham, an obscure villagein Sussex, where he died, in possessionof no preferment, on the 31st day ofAugust, 1819. He was a man of profoundlearning and great abilities,(although he never appeared as anauthor,) and so high was his reputationfor academical discipline, thatwhile he was dean, an unexpected vacancy,in his college, is said to havebeen always a subject of eager competition." 1 have long thought," said Dr.Parr, in 1800, " and often declared, thatthe highest station in the church wouldnot be more than an adequate rewardfor Cyril Jackson. Upon petty anddubious questions of criticism, I maynot always have the happiness to agreewith him ; but I know that, with magnanimityenough to refuse two bishoprics,he has qualities of head and heartto adorn the primacy of all England,and to protect all the substantial interestsof the English church." ByPorson, he was greatly admired; and,soon after his retirement from Christchurch,the provost of Oriel collegedescribed him as one who had drunklargely at the fountain of modernscience, as well as of ancient learning ;who never ceased to encourage, todirect, and to assist those around himin every honourable pursuit. TheReverend George Croly states, that heamused himself, after he had givenup his deanery, by occasional visits tohis old friends in London, or to theprince at Brighton, by whom he wasalways received with scarcely less thanfilial respect, and then returned to hisobscure, but amiable and meritorious,life of study, charity, and prayer. Thesame writer remarks, that for Jackson'srefusal of the Irish primacy, althoughit was idly blazoned forth at the timeas an act of more than Roman virtue,the following obvious reasons existed :his income was large, his duty light,and his time of life too far advanced tomake change easy or dignified."SCOTT, (THOMAS,) was born atWingtoft, in Lincolnshire, in 1747. Atthe age of sixteen, he was apprenticedby his father, who was a farmer, to asurgeon at Alfprd, with whom, however,he remained only two months.By dint of close application, he obtaineda considerable knowledge of theLatin and Greek languages ; and, beingordained by Bishop Green, he, forsome time, held the curacies of WestonUnderwood, and Ravenstow, Bucks.In 1785, he was appointed chaplain ofthe Lock chapel ; and, in 1801, rectorof Aston Sandford, where he died, onthe 16th of April, 1821. Newton, thefriend of Cowper, is said to have madehim a convert to Calvinism; in defenceof which he rendered himself veryconspicuous, both as a preacher and awriter. He published A Commentaryon the Bible ; A Defence of Calvinism ;The Force of Truth ; and various otherpieces.FISHER, (JOHN, Bishop of Salisbury,)was born at Hampton, in Middlesex,in 1748, and completed hiseducation at Penthouse college, Cambridge.He took his degree of B. A.in 1770, with much credit; and, twoyears afterwards, he obtained an appropriatedfellowship at St. John's.After having proceeded to the degree ofM. A. in 1773, he became a tutor of hiscollege; and obtained several studentsof distinction. His first preferment wasto the curacy of Hampton, in whichhe had officiated but for a short time,when the mastership of his college becomingvacant, he was assailed, by ministers,with entreaties, threats, andpromises, to vote in favour of Dr.Beacon ; but a sense of his duty, it issaid, induced him to support the rivalcandidate, Dr. Chevalier. Such conductwould, it was supposed, havetended to shut him out from preferment:it had, however, a very differenteffect; Bishop Hurd being so charmedwith his integrity, as to procure himAPPENDIX.the appointment of tutor to PrinceEdward, afterwards Duke of Kent. In1780, he proceeded to the degree ofB. D. and was made one of the royalchaplains in ordinary, and deputy-clerkof the closet In 1785, he went toItaly for the benefit of his health ; and,on his return in the following year, theking presented him to a canonry ofWindsor. In 1789, he proceeded tothe degree of D. D. ; in 1803, he waspromoted to the see of Exeter ; at thelatter end of the same year, he enteredupon the important task of tutor to thePrincess Charlotte ; and, in 1807, hewas translated to the diocese of Salisbury.He was also chancellor of theorder of the Garter, vice-president ofthe Bible Society, and F. S. A. Hedied on the 8th of May, 1825, leavingthree children, by his wife, Dorothea,only daughter of J. F. Scrivener, Esq.to whom he was united in 1787. Hemeddled but little with public affairs,except so far as regarded the claims ofthe catholics, which he invariably opposed;"because," as he stated, " theirobject seemed to be rather the attainmentof civil power, than religioustoleration." His printed productionsconsist of a few discourses on publicoccasions, which, it is said, the authorityof custom alone induced him topublish. His talents, though not brilliant,were more than respectable. Asaprelate and a tutor, he invariablyevinced a laudable anxiety for theproper performance of his duties. Hewas urbane, vivacious, modest, andeminently benevolent : but the moststriking points in his character were hisperfect disinterestedness, and the admirablesuavity of his temper. Sometimebefore his decease, he declined torenew an episcopal lease, lest, by sodoing, he should injure his successor,who is said to have consequently realizedno less than '30,000. He succeeded,by his mildness, in allaying, toa great extent, the fiery impetuosityof the Princess Charlotte. It is stated,that he earnestly implored her, whenevershe found her passion getting thebetter of her reason, to repeat thefollowing lines from Pope :Teach me to feel another's worthhide the fault I *,-. ;That mercy I to others shew,That mercy shew to me 'On one occasion, it is added, findingher in the act of vehemently scoldinga young female domestic, who stoodtrembling before her, and not daringto quit her presence, he asked theprincess, if, previously to giving ventto her wrath, she had remembered hisrecommendation as to the passage inPope. " No," replied her royal highness; " I was in too great a passion torecollect that or any thing else." Hethen repeated the lines himself; andapplied them, it is said, so admirablyto the occasion, that his young pupilburst into tears ; and spontaneouslysending for the offender, who had previouslybeen directed to retire, in themost feeling manner, apologized for herviolence.BATHURST, (HENRTT, Bishop ofNorwich,) son of the Right HonourableBragged Bathurst, was born in 1748, andacquired the rudiments of education atWinchester school, whence he was removed,in 1761, to New college, Oxford ;where he took the degree of B. C. L.in 1768, and that of Dec. L. in 1776.His only preferments in the church,prior to his elevation to the bishopricof Norwich, which occurred in 1805,were the vicarage of Cirencester, abenefice in the gift of his family ; acanonry of Christchurch, Oxford ; .anda prebend of Durham. He deliveredhis maiden speech, from the episcopalbench, on the 27th of May, 1808, insupport of Lord Grenville's proposedmeasure in favour of the catholics, forwhose emancipation he subsequentlybecame one of the most fervent advocates.He has also evinced the liberalityof his political and religious opinions,by his exertions in favour of parliamentaryreform, and concessions to thedissenters. He is greatly respected forhis independence and amiable qualities ;but has no pretensions to eminence,either as an author or an orator. Hispublications consist of a few sermons,preached on special occasions. By hiswife, Grace, a niece of Sir Eyre Conte,and daughter of the Dean of Kilfenora,he has several children, by whom he issaid to be deservedly beloved.O'BEIRNE, (THOMAS Lewis,Bishop of Meath,) the son of a farmer,and a native of Ireland, was born inTHE CHURCH.1748. His parents, who were catholics,after he had obtained the rudiments oflearning at the diocesan school ofArmagh, sent him to St. Omer, wherehe appears to have highly distinguishedhimself by his application and talents.He had been educated with a view tohis entering the Romish priesthood;which, however, on the completion ofhis academical studies, he not only declinedto do, . but, after publicly renouncingthe religion of his forefathers,he took orders in the church of England,and entered himself of Trinity college,Cambridge ; where, in due course, heobtained his divinity degrees. The Rev.George Croly seems to attribute hischange of religion to the following circumstance: While returning homefrom a visit to some friends in England,he stopped at a village-inn, and ordereda shoulder of mutton, the only meat inthe house, to be dressed for his dinner.Before the joint was roasted, two othertravellers arrived, who prevailed on thelandlady to 'consent that it should beserved up at their own table. " Theyoung Irishman above stairs," however,on being apprised of the arrangement,vehemently protested that no two travellerson earth should deprive him ofhis dinner; but, at the same time, declaredthat he should feel happy to havetheir company. The invitation was accepted; and, O'Beirne, " then a veryhandsome young man, and always avery quick, anecdotical, and intelligentone," so fascinated his guests, that inthe course of the evening, which appearsto have been jovially passed, they inquired," what he meant to do withhimself?" He replied, that he wasdestined for the Irish priesthood; which,however, his companions protested wouldnot afford sufficient scope for his abilities;and, on their departure, theyrequested him to call upon them inLondon, at the same time, avowingthemselves to be Charles James Foxand the Duke of Portland. " Such aninvitation," adds Croly, " was not likelyto be declined : his two distinguishedfriends kept their promise honourably ;and, in a short period, O'Beirne enjoyedall the advantages of the first societyin the empire." By other writers, hisconversion to protestantism is attributedchiefly to Bishop Hinchcliffe;through whose interest, it is stated, heobtained the college vicarage of Grim-don; and, in 1776, the appointment offlag-chaplain to Lord Howe, whom heaccompanied to America ; and in whosevindication from certain charges whichwere brought forward against him, hepublished a pamphlet, soon after theirreturn to this country, entitled, TheGleam of Comfort. He now became azealous adherent to the Portland party ;and, after having obtained the vicarageof West Keeping, he distinguished himselfas a spirited contributor to TheEnglishman, a paper which appears tohave been the organ of his politicalconnexions. The Duke of Portlandrewarded his exertions by appointinghim his chaplain, when nominated lord-lieutenantof Ireland; making him hisprivate secretary ; procuring him a royalchaplaincy ; and presenting him, onthe last day of his premiership, to twovaluable livings in the gift of the crown,which he subsequently resigned, onobtaining, through the duke's interest,the rich benefices of Temple Michaeland Mohill, from the Archbishop ofTeam. He subsequently became chaplainand private secretary to EarlFitzwiiliam, during the vicegerency ofthat nobleman ; by whom, in 1795, hewas raised to the see of Ossory, fromwhich his translation to that of Meathtook place in 1798. He died on the 15thday of February, 1823, having had a sonand two daughters by. his wife, whowas a niece of the Earl of Moray. Asadiocesan, he was much beloved byhis clergy ; many of whom were in thehabit of travelling a considerable distanceto attend his lectures on topics ofreligious controversy. His first chargeis said to have been unrivalled forapostolic doctrine and pastoral simplicity.Besides his contributions to TheEnglishman, he wrote several politicalpieces, with the signature of A CountryGentleman, which appeared in a workunder that title, published by Almon.He also published a pamphlet againstthe proposed commercial regulations in1785, of which he is said to have beenthe extinguisher ;" The Crucifixion, apoem ; An Ode to Lord Northampton ;The Generous Impostor, a comedy ; occasionaltracts, sermons, and charges;and some parts of the Probationary Odesand Holland. It is stated, to his honour,that he always evinced an amiable spiritA Open DIX.of toleration to the members of thatchurch from which he had seceded;who, it is added, while they regrettedhis loss, felt perfectly satisfied of thepurity of his motives in renouncingtheir faith.KING, (RICHARD,) a native ofBristol, was born about the year 1749.After having taken his degrees in arts,and obtained a fellowship at Newcollege, Oxford, he was presented tothe rectory of Worthy, Salop, andthe vicarage of Steeple Mordent, Cambridgeshire; in possession of whichhe died, on the 30th of October, 1810.He was married, in 1782, to thedaughter of Sir Francis Barnard, a ladydistinguished for her literary talents.He was the author of two tracts : oneOn the Inspiration of the Holy Scriptures;the other, On the Alliance betweenChurch and State ; of Letters fromAbraham Plymley to his brother Peter,on the Catholic Question ; and of somepieces on moral and religious subjects,which appeared in periodical publications.HOLMES, (ROBERT, Dean of Winchester,)was born in 1749, and educatedat Winchester school and Newcollege, Oxford. After having takenhis degrees in arts and divinity, hesucceeded Dr. Wanton as professor ofpoetry ; and became, successively, rectorof Stanton, in Oxfordshire ; canon ofSalisbury and Christchurch ; and, in1804, dean of Winchester. He diedon the 12th of November, 1805. Theworks of Dean Holmes are highly creditableto his industry, learning, andabilities: they consist of a series ofdiscourses preached at the Bamptonlecture ; an ode on the installation ofthe Duke' of Portland as chancellor;Alfred, an ode, with six sonnets; andseveral sermons and tracts, besides hiscelebrated collations of the Septuagintmanuscripts, which were continued,after his decease, by the Rev. JamesParsons.Manse, (WILLIAM Lord,Bishop of Bristol,) was born about theyear 1750, and in 1770, became a studentat Trinity college, Cambridge,where he took the degree of B. A. in1774, and that of M. A. in 1777. He wassoon afterwards made an assistant-tutorof his college, and had, among otherpupils, Spencer Perceval, through whoseinterest he is said to have obtained, insuccession, the rich living of Berwick,in Helmet; the appointment of universityorator ; the mastership of his college ;the degree of D. D. per literal regis ;and, in 1808, the bishopric of Bristol, inpossession of which he died, in 1820.He was lofty and arrogant in his manners; and appears to have been moreeminent as a wit than as a divine orascholar. One day, while an undergraduate,finding, it is said, the followingcommencement of a poem on the tableof a fellow-student:The sun's perpendicular raysIllumined the depths of the lea ;he added,The fishes beginning to sweat.Cried, " D n it ! how hot we shall be ! "A publican having substituted, as thesign of his house, the portrait of Dr.Watson, for that of Bishop Blaze,Mansellll, who is said to have been exceedinglyhostile to the liberal sentimentsof the prelate of LlandafF, producedthe following epigram on theoccasion :Two of a trade could never agree ;No proverb e'er Hat juster :They've ta'en down Bishop Blaze, d'ye ee,And put up Bishop Bluster.At a radical meeting, a celebrated tailorof Cambridge having, in the course ofa violent speech against the Tories,thus commenced one of his sentences,Liberty, gentlemen, is a plant "Mansellll added, " So, gentlemen, is acabbage!" He wrote a Latin epigram, onDr. Jowett's improvements on a smallstrip of land attached to his residence,of which, the following is a translation :A little garden little Jowett made,Anil I rricM it with a little palisade ;Because this garden made a little talk,He chang'd it to a little gravel walk :And if you'd know the taste of little Jowett,This little garden won't a little show it.Porson, who was his cotemporary atCambridge, despised him, and frequentlymimicked, with much drollery, his5 pompous manner of reading. One day,emmy Gordon, a well-known characterat Cambridge, petitioned Dr. MansellllTHE CHURCH.for the gift of half-a-crown. " I will giveyou what you ask," said the bishop,if you can produce a greater roguethan yourself." Gordon immediatelyretired, and soon afterwards returnedwith the esquire befell of the university,a talented man, but by no meansremarkable for moral excellence, towhom he had pretended that the bishopwanted him. Mansellll, it is added, corroboratedGordon's estimate of the befell'scharacter, " by presenting theminor rogue of the two with the half-crownwhich he had solicited."HAWKER, (ROBERT,) was born atExeter, in 1753. Adopting the medicalprofession, he obtained a surgeon'scommission in the marines, which, however,he abandoned in disgust at thepractice of flogging ; and, entering intoholy orders, became, in 1778, curate,and in 1784, vicar, of St. Charles theMartyr, at Plymouth. He preachedand published several sermons on thedivinity of Christ, in 1792 ; duringwhich year, the Scotch universitiesconferred on him the degree of D. D.In 1793, he produced his Evidenceof a Plenary Inspiration ; in 1794, Sermonson the Divinity and Operationsof the Holy Ghost ; in 1795, Misericordia;in 1797, The Christian's PocketCompanion, and several sermons ; in1798, his Youth's Catechism ; in 1801,Specimens of Preaching; in 1802, TheLife of W. Comes ; in 1805, an editionof his own works, complete in six volumes;in 1807, The Life and Writingsof the Rev. H. Tanner ; in 1808, TwoLetters to a Barrister ; in 1810, A Letterto Mr. Hall, in Defence of the FemalePenitentiary; in 1816, An Edition ofthe Bible, with a Commentary ; and,during the same year, The Poor Man'sCommentary on the New Testament.He was one of the most popular evangelicaldivines of his day, and when hepreached in the metropolis as he frequentlydid, during the latter part of hi*ire, " such crowds followed him, thatthe lives and limbs of his congregationwere often in peril." According to awriter in the Baptist Magazine, whostates that his system of religion mightbe more aptly termed Antinomianism,than any thing else, " his memory wasvery tenacious; and, as he read littlebesides the Bible, it was amply storedwith passages of holy writ. He had allthe requisites of an orator, withoutturning them to much account ; a commandingfigure, striking countenance,most penetrating eye, thorough self-possession,a voice flexible and sonorous,and a tongue voluble to a degree almostunprecedented. Indeed, the great secretof his popularity consisted in thisfaculty of pouring out, at will, copiouscitations from Scripture, intermingledwith a kind of running comment, expressedin a luscious colloquial dialect,almost peculiar to himself; which wasvery acceptable to the great mass of professors,who think but little, and resolvenearly all religion into feeling.""In the cause of religion and charity,"observes his biographer in the NewMonthly Magazine, for 1827, " he wasever a most zealous advocate; and, asan author, was well known and dulyappreciated, for piety, energy of thought,and purity of intention. In the pulpit,he shewed himself an earnest preacherof the Gospel ; and in society, though,with the most gentlemanly demeanourto all classes, he ' contended earnestlyfor the faith.' Even persons who differedwith him on religious matters,admired the man, and appreciated hismotives." He died on the 6th of April,1827.Combine, (GEORGE, Bishop ofWinchester,) the son of a tradesman-namedPretyman, was born at BurySt. Edmund, on the 9th of October,1753. After having made considerableprogress as a classical student, underthe tuition of his brother, at the gram-mareschalof his native place, hewas removed, at the age of eighteen,to Pembroke hall, Cambridge. Ontaking his degree of B. A., in 1772, hewas senior wrangler of his year ; andsoon afterwards gained the first Smith'sprize, for his proficiency in mathematics.He obtained a fellowship, andbecame a tutor of his college, in 1773;proceeded to the degree of M. A. in1775 ; and filled the honourable office ofsenior moderator, in 1781. In the followingyear, Pitt, who had been hispupil, on becoming chancellor of theexchequer, appointed him his privatesecretary. During the same year, Dr.Shipley presented him to the valuablesinecure rectory of Owen ; and, inAPPENDIX.1784, he obtained a prebendal stall inSt. Peter's, Westminster, on his collationto which he took the degree ofD.D. by royal mandate. In 1785, hewas elected F. R. S., and preferred tothe living of Sudbourn-cum-Orford, inSuffolk ; and, in 1787, he succeeded Dr.Thurlow in the bishopric of Lincoln,and the deanery of St Paul's. In1799, previously to which year be hadpublished some charges and sermons,appeared his Elements of ChristianTheology; and, in 1811, his Refutationof the Charge of Calvinism against theChurch of England. He refused thebishopric of London in 1813, but consented,in 1820, to accept that of Winchester,to which he was accordinglytranslated. In 1821, he published thefirst portion of his Life of William Pitt,in two volumes, which were subsequentlyincreased to three ; and it isunderstood that he was employed on acompletion of the work during thelatter period of his life. At the suggestionof his wife, a daughter ofThomas Maltby, Esq., of Buckinghamshire,in 1823, he made a claim,which was allowed, to a Nova Scotiabaronetage, which had been conferredby Charles the First on one of hisancestors. He died on the 14th ofNovember, 1827, leaving a daughterand two sons, the eldest of whom declinedassuming the title which hisfather had recovered. At the time ofhis decease, the bishop's personal propertyamounted to nearly 200,000;and he was also possessed of severalfarms in Suffolk, which had been bequeathedto him by James Hayes, Esq.,and a valuable estate, comprising theentire parish of Ribs, in Lincolnshire,with the manor and advowson, whichhad been left him by a gentleman withwhom he had no sort of connexion, oncondition that he should assume thename of Tomline, which was that ofhis benefactor. While private secretaryto Pitt, he was satirized, in the ProbationaryOdes, as a man destitute of allregard for truth ; and after he had beenelevated to the episcopal bench, althoughhis fortune was immense, hewas accused of evincing an undignifiedlove of money, and of so distributinghis patronage as chiefly to advanceand enrich his own family and connexions.The justice of these accusationsis, however, even more than doubtful.One of his biographers describes himas having been, in his professional character,vigilant, impartial, and compassionatej and, in ordinary intercourse,though extremely dignified, condescendingand kind. The writer adds,that although, to the inferior clergy,there was something unquestionablyoverawing in his presence, yet it wasimpossible not to admire the courtlinessof his manners, and the benevolenceof his sentiments. In the houseof lords he rendered himself conspicuous,chiefly by opposing concessioneither to catholics or dissenters.His realise on Christian Theology isa book of considerable reputation ; buthis Life of Pitt, though voluminous,is dull and unsatisfactory. When hehad finished the first portion of thelatter work, he proposed, in a lettersigned " George Wanton," that it shouldbe brought out by a celebrated publisher,who, being ignorant that "wanton"was the usual signature of theBishops of Winchester, and feeling indignantat the arrogant propositions ofone whom he supposed to be a provincialtyro in literature, returned, it issaid, a contemptuous negative to theoffer ; which, however, on account ofthe active' measures which he took tointercept it, on being informed of hiserror by a friend, to whom he accidentallymentioned the circumstance,never reached the hands of his dignifiedcorrespondent.BURGESS, (THOMAS, Bishop ofSalisbury,) was born at Odium, inHampshire, in 1754-5, and educatedat Winchester college, and New college,Oxford. After graduating as B. A. hebecame a fellow and tutor of CorpusChristii college, and, subsequently, proceededto the degrees of M. A., B. D.,and D. D. While at the university, heobtained a prize for An Essay on theStudy of Antiquities ; and publishedA Treatise on the Origin and Formationof the Greek Language. Thiswork obtained the favourable notice ofBishop Barrington, who appointed theauthor his chaplain, gave him a prebendof Carlisle, and, subsequently, a stall,to which a living was attached, in thecathedral of Durham. In 1803, Addington,then prime minister, who hadTHE CHURCH.been his cotemporary at Winchesterand Oxford, procured his elevation tothe see of St. David's, from which hewas subsequently translated to that ofSalisbury. Besides the works alreadynamed, he is the author of First Principlesof Christian Knowledge ; ConspectusCritical Observation inScriptures Graces et Latinos ; Remarkson Josephus's Account of Herod's rebuildingthe Temple at Jerusalem ;Elementary Evidence of the Spirit ofChristianity ; Considerations on theAbolition of Slavery ; A Discourse insupport of the Doctrine of Christ'sDivinity ; Practical Christianity, or, armeniansand Calvinists reconciled onScripture Principles ; Initia Pauline ;and some occasional sermons. He hasalso edited Ravine Opuscula ; InviteHomeric; Burton's Pentalogia ; andthe Miscellanea Critica, of Dawes, witha copious appendix. He was married,in 1796, to Miss Bright, of Durham,half sister to the Marchioness of Winchester.MARSH, (HERBERT, Bishop ofPeterborough,) was born in London,about 1757, and, in 1776, became a sizarof St. John's college, Cambridge, wherehe graduated as B. A. with great distinction,obtained several prizes, and waselected to a fellowship. After havingproceeded to the degree of M. A. in1783, he went to Germany, whence heis said to have transmitted importantpolitical information to Mr. Pitt; and,on his return, to have obtained a pensionfor his services. Resuming hisacademical pursuits, after having graduatedin divinity he delivered severalseries of discourses, as Lady Margaretprofessor, which were afterwards printedunder the title of Lectures on Theology.In 1792, he published An Essay onthe Usefulness of Theological Learningto those designed for Holy Orders ;also. The Authenticity of The Booksof Moses considered ; and, in 1795, heengaged in a controversy with ArchdeaconTravis, on the subject of theThree Heavenly Witnesses. In 1800,he printed, in two volumes, octavo,A History of the Politics of GreatBritain and France, in which he strenuouslyvindicated the conduct pursuedby the British government. In 1807,he vacated his fellowship, by marryingthe daughter of Professor Michaelis,of Gottingen, whose Introduction tothe New Testament he had previouslytranslated and published, with someoriginal explanatory notes. In 1816,he obtained the see of LandafF, (withthe deanery of St. Paul's annexed,)from which he was translated, in1819, to that of Peterborough. Hisattempts to repress Calvinism in hisnew diocese, soon rendered him obnoxiousto the evangelical portion ofthe clergy, and several publications appearedon the subject, which was ultimatelybrought before the house oflords, but without any material result.Besides the works already mentioned,he has produced Horse Pelagian ;National Religion the foundation ofNational Education ; A History of theTranslations which have been made ofthe Scriptures; A Comparative Viewof the Churches of England and Rome ;Statement of Two Cases tried, onein the King's Bench, and the other inthe Arches Court of Canterbury, onthe subject of his anti-Calvinistic examinationof candidates for holy orders,and applicants for licences to preach orhold livings in his diocese ; An Inquiryinto the consequences of neglecting togive the Prayer-book with the Bible;and several lectures, sermons, speeches,&c.GISBORNE, (THOMAS,) was bornat Derby, in 1758, and proceeded fromHarrow school, in 1776, to St. John'scollege, Cambridge, where, after havingobtained Sir William Browne's goldmedal, he graduated as B.A. in 1780,with considerable honour. Shortly afterwards,he was declared senior chancellor'smedallist ; and, in 1783, becameM. A. His only preferments in thechurch have been to a prebendary ofDurham, and the perpetual curacy ofBarton-under-Needwood, in Staffordshire.He married, in 1784, Mary, thedaughter of Thomas Barrington, Esq.by whom he has a large family. Thisexemplary divine is the author of threevolumes of sermons ; An Inquiry intothe Duties of Men in the higher andmiddle Classes of Society; An Inquiryinto the Duties of the Female Sex ; AFamiliar Survey of the Christian Religion,and of History, as connectedwith the Introduction of Christianity,APPENDIX.and with its Progress to the presentTime; Poems, Sacred and Moral ; Walksin a Forest ; and the Principles of MoralPhilosophy investigated and applied tothe Constitution of Civil Society.POTT, (JOSEPH HOLDEN, Archdeaconof London,) son of the celebratedsurgeon, Perceval Pott, was bornabout the year 1758. He published apoem in two cantos, while a scholar atEton ; whence he was removed, in1776, to St. John's college, Cambridge,where he produced a volume of odes,elegies, &c. in 1779. He took the degreeof B. A. in 1780, and that of M. A.in 1783. Entering into holy orders, heobtained, successively, the rectory of St.Olave, Old Jewry ; a prebendal stall inLincoln cathedral ; the archdeaconry ofSt. Alban's ; the rectory of Bursted, inEssex ; that of Northall, in Middlesex ;that of St. Martin's-in-the-fields, Westminster; and the archdeaconry ofLondon. In addition to the works alreadymentioned, he has published atragedy, entitled Sultan ; An Essayon Landscape Painting; Sermons forFasts and Festivals: Elementary Discoursesfor Young Persons after Confirmation; Christian Prudence and Discretion,urged against fantastic andhurtful Schemes of Life: a Concio adClem, on proceeding to the degreeof D. D. in 1803 ; Considerations onthe General View of the Christian Covenant;The Case of the Heathen consideredwith that of Persons who enjoythe Blessings of the Gospel ; Remarkson two particulars, in A Refutation ofCalvinism, by a Friend to the Principlesof that Work ; besides variouscharges and sermons.Kept, (HENRY,) was born at Norwich,in 1761. He commenced his educationat the grammar school of hisnative city, whence he was removed, in1777, to Trinity college, Oxford, whereafterhaving taken his degrees of B. A.and M.A., he became tutor and obtaineda fellowship. In 1790, as Hamptonlecturer, he delivered a series ofdiscourses, defending the church ofEngland against the attacks of Gibbon,Priestley, and others. In 1793, hebecame a candidate for the professorshipof poetry, but lost the election byabout twenty votes. During the sameyear took his first degree in divinity.In 1808, he relinquished his collegeoffices, although he still continued toreside at the university. In 1814,Bishop Tomline presented him to theperpetual curacy of Wykeham, which,with that of Elsfield, given him by Dr.Chapman, were the only prefermentshe ever possessed, although it is said,many valuable college benefices fell tohis turn while a fellow of Trinity,which, however, he had declined, asthey respectively occurred, in favour ofhis juniors. Towards the close of theyear 1823, he married a lady, namedWhite, and retired to the village ofCharlton, in Gloucestershire, of whichshe had previously been a resident. Onthe 30th of June, 1825, this accomplishedscholar and divine was drowned, whilebathing near the seat of Sir JohnGibbons, of Shadwell, Baronet, withwhom he was on a visit. By his will, hedevised the bulk of his property, whichamounted to about 25,000, after thedecease of his wife, to the Radcliffe infirmary,and other charitable institutions.He appears to have commencedhis literary career in 1787, during whichyear, he contributed five numbers tothe Olla Podrida. In 1793, he publisheda small volume of Juvenile Poems,which, although they were not whollydestitute of merit, the author, shortlyafterwards, took great pains to suppress,as they were calculated, in the opinionof his friends, to injure rather than toenhance his literary reputation. Inallusion to this circumstance, his fellowcollegian, Thomas Wanton, wrote thefollowing epigram, the point of whichturns upon a nasal peculiarity of Kelt:Our Kelt not a poet ! Why, how can you ay so ?For if he's no Vriil, I'm sure be' a Maso.The subject of our notice also publishedA History of the Interpretation of Prophecy; Journal of a Tour to the Lakesof Cumberland, printed in Major'sBritish Tourist ; Elements of GeneralKnowledge, a book of which Johnsonsaid, the tutor would be deficient inhis duty, who neglected to put it intothe hands of his pupils ; Logic madeEasy ; Emily, a moral tale ; a new editionof Hadley's Beauties of EnglishPoetry ; and Flowers of Wit, or, ACollection of Bon-mots, ancient andTHE CHURCH.modern. For several years before hisdeath, he is said to have been engagedin a translation of the Greek proverbs,collected by Lubin, with notes, whichhe left in manuscript, unfinished. Asawriter, he was neat and elegant ; as apreacher, animated and impressive ; and,in his opinions as a divine, particularlyhostile to enthusiasm.MAGEE, (WILLIAM, Archbishop ofDublin,) a native of Ireland, was bornin 1765, and completed his education atTrinity college, Dublin ; where, afterhaving taken the degrees of B. A. andM. A., he was appointed assistant professorof oriental languages. About theyear 1806, he became senior fellow of hiscollege; and, soon afterwards, professorof mathematics. In 1813, he obtainedthe deanery of Cork; and, in 1819,the bishopric of Rapine, from which hewas translated, in 1822, to the archiepiscopalsee of Dublin. His publicationsconsist of a few sermons andcharges ; A Memoir of Thomas Perceval,M. D. ; and two volumes of Discourseson the Scripture Doctrines ofthe Atonement and Sacrifice of Christ;in which he attacked unitarianismwithsuch orthodox zeal, learning, and acuteness,that the work became remarkablypopular. His admirers eulogized himas "the uncompromising upholder ofChristianity, whether assailed by theUnitarian or the papist;" while a largeportion of his fellow-countrymen werebitterly upbraiding him for his activehostility to the catholic claims. Accordingto a writer in the New MonthlyMagazine, he ascended the archiepiscopalthrone with a spirit of fierceintolerance ; and his first charge fellupon the inflammable population of Irelandlike a firebrand, exciting amongthe catholics the most deplorable heart-burnings." He thrust himself forward,"continues the writer, " as thehead of the declining Orange party;projected the New Reformation Society;and opposed the burial of aRoman catholic in the church-yard ofSt. Peter's, Dublin, because some legalpunctilio had not been complied with.His ambition was manifest in all hewrote, preached, or said : it was visible,even in the arrogant port with whichhe bustled along the streets of the metropolis; presenting, in most ludicrouscombination, the pert coxcomb with theoverbearing churchman ; and suggestingto the humorous fancy of an eminentcatholic preacher, the happy designationof the ' magpie prelate.Rowley, (WILLIAM, Archbishopof Canterbury,) the son of a beneficedclergyman, was born in Hampshire,in or about the year 1765. Afterhaving received a preliminary classicaleducation, he was sent to Winchestercollege; whence, in 1784, he was removedto New college, Oxford. Hetook the degree of B.A. in 1787, or1788, and soon afterwards succeeded toa fellowship. On the llth of July,1791, he became M.A., and subsequentlymigrated to Christchurch college,where he acted as private tutor tothe Prince of Orange. He obtainedthe degree of B. D. on the 29th ofJanuary, 1805, and that of D. D. on the1st of the following month. In 1809,he succeeded Dr. Hall, in the regiusprofessorship of divinity, which he continuedto hold until the year 1813, when,on the death of Dr. Randolph, he wasmade dean of the chapel-royal, provincialdean of Canterbury, and raised tothe metropolitan see, from which histranslation to that of Canterbury tookplace in 1828. Archbishop Howley ismarried, and has several children. Hiselevation to the bishopric of Londonhas been attributed solely to his knownhostility to the catholic claims ; to which,on obtaining a seat in the house oflords, he became a conspicuous opponent.He is said to be learned, modest,talented, pious, and munificent.His productions consist of a few visitationcharges, and occasional sermons.VAN Milder, (WILLIAM, Bishopof Durham,) the son of a merchant ofDutch extraction, was born in London,about the year 1765, and educated atMerchant Tailors' school, and Queen'scollege, Oxford. He took the degreeof B.A. in 1787, and that of M. A.in 1790. Soon after he had beenordained, he became rector of St. ; in which capacity he was suedfor non-residence, but claimed exemptionfrom the penalty, because therewas no parsonage-house in the rectory.A verdict was, however, obtainedagainst him, from the consequences of52 tAPPENDIX.which, as many other divines were inasimilar predicament, he was relievedby an act of parliament. In 1804,he delivered the Boileau lectures ;which, about two years after, he publishedunder the title of The Progress ofInfidelity. The orthodoxy and learningwhich he displayed in this production,procured him the preachershipat Lincoln's-inn, a living in Surrey,and the regius professorship at Oxford.In 1813, he accumulated the degreesof Bed. and D. D. ; and, aboutthe same time, obtained a canonry ofChristchurch. In the following year,he preached the Bampton lectures,which he published in 1815, under thetitle of An Inquiry into the GeneralPrinciples of Scripture Interpretation.In 1820, he was promoted to the deaneryof St. Paul's ; and, at the same time,raised to the see of Llandaff; fromwhich he was subsequently translatedto that of Durham. He is amiable inprivate life ; a good preacher ; a mostorthodox divine; a profound scholar;and an admirer of Lord Liverpool'spolitical principles, although he thoughtproper to vote for catholic emancipation,when it was brought forward as agovernment measure, by the Wellingtoncabinet. In addition to the worksalready mentioned, he has publishedA Sermon on the Assassination ofSpencer Perceval ; a Charge to theClergy of Llandaff; and, The Substanceof a Speech, delivered in 1825,on the Removal of the Disabilities ofthe Roman Catholics.MIDDLETON, (THOMAS FAN-shaw,first Bishop of Calcutta,) wasborn in the month of January, 1769, atKedleston, in Derbyshire; of whichplace his father was rector. At anearly age he was placed at Christ's Hospital; whence he proceeded, on a schoolexhibition, to Pembroke Hall, Cambridge; where he took the degrees ofB. A. and M. A., in 1792 and 1795, andaccumulated those of B. D. and D. D.,in 1808. Soon after he had graduated,he became curate of Gainsborough, inLincolnshire. In the year 1794, hewas employed as tutor to the nephewsof Bishop Pretyman, by whose patronagehe obtained, in succession, thearchdeaconry of Lincoln ; the rectoryof Tansor, in Northamptonshire; theconsolidated rectory of Little and CastleBytham, which he held by dispensationwith that of Tansor; the vicarage ofSt. Pancras, Middlesex, with the rectoryof Puttenham, Hearts ; and the archdeaconryof Huntingdon, to which he waspreferred in 1812: previously to whichyear, he had published a periodicalpaper, called The Country Spectator ;The Blessing and Curse, a thanksgiving; a visitation sermon ; and a valuabletreatise on the Doctrine of theGreek Article, applied to the Criticismand the Illustration of the New Testament.After failing in a strenuous attemptto procure an act of parliamentfor the erection of a new church, atSt. Pancras, he became so active andzealous a member of the Society forthe Promotion of Christian Knowledge,that when government came to a resolutionof establishing episcopacy inIndia, he was offered the new bishopricof Calcutta, which, at first, he positivelydeclined ; but, in compliance with theurgent entreaties of his friends, at lengthconsented to accept. He was accordinglyconsecrated on the 8th of March,1814 ; and on the 8ih of June, in thesame year, having in the interim beenelected F. Res., he embarked for India.In the following month of November,he reached the presidency of Bengal,and immediately began to apply himself,with extraordinary fervor, to theperformance of his arduous and importantduties. In a letter, dated the 21stof December, 1815, addressed to theBishop of St. David's, he states, that hewas then about to proceed on a visitationto Madras, the Malabar coast, and thenceto Bombay ; a journey, in the whole, ofabout five thousand miles. Such a visitation,as he remarked, had, perhaps,never been made by a Christian bishop.In 1820, he laid the foundation of achurch at Calcutta ; where, also, chieflythrough his exertions, a missionarycollege was soon afterwards erected.His brilliant and laborious career, as aprelate, was terminated by a fever, on the8th of July, 1822. In the following December,The Society for the Promotionof Christian Knowledge, in order to perpetuatehis memory, voted the sum of,6,000, for the establishment of severalscholarships, to be designated by hisname, at the Calcutta college ; and, incompliment to his widow (a daughterTHE CHURCH.of John Madison, Esq., of Gainsborough,whom he married in 1787) itwas resolved that a copy of the voteshould be presented to her on vellum.He is described, apparently with greatjustice, by one of his biographers, ashaving been endowed with a masculineunderstanding; considerable powers ofeloquence ; an ardent and excursivemind ; controlled, however, by the mostdisciplined and calculating discretion ;great learning, especially in the prosedepartment of Greek literature ; a dispositionso benevolent, that to relieveothers he often distressed himself;astonishing zeal for the advancement ofChristianity in the east; and suchsevere ideas of duty, that he knew nomedium between right and wrong,falsehood and truth, or exertion andneglect.RICHMOND, (Legs,) was born atLiverpool, on the 29th of January, 1772.He received an injury, during his childhood,by leaping from a wall, whichlamed him for the remainder of his life.After having laid the foundation of aclassical education, he proceeded toTrinity college, Cambridge, where asevere illness, produced by intense application,materially retarded his academicalprogress. He graduated, byjEgrotat, in 1794, and proceeded to thedegree of M. A. in 1797 ; during whichyear he married, took deacon's orders,and commenced his pastoral duties as acurate, in the Isle of Wight. He subsequentlyofficiated, for some time, atLock chapel, in the metropolis ; and,in 1805, obtained the rectory of Survey,in Hertfordshire, where he died, on the8th of May, 1827. Besides a work,entitled, The Fathers of the Church, hewrote a number of narrative pieces, insupport of religion, several of which,(including The Dairyman's Daughter,The Young Cottager, The Negro Servant,&c.) after having been printedseparately, were collected and publishedin one volume, entitled, Annalsof the Poor. Some of these simpleand unpretending compositions, whichprocured for their amiable author alarge share of public esteem, as well asthe friendship of many pious andlearned individuals, have been translatedinto more than twenty foreignlanguages, and millions of copies ofthem have been circulated. Hepreached extemporaneously, and withoutmuch preparation. " Why," saidhe, " need I labour, when our simplevillagers are far more usefully instructed,in my plain, easy, familiar manner?The only result would be, that I shouldaddress them in a style beyond theircomprehension."Man, (RICHARD, Bishop of Downand Connor,) was born at Southampton,about 1777, and proceeded from Winchesterschool to Oriel college, Oxford,in 1793, or the following year. Afterhaving graduated as B. A. and obtaineda prize, for the best essay on commerce,he was elected to a fellowship; proceededto the degree of M. A. ; enteredinto holy orders, and became curateto his father, who was rector of AllSouls, at Southampton. In 1811, hewas appointed to deliver the Bamptonlectures; and, in 1814, in conjunctionwith D'Oyly, he published D'Oyly andMantt's Quarto Bible, with notes originaland select. He now becamechaplain to the Archbishop of Canterbury,and vicar of Coggeshall, in Essex.In 1816, he printed the discourseswhich he had preached at the Bamptonlecture, under the title of An Appeal tothe Gospel, or an Inquiry into the Justiceof the Charge that the Gospel is notpreached by the National Clergy. Soonafterwards, he obtained the living ofSt. Botolph, Bishopsgate ; and, in 1820,the bishopric of Killala and Kilfenora,from which he was translated, in 1822,to that of Down and Connor. Besidesthe works already mentioned, he haspublished an edition of the PoeticalWorks of Joseph Wanton, with a Memoirprefixed ; Puritanism Revived ;The Slave, and other poetical pieces;The Book of Psalms, in a new Englishmetrical Version, with Notes, criticaland illustrative; Biographical Noticesof the Apostles, &c. ; an edition of theBook of Common Prayer, with extractsfrom the writings of the mostlearned divines and commentators ;three volumes of sermons, and a numberof discourses, tracts, &c.D'OYLY, (GEORGE,) the son ofArchdeacon D'Oyly, was born about1778; and sent, in 1796, to Trinity college,Cambridge; where, on graduatingAPPENDIX.as B. A. in 1800, he was second wrangler,and, shortly afterwards, obtained thesecond Smith's prize. After havingbeen elected to a fellowship, he tookthe degree of M. A. in 1803. In 1807,and the two following years, he filledthe office of junior moderator; in 1810,he graduated in divinity; in 1811, hewas elected Christian advocate ; and, inthat capacity, preached two discoursesbefore the university ; the one, On aParticular Providence, and the other,On Modern Unitarianism. These wereprinted in 1812 ; and about the sameperiod, he published, in two parts, ALetter to Sir William Drummond, relativeto his Oedipus Judices. In 1814,in conjunction with Dr. Mantt, he produceda quarto Bible, with original andselect notes and illustrations. In 1816,he resigned the office of Christian advocateon proceeding to the degree ofD. D. ; and, in 1820, the Archbishopof Canterbury, to whom he had forsome time before, been chaplain, presentedhim to the valuable rectory ofLambeth. He was subsequently offered,it is said, an Irish bishopric, which,however, he thought proper to decline.Besides the works already named, hehas published The Life of ArchbishopBancroft, with an Appendix ; An Essayon the Doctrine of Assurance ; and onevolume of sermons.Cornerstone, (EDWARD, Bishopof LlandafF,) was born about the year1780, and finished his education atOriel college, Oxford, where he obtaineda prize medal for an Englishessay on agriculture, and another for acomposition in Latin verse. He tookthe degree of B. A., in 1794, and soonafterwards obtained a fellowship. In1797, he proceeded to the degree ofM. A. ; and, in 1802, succeeded Dr.Hurts, as professor of poetry. In 1807,he served the office of proctor ; and, inthe following year, he proceeded to thedegree of B. D. In 1809, he resignedhis professorship ; and, in 1813, becameprovost of his college, rector of Burleigh,in Essex, and D. D., by diploma. In1828, he was promoted to the deaneryof St. Paul's, and, at the same time,raised to the bishopric of Llandaff.Shortly afterwards, he voted in favourof catholic emancipation and the repealof the test and corporation acts ;although he had previously, it is said,been decidedly hostile to concession.He has published a few single sermons ;An Inquiry into the Doctrines of Necessityand Predestination ; and Prse-sections Academics Oxonii Habita.Aye, (JOHN, Bishop of Lincoln,)the son of humble, but respectableparents, was born about 1782. He appearsto have graduated with extraordinarydistinction, in 1804, at Christcollege, Cambridge, where he proceededto the degree of M. A. in 1807 ; and,subsequently, became tutor to the Marquessof Bute ; who, on coming of age,is said to have presented him with20,000 ; one half of which was, however,returned. In 1814, the subjectof our notice obtained the mastershipof his college, when he took the degreeof B. D. ; and, shortly afterwards, thatof D. D., by royal mandate. In 1815,he served the university office of vice-chancellor; and, in the following year,succeeded Bishop Watson in the regiusprofessorship of divinity. On the deathof Bishop Mansellll, he was raised,through the interest, as it is supposed,of his noble pupil, to the see of Bristol,and subsequently translated to that ofLincoln. He has published a Concioad Clerum; a sermon on. the death ofthe Princess Charlotte ; and The EcclesiasticalHistory of the Second andThird Centuries.LLOYD, (CHARLES, Bishop of Oxford,)was born at Townley, Bucks, onthe 26th of September, 1784. FromEton, he was sent, in 1803, to Christchurch,Oxford; where, in 1804, he wasselected as dean's student, and shortlyafter became tutor to Mr. Peel. In1806, he took the degree of B. A. withgreat distinction ; he then went intoScotland, as tutor to Lord Elgin'schildren ; but soon returned to Oxford,and obtained the post of mathematicallecturer at his college. In 1809, he proceededto the degree of M. A. ; and,about the same period, took holy orders.In 1819, he was appointed preacher ofLincoln's-inn; and shortly afterwards,became chaplain to the Archbishopof Canterbury, who presented him tothe living of Bursted, in Sussex ; whichhe resigned, in 1822, on being chosenregius professor of divinity. About theTHE CHURCH.same period, he proceeded to the degreeof D. D. ; and, in 1827, obtainedthe bishopric of Oxford. Soon after hisintroduction to the house of peers, hedisplayed his zeal as a supporter ofhigh protestant principles, during adebate on catholic emancipation, whichhe most vehemently opposed; but, inthe next session, he spoke and votedin favour of the relief bill. He, consequently,brought on himself the bitterreproaches of those who were hostile tothe measure, and lost the esteem of hisformer friends. It has been broadly insinuated,that remorse for his apostacyrapidly hurried him to his grave : hisdeath, however, may, with more probability,be ascribed to a severe cold,which he caught, by sitting in a currentof air, while dining with the RoyalAcademicians, a few days after he hadspoken, what Croly terms, his fatalspeech, in the house of lords. Hisdeath took place on the 31st of May,1829. By his wife, a daughter ofColonel Stapleton, he left five children.In private life," says a writer in TheGentleman's Magazine, " he was oneof the most amiable of human beings ;keenly alive to every domestic tie, andevery domestic duty ; frank and open-hearted,generous, affectionate, andconsiderate." He is described, by thesame writer, as having been a soundreasoner, an excellent tutor, and oneof the firmest defenders of the churchof England. He produced an editionof the Greek Testament, printed insmall octavo, at the Clarendon press ;and was the author of a paper in theBritish Critic for October, 1825, entitled,A View of the Roman CatholicDoctrines.JAMES, (Join THOMAS,) Bishopof Calcutta, was born on the 23rd ofJanuary, 1786. After having receivedthe rudiments of education under hisfather, at Rugby grammar school, hewas placed on the foundation at theCharter-house. In 1803, he obtained aprize medal, from the Society of Arts, foradrawing of Winchester cathedral ; and,about the same time, evinced a stronginclination for a maritime life, which,however, at the earnest entreaty of hismother, he endeavoured to subdue, andturned his attention to the church. In1804, he was removed to Christchurch,Oxford, where Dean Jackson, soonafterwards, rewarded his applicationwith a studentship. After having takenhis degrees of B. A. (in 1807) and M. A.(in 1810) he acted as a tutor of his college,until 1813, when, with Sir JamesLiddell, he made a tour through thenorth of Europe ; of which, on his returnto England, he printed an account ;and, some time afterwards, at the requestof his friends, published a setof illustrative sketches, engraved andcoloured by himself. In 1816, he visitedItaly, and collected materials for hiswork, entitled, The Italian Schools ofPainting, which met with such success,on publication, that, in 1822, he producedanother, on The French, Dutch,and German Schools : this he intendedto have followed up with descriptions ofthose of Spain, France, and England ;but the increase of infidelity inducedhim to devote his attention to the defenceof Christianity ; and, in 1826, hepublished the Semi-Sceptic ; or, TheCommon Sense of Religion considered.Although he took orders soon after hisreturn from Italy, he had hitherto obtainedno preferment, except the smallvicarage of Clifton with Selsoe, in Bedfordshire; from which, on the death ofBishop Heberr, he was, unexpectedly,raised to the see of Calcutta. Early in1827, the university of Oxford conferredupon him the degree of D. D. bydiploma ; and, on the 14th of July inthat year, he embarked for India;where, like his two excellent predecessors,he soon fell a victim to theclimate. He persevered in discharginghis laborious episcopal functions, evenafter he had become so deplorably enfeebledby disease, that, being unableto stand, he was under the necessityof preaching on his knees. He died onthe 23rd of August, 1827, leaving threechildren, and a widow, the daughterof F. Reeves, Esq. of East Sheen, inSurrey. He is described as havingbeen mild, agreeable, pious, and benevolent; an able preacher, an orthodoxdivine, and a man of considerablelearning, judgment, and taste.Kennel, (THOMAS,) son of Dr.Kennel, Master of the Temple, wasborn in 1787, and placed, at an earlyage, on the foundation at Eton, wherehe obtained the Buchanan prize for aAPPENDIX.Greek Sapphic ode, on the propagationof the Gospel in India ; and, in conjunctionwith three of his fellow-students,published a periodical, in imitation ofThe Microcosm, entitled. The Miniature.He was removed, in his turn, toKing's college, Cambridge, in 1806 ;and, two years afterwards, he obtainedSir William Browne's gold medal, for aGreek ode. He also distinguished himself,about the same period, by hiscontributions to the Museum Critical.After having graduated, and enteredinto holy orders, he was appointed to his father, in theTemple. In 1811, he produced Animadversionson the Unitarian Translation,or improved Version of The New Testament; and, about the same time,accepted the editorship of The BritishCritic. In 1816, he was presented tothe vicarage of Kensington, and electedChristian advocate at the university ofCambridge. In 1819, he published awork, which passed rapidly through sixeditions, in answer to Chat, Morgan,and Lawrence, entitled, Remarks onScepticism, especially as it is connectedwith the Subjects of Organization andLife. On account of some observationscontained in this production, an attemptwas made to exclude him fromthe Royal Society, of which, however,he became a fellow. Soon after theappearance of The Apocryphal NewTestament, he printed his Proofs ofInspiration, or the Grounds of Distinctionbetween the New Testament andthe Apocryphal Volume. In 1823, theBishop of Salisbury, to whom he had,for some time, been examining chaplain,conferred on him the mastershipof St. Nicholas's hospital, and collatedhim to the prebend of South graham.Shortly afterwards, he publisheda letter to Henry Brougham, Esq.upon a speech delivered by him atDurham, and upon three of his articlesrelative to the clergy, in the EdinburghReview. His last literary workwas an edition, with a preface andnotes, of Hunter's Narrative of theConversion of Count Struensee : soonafter the completion of which he becamealarmingly ill, and died of a decline,on the 30th of June, 1824,leaving a widow, the daughter of JohnDelafield, Esq., of Kensington, whomhe had married in the autumn of thepreceding year. He was a zealous, yetcalm and rational supporter of Christianity; an eloquent and persuasivepreacher; an affectionate relative, anda most sincere friend. He deliveredthe Warburtonian lectures, at Lincoln's-inns and, on several occasions, officiatedat the university church of St.Mary's. Some time before his deathhe had proceeded to the degrees ofM. A. and B. D. ; and, in addition tothe works already mentioned, hepublished two sermons, one, On theValue of Human Life under the Gospel,and the other, On the UnambitiousViews of the Church of Christ.BENSON, (CHRISTOPHER,) wasborn about the year 1788, and completedhis education at Trinity college,Cambridge, where he took his degreesof B. A. and M. A. without much distinction,either as a mathematician oraclassic; but after having, for sometime,officiated as a curate, in hisnative county, Cumberland, on preaching,in his turn, at the university church,he displayed such extraordinary powersas a pulpit orator, that he was immediatelyappointed to the Hussein professorship.Some time afterwards, hebecame a fellow of his college, andobtained a small living in the neighbourhoodof Cambridge, from whichhe was removed, by Lord Eldon, onthe recommendation of Dr. Howley,then bishop of London, as a divineeminently qualified for the station, tothe valuable and important living ofSt. Giles's-in-the-fields. A few yearsafterwards, he became master of theTemple, and a prebendary of Worcester.As a preacher, he enjoys considerablepopularity : his voice is full, solemn,and manly ; and his manner earnest,impressive, and somewhat severe ; buthis action is neither energetic nor graceful.He has published A TheologicalInquiry into the Sacrament of Baptism ;The Chronology of our Saviour's Life,or An Inquiry into the true Time ofthe Birth, Baptism, and Crucifixion ofJesus Christ; two separate volumes ofdiscourses, delivered before the universityof Cambridge, as Hussein lecturer;and a few single sermons. Hemarried, soon after his appointment tothe mastership of the Temple, a relativeof Milford, the historian of Greece.THE SENATE.TRUMBULL, (Sir WILLIAM,) wasborn about the year 1640. After havingstudied for some time at Rockinghamgrammar-school, he removed to St.John's college, Cambridge, which hequitted at an early age, for the purposeof making a continental tour. On hisreturn, he is supposed to have become amember of All Souls college, and is saidto have taken the degrees of B.C.L.and D. C. L. He received the honour ofknighthood from Charles the Second,and became, successively, judge advocateof Tangier, clerk of the signet, clerkof the delivery of the ordnance stores,envoy extraordinary to the court ofFrance, ambassador to the sublimePorte, commissioner of the treasury, aprivy-counsellor, and secretary of state.He also acted for some time as governorof the Hudson's Bay and Turkeycompanies, and sat in several parliamentsfor different places. He wastwice married: first, to Elizabeth, thebeautiful daughter of Charles Dotterel;and secondly, in his old age, to Judith,daughter of the fourth Earl of Sterling,by whom he had two children. Hedisplayed great zeal in favour of thepersecuted protestants on the continent,and is said to have been a man of unblemishedreputation and much ability.To William the Third, he is stated, onone occasion, to have given the followingadvice: " Do not, sir, send embassiesto Italy, but a fleet into the Mediterranean,and you will get all you want."The latter part of his life was spent inlearned ease, at East Hampstead, inBerkshire, where he died on the 14thof December, 1716. Pope, with whomhe lived upon terms of friendship, wrotehis epitaph, which is said to contain intwelve lines, almost every topic of encomium,calculated to excite either love,veneration, or esteem.HUME, (PATRICK, Earl of parchment,)was born on the 13th of January,1641, and educated by, or underthe superintendence of, his mother.He became member of parliament forBerwick, in 1665 j and, two years afterwards,he was thrown into prison forhaving remonstrated against a tax whichhad been imposed by the privy-council.On being liberated, after a confinementof thirteen months, he entered into aplot against Charles the Second ; which,being discovered, he was declared atraitor, and his estate was confiscated.Escaping to the continent, he therejoined the Duke of Monmouth, whomhe soon afterwards accompanied in hisfatal expedition to England; on thedisastrous termination of which, afterlurking for three weeks in Ayrshire,he contrived to reach Dublin, andthence fled to Holland. He now becameattached to the party of thePrince of Orange, with whom he cameto England in 1688. Soon after therevolution, he recovered his confiscatedestate, and the new monarch made hima privy-counsellor, a lord of session, lordhigh chancellor, and lord high commissionerof Scotland ; creating him, also,in 1690, Baron of Bosworth ; and, in 1697,Earl of Parchment. On the accessionof Queen Anne, he lost his preferments ;but, as it is stated, none of his activity.Becoming a leader of the Whigs, herendered himself conspicuous by hisviolent opposition to the establishmentof episcopacy in Scotland, and his bitterhostility to those who were favourableto the restoration of the Stuartss, whomhe at once detested and feared. Accordingto Lockhart, he received1104: 15s: Id. for promoting theunion with Scotland ; and, it is said, obtaineda pecuniary reward for supportingthe act of settlement in favour ofthe Electress Sophia. Soon after theaccession of George the First, he becamehigh sheriff 1 of Berkshire, and alord of police. He died in 1724; leavingissue, by his wife, Grisel, a daughter ofSir Thomas Kerr, of Cavers. He issaid to have been remarkably handsome,but exceedingly disagreeable as a companion,on account of the coarseness ofhis epithets, and his intolerable passionfor making harangues.APPENDIX.CONINGSBY, (THOMAS, Earl Coningsby,)the son of Humphrey Coningsby,of Hampton Court, was bornabout 1650. He took an active partin public affairs during the reignsof William and Mary, Queen Anne,and George the First. Soon after therevolution, he was raised to the Irishpeerage by the title of Lord Coningsby,of Clanbrasil ; in 1704, he became paymasterof the forces; in or about 1716,George the First conferred on him aBritish peerage, with remainder to hisdaughter Margaret and her issue male,the issue of a second marriage, althoughhe had sons living by his first wife;and, in 1719, he obtained the earldomof Coningsby, with the like limitation.He died on the 1st of May, 1729. Inpolitics, he appears to have been astrong Whig; and, it is said, alwaysspoke in a passion. Bishop Atterbury,during a debate on some ministerialbill, having stated that he had foretoldits introduction during the precedingsession, and was sorry to find he hadproved a true prophet, Coningsby remarked,that he did not know to whatprophet the right reverend prelatecould be likened, except to the prophetBalaam, who was reproved by his ownass. " As the noble lord," repliedAtterbury, " hath discovered a similitudein our manners, I am well contentto be compared to the prophetBalaam ; but I am at a loss how tomake out the other part of the parallel ;I am sure that I have been reproved bynobody but his lordship."Wordsworth, (ROBERT, Viscount,)the son of an English Roundhead,who, after obtaining large grantsof land for his services in assisting toreduce Ireland, became an eminentmerchant in Dublin, was born in theIrish metropolis, in 1656. He waseducated at Trinity college, and, onentering upon his public career, actedwith such zeal against James the Second,that the Irish parliament attaintedhim, and sequestered his estate.When William was firmly seated onthe throne, Molesworth became a privy-counsellor;and, in 1692, was sent outas envoy extraordinary to Denmark.Being forbidden the court on account ofhis insolent behaviour, he abruptly returnedto England, and published whatwas deemed so libellous an account ofthe country he had quitted, that PrinceGeorge employed Dr. King to answerit ; and the Danish ambassador endeavouredto get him punished, butwithout effect. In 1713, Molesworth,who was an active member, first of theIrish, and afterwards of the Britishparliament, gave such offence to QueenAnne, by his slanderous reflections uponthe clergy and the peers, that his namewas struck out of the list of privy-counsellors; but, in the following year,George the First rewarded him for hisattachment to the house of Hanover,by making him a privy-counsellor ofIreland, and a commissioner of tradeand plantations. In 1716, he was createdan Irish viscount ; and died on the22nd of May, 1725, leaving severalchildren by his wife, a daughter of theEarl of Belmont. He was a man ofconsiderable learning, and, besides hisAccount of Denmark, wrote severaltracts on the peerage, the promotion ofagriculture, &c. and translated Ottoman'sFranco Gallia. He dedicated awork, written by his daughter, Mrs.Mary Monk, to Princess, afterwardsQueen, Caroline, with whom he appearsto have been a favourite. Hewas the friend of Shaftesbury, Locke,Molyneux, and Toland ; and, althoughan avowed sceptic, left 50 towardsbuilding a church in Ireland.TALBOT, (CHARLES, Duke ofShrewsbury,) whose father fell in aduel, occasioned by the discovery ofthe profligate Duke of Buckingham'slicentious intercourse with his countess,was born on the 24th of July, 1660, andhad Charles the Second for his godfather.He was brought up a catholic,but, in his twentieth year, the argumentsof Tillotson converted him toprotestantism. Disgusted with the proceedingsof James the Second, to whomhe was lord-chamberlain, he mortgagedhis estates for 40,000, and, repairingto Holland, assisted William of Nassauas well with his purse as his advice.On the accession of that prince to theBritish throne, Lord Shrewsbury wasnominated a privy-counsellor and secretaryof state, lord-lieutenant of three,and afterwards of five counties, createda marquess and a duke, and investedwith the order of the Garter. At thisTHE SENATE.time his popularity was so great, thatWilliam called him The King of Hearts.In 1699, he repaired to the continentfor the benefit o/ his health, which hadbeen much injured by a fall from hishorse during a fox chase; and, whileresiding at Rome, married an Italianwidow of rank, who had previouslyabjured the catholic faith. He returnedto England in 1705, but was coolly receivedby his old friends, the Whigs;and, in 1710, joined their politicalantagonists. In 1712, he resided, asBritish ambassador, for a short period,at the French court, and, soon afterwards,obtained the lord-lieutenancy ofIreland ; in which office he acted withsuch impartiality, that, while the Toriessuspected, the Whigs feared to trusthim. At the time of the death ofQueen Anne, he was lord treasurer,and displayed so much zeal in behalf ofthe house of Hanover, as to obtain thedecided esteem of George the First;shortly after whose accession, he resignedhis employments, and died,without issue, on the 1st of February,1717. He was a man of great probity,learning, and judgment. His mannerswere fascinating, and his habitsmunificent ; but, although addicted togallantry in the early part of his career,he contrived, it is said, to raise hisestate from 4,000 a year in debt, to8,000 a year out of debt. It was asaying of his, that, " had he a son, hewould rather breed him a cobbler thanacourtier, and a hangman than a statesman."He is accused of having beenconstitutionally deficient in personalcourage, to such a degree, as to excitethe contempt of Queen Mary; who,however, it is added, charmed with hispersonal graces and elegant demeanour,would certainly have married him hadshe outlived the king.MONTAGUE, (CHARLES, Earl ofHalifax,) a native of Horton, in Northamptonshire,was born on the 16thof April, 1661, and educated at Westminsterschool, and Trinity college,Cambridge. Some verses, which hewrote on the death of Charles theSecond, having attracted the favourablenotice of Lord Dorset, that noblemaninvited him to London, where, in 1687,he wrote, in conjunction with Prior,The City Mouse and Country Mouse, aparody on Dryden's Hind and Panther.Having, about the same time, marriedthe Dowager Countess of Manchester,he abandoned an idea which he had previouslyentertained, of entering into holyorders, and became, by purchase, a clerkof the council. Shortly afterwards, heobtained a seat in the house of commons,where he soon rendered himselfconspicuous as a partisan of theWhigs. At an early period of his senatorialcareer, while supporting the proprietyof allowing counsel to personsaccused of high treason, after a slightpause, the effect of embarrassment, inhis speech, he exclaimed, " Is it notreasonable to grant a prisoner, arraignedbefore a solemn tribunal, the privilegeof a pleader, when the presence of thisassembly can thus disconcert one of itsown members?" He was appointedchancellor of the exchequer, in 1694;first commissioner of the treasury, in1698 ; and created a peer in 1 700. Duringhis administration, the bank of Englandwas established, and that anticipationof the public revenues commencedwhich produced the national debt.While Tory influence prevailed, in thereign of Queen Anne, articles of impeachmentwere twice presented againsthim, but without effect, by the house ofcommons, to which he had given offence,by supporting the proposition for astanding army in the time of peace.He was a zealous advocate for theunion with Scotland, and greatly annoyedthe queen by carrying a motionfor summoning the electoral prince ofHanover to parliament, as Duke ofCambridge. On the accession ofGeorge the First, he was raised to theearldom of Halifax; made a knight ofthe Garter; and appointed first commissionerof the treasury, and auditorof the exchequer. He remained in officeuntil his death, which took place onthe 19th of May, 1715. His poemsand speeches were published in thecourse of the same year ; and Dr.Johnson, who included the former inhis edition of the British Poets, observesof him, that " it would now beesteemed no honour by a contributor tothe monthly bundles of verses, to betold that, in strains either familiar orsolemn, he sings like Montague." Heaspired to the character of a Maecenas,and, though not munificent, wasAPPENDIX.eulogized by nearly all the poets of hisday, except Pope and Swift, the latter ofwhom spoke of him with ridicule andcontempt. By his political antagonists hewas accused of having been servile andsuperficial; while, on the other hand,his admirers contend, that he displayedgreat independence of mind, combinedwith solid judgment and ready apprehension.It is related, that the Earl ofDorset having, in allusion to the sharehe had had in the production of thestill popular parody on The Hind andPanther, introduced him, in the followingterms, to William the Third: " Sire,I have brought a mouse to wait onyour majesty ;" the king replied, " Youdo well to put me in the way ofmaking a man of him ;" and immediatelygranted him a pension of ,500per annum!SEYMOUR, (CHARLES, sixth Dukeof Somerset,) commonly called theproud duke, was born on the 12th ofAugust, 1662. He became a knight ofthe Garter in 1684, and assisted in collectingthe militia of Somersetshireagainst the Duke of Monmouth. Hewas also a lord of the bedchamber, andcolonel of the third regiment of dragoons,both of which posts he lost forrefusing to introduce the pope's nuncioto an audience with the king. In 1688,he was elected chancellor of the universityof Cambridge ; and, in the sameyear, contributed to the success ofWilliam, during whose reign he presidedover the privy-council. On QueenAnne's accession, he was appointedmaster of the horse ; and, in 1708, oneof the commissioners for treating of theunion. His unexpected appearance atthe privy-council, with the Duke ofArgyle, when the queen's recovery wasdespaired of, greatly conduced to the uninterruptedsuccession of the Hanoverianline. He acted as a guardian of the realmuntil the arrival of George the First,who appointed him a privy-counsellor,and restored him to the mastership ofthe horse, from which he had been dismissedin 1710. On being refused theliberty of bailing his son-in-law, SirWilliam Wyndham, who was suspectedof corresponding with the Pretender,he expressed his indignation so strongly,that the king removed him from all hisemployments. Some years before hisdecease, he retired from public affairs,to his seat, at Wentworth, in Sussex,where he died on the 2nd of December,1748, and was succeeded by his eldestson. In person, he was of a graceful,middle stature, with a very dark complexion.His first wife was the heiressof the house of Northumberland; hissecond, a daughter of the Earl of Winchelseaand Nottingham. The latterhaving once familiarly touched him onthe shoulder with her fan, he turnedround, and angrily exclaimed, " Myfirst duchess, madam, was a Percy, andnever took such a liberty !" His children,according to Noble, obeyed hismandates with profound respect; andthe two youngest daughters stood watch,alternately, by his side, whilst he sleptafter dinner. Awaking suddenly, oneday, he found his attendant, who wasmuch fatigued, sitting down ; an act ofdisrespect (as the duke deemed it)which he punished by leaving her20,000 less than her sister. In thereign of Queen Anne, his servants, whoobeyed him by signs, wore the samelivery as the royal footmen ; and, onsome offence being given to him by hermajesty, he ordered his domestics topack up the whole of their dresses, in acart, and throw them into the courtyardof the palace. One .day, at dinner,he said, sneeringly to the painterSeymour, who was then employed atWentworth, in decorating a room withportraits of race-horses, " Cousin Sey-mour,your health !" " My lord, Ireally believe that 1 have the honourof being of your grace's family," wasthe painter's reply ; which so offendedthe duke, that he rose from the table,and sent his steward to pay Seymour,and dismiss him. Another artist wasthen sent for, to complete the portraits,which, however, he modestly declinedtouching, and, by his advice, the dukeasked Seymour to return to his labours ;but the latter proudly replied, " Mylord, I will now prove that I am of yourgrace's family, for I won't come." Theduke's attempts at oratory were marredby a hesitation in his speech. He washonourably tenacious of his principles,and, if his pride, the result, perhaps, ofa bad education, exposed him to ridicule,it also raised him above all mercenaryviews, as a public character. LordHardwicke describes him as havingTHE SENATE.been " so humoursome, proud, and capricious,that he was rather a ministryspoiler, than a ministry maker ;" and,Swift said of him, probably because hewas a Whig, that he had not a grain ofjudgment, and hardly common sense.Pallets, (Lord WILLIAM,)youngest son of Charles, first Dukeof Bolton, was born in 1666, and enteredparliament, as member for Winchester,in 1688-9. In 1710, he wasreturned for Lymington, and continuedto represent that place during the remainderof his life. In 1715, he obtaineda eldership of the exchequer;in possession of which he died, onthe 25th of September, 1729. Hewas twice married : first, to a granddaughterof the Due Delaforce, andby whom he had two sons and twodaughters ; and, secondly, to LadyArabella Bennet, daughter of Charles,Earl of Mandeville, by whom, also,he had issue. Walpole, after terminghim a great dunce, though often achairman of committees in the houseof commons, relates the following singular,and almost incredible, anecdotesof him: " Being to read a bill fornaturalizing Jemima, Duchess of Kent,he called her Jeremiah, Duchess ofKent" " Having heard south wallscommended for ripening fruit, heshewed all the four sides of his gardenfor south walls." " A gentleman desiringa fine horse that he had, offeredhim an equivalent. Lord William replied,that the horse was at his service,but he did not know what to do withan elephant." " A pamphlet, calledThe Snake in the Grass, being reported,probably in joke, to be written by hislordship, a gentleman, abused in it,sent him a challenge. Lord Williamprofessed his innocence; but the gentlemanwould not be satisfied without adenial under his hand. He then tooka pen, and began, ' This is to gratify,that the buk called the Snake ' ' Oh,my lord,' said the person, ' I am satisfied; your lordship has clearly convincedme you did not write the book'"METHUEN, (Sir PAUL,) was bornin 1671, and rose to the dignity of lordchancellor of Ireland. While holdingthat high office, he concluded the famouscommercial treaty with Portugal, whichbears his name. He also resided, in adiplomatic character, at the court ofSavoy ; and, at one time, entertainedhopes of being elevated to the Englishwoolsack. He successively became acommissioner of the admiralty, a lordof the treasury, comptroller, and afterwardstreasurer, of the household, anda commissioner for investigating thestate of the law. He sat, in several parliaments,for the borough of Bracelet.When comptroller of the household hestrenuously opposed the bill for reversingthe attainder of Bolingbroke ; whohad, he said, conceived the traitorousdesign of defeating the protestant succession.In 1733, he resisted the excisescheme, as a measure, which, inhis opinion, would invest the crownwith greater power than was consistentwith the constitution of a free country.He ultimately obtained the insigniaof the Bath ; and, after many yearsspent in retirement, died at the advancedage of eighty-six, on the llthof April, 1757, leaving a handsome provision,for life, to all his domestic servants.Sir Richard Steele, who dedicatedto him one of the volumes of theSpectator, eulogizes " the frank entertainmentat his table, his easy condescensionin little incidents of mirth, andgeneral complacency of manners." InMacky's Memoirs, he is described as aman of intrigue, but very muddy in hisconceptions, and not quickly understoodin any thing ; in his manners, much ofa Spaniard ; and in his person, a tallblack man. Swift heightens the pictureby branding him as a "profligaterogue, without religion or morals ; butcunning enough ; yet without abilitiesof any kind." From this annotationof the dean, it may be safely concluded,that Methuen was a staunch Whig.Shipped, (WILLIAM,) was bornin 1672, at Stockport, in Cheshire, ofwhich his father was rector. He enteredparliament in 1707, and becamean undisguised advocate of the Stuartss.The court endeavoured to buy himover ; but, although his annual incomedid not then exceed 400, he was inaccessibleto temptation ; and, by astrict economy, continued to maintainhis independence. Of George the First,he declared in the house of commons,that " the only infelicity of hisAPPEN DIX.majesty's reign was, that he was unacquaintedwith our language and constitution."All parties in the housewished him to retract these words ; andthe Prince of Wales, afterwards Georgethe Second, offered him 1,000 to doso, but in vain. He was then sent tothe Tower ; but confinement neitherchanged his politics, nor diminishedhis resolution. He would often sayto the most violent Whigs, both beforeand after his liberation, " It is necessaryto restore the Stuartss ;" and whenasked how he meant to vote, on anymeasure of importance, he generallyreplied, " I cannot tell, until I hearfrom Rome." He was a private friend,though a stern political opponent, toWalpole ; who, on one occasion, detectedhim, or one of his friends, in atraitorous correspondence with the Pretender; but consented to take no noticeof the matter, on condition thatShippen should support him, if personallyattacked. Shippen acquiesced ;and, in discharge of the obligation, insteadof voting, as was expected, infavour of the motion brought forward bySandys, against Walpole, in February,1741, left the house, with above thirty ofhis Jacobite friends; and Sandys, partlyowing to this unexpected secession, wasleft in a minority. Shippen, at length,became rich, having obtained a fortuneof 70,000 with his wife, the daughterof a Northumberland knight, namedStole. He lived, for many years, inNorfolk-street, Strand, where he delightedto gather around him personsof rank, learning, and talent. His conversationwas dignified, but vivacious ;and his oratory impressive, although hespoke rapidly, in a low tone of voice,and usually with his glove before hismouth. Pope says,I love to pour out all myself, as plainAi honest Shippen, or downright Montaigne.Besides several prose tracts, he publisheda poetical pamphlet, in which hesatirized the great Whig lords, underthe names of the principal Romanswho engaged in Catiline's conspiracy.His verses were severe, but not harmonious.He died without issue, in1743.Bridges, (Join, Duke of Chances,)the eldest son of Lord Chandos,was born in 1673. In 1695, he wasreturned to parliament for Hertford,and bore a considerable share in theinquiry as to the conduct of certainpersons, members of parliament, whohad received bribes to procure a newcharter for the East India Company.Being looked upon as one of the bestaccountants in the nation, he was selectedas a commissioner for takingand stating the public accounts. Hesupported a bill for a new coinage,which greatly improved the currency ;and, in 1707, was appointed one of thecouncil to Prince George of Denmark,then lord high admiral. Soon afterwards,he became paymaster-generalof the army, in which station he actedso much to the satisfaction of the public,and in parliament with such zeal forthe house of Hanover, that, upon theaccession of George the First, he wascreated Viscount Wilton and Earl ofCarnarvon; and, in 1719, Marquess ofCarnarvon and Duke of Chandos. Heexpended 200,000 in building theprincely mansion of Canons, in Middlesex,(which was afterwards disposedof piece-meal,) where he lived with asplendour equal to that of royalty. Hewas a long time not only the governor,but the support of the Royal AfricanCompany. A patron of learning andpiety, he is said to have doubled thevalue of a favour by his handsomemanner of conferring it. A clergymanwas, one day, viewing the libraryat Canons, when the duke said, " Pray,sir, fix on any book you like, and itshall be yours. The clergyman choseone, intentionally, of little price ; but,afterwards, finding a bank-note of considerablevalue between the leaves,which had been intentionally placedthere by the duke, he returned it, andwas presented, as a reward for hishonesty, with another of twice theamount. The duke founded a lectureshipat St. Andrew's, in Scotland, ofwhich university he was chancellor.Although addicted to no vicious pleasures,yet, after having accumulated afortune of 700,000, he was reduced,by the easiness of his temper, andhis unlimited munificence, to a statebordering on indigence. " With allthis," says Speaker Onslow, "he hadparts of understanding and knowledge,experience of men and business, withTHE SENATE.a sedateness of mind, and a gravityof deportment, which more qualifiedhim for a wise man, than what thewisest men have generally been possessedwith. He fell from his highestate, pitied and lamented by all whoknew him ; for a man of more truegoodness of nature, or gentleness ofmanners, never lived." He died onthe 9th of August, 1744, and wasburied at Christchurch. He had beenthrice married: first, to a daughter ofSir Thomas Lake ; secondly, to a sisterof Lord Willoughby ; and lastly, to therich widow of Sir Thomas Naval. Hiseldest surviving son, the issue of thefirst marriage, succeeded to the dukedom.BATHURST, (ALLEN, Earl Bathurst,)eldest son of Sir BenjaminBathurst, treasurer of the householdto Queen Anne, while Princess ofDenmark, was born in St. James'ssquare, on the 16th of November,1684, and educated by his uncle, DeanBathurst, the president of Trinitycollege, Oxford. Having obtained aseat in parliament for (Cirencester, in1705, he became a conspicuous opponentto Marlborough and the Whigs.In 1711, he was raised, with elevenother commoners, to the peerage, forthe purpose of effecting a Tory majorityin the house of lords. He opposedthe attainder of Bolingbroke andOrmond, and displayed great politicalhostility to Walpole. In 1742, he Becamea privy-counsellor ; and, in 1757,was appointed treasurer to the youngPrince of Wales, afterwards Georgethe Third, on whose accession, decliningall employments, he obtained a pensionof 2,000 a year. He was advancedto the dignity of an earl, in 1772, andpassed the evening of his life in retirement.He had been the friend of Pope,Swift, Addison, Bolingbroke, and Gay ;and retained, in old age, the vivacityfor which he had been distinguishedin his prime. About two years beforehis death, he had a party of friends,to meet his son, Lord Apsley, thechancellor ; on whose departure, aboutmidnight, the earl exclaimed, to hisremaining guests, " Now, my friends,that the old gentleman is gone, I thinkwe may venture to crack anotherbottle !" Dr. Cheyne had assured him,fifty years before his death, which tookplace on the i6th of December, 1775,that if he did not discontinue drinkingport wine, his mortal career would bespeedily terminated : he still, however,continued to take at least a bottle perday ; and enjoyed the full possession,as well of his mental as his bodilyfaculties, up to the advanced age ofninety-one.BARNARD, (Sir JOHN,) was bornat Reading, in 1685 ; and, at the ageof fifteen, was placed in the counting-houseof his father, a member of thesociety of friends, whose religious tenetsyoung Barnard renounced, four yearsafterwards, and became a member ofthe church of England. In or aboutthe year 1721, he was chosen, by adeputation of wine-merchants, to appearbefore the house of commons, insupport of their petition against ameasure then pending, which, if carriedinto execution, would have greatlyaffected their trade. He acquitted himself,on this occasion, in so masterlya manner, that the citizens of London,in 1722, after a violent contest, returnedhim as one of their membersto parliament. He was, generallyspeaking, hostile to Walpole, whoseexcise scheme he opposed with greatvigour and success. His subsequentattempt to reduce the four to three percents,exposed him to violent clamours ;which, however, he appears to haveutterly disregarded, acting, on all occasions,entirely according to the dictatesof his conscience. He was knightedin 1732; and, in 1737, became chiefmagistrate of the city of London, inwhich capacity he displayed great vigilance; but, though wholesomely severeon proper occasions, tempered" justicewith mercy. In 1745, with a view tosupport government, he was the firstto sign a declaration, by which themerchants and bankers of Londonpledged themselves to take bank-notesas cash. Having become father of thecity, and acquired a high degree ofestimation for his honesty and talent,his fellow-citizens, in 1749, against hisinclination, erected a statue of him inthe Royal Exchange. He died atClapham, on the 29th of August, 1764,leaving a son and two daughters, allallied by marriage to noble and opulentAPPENDIX.families. He was, in every respect, anadmirable character. His probity wasunimpeachable ; his demeanour modestyet firm ; his knowledge, notwithstandingthe meagre education he had received,extensive; his conduct, in privatelife, virtuous, and, in his publiccapacity, able, upright, and patriotic.As a speaker in the house of commons,he was clear but concise ; without presumption,yet always undaunted. Althoughpolitically an opponent to, hewas, as an individual, the friend ofWalpole. An uncompromising supporterof parliamentary decorum, heonce interrupted the course of his argument,on observing Sir Robert, thenin the height of his power, whisperingto the speaker, by exclaiming, " Mr.Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I address myselfto you, and not to your chair. Iwill be heard I call that gentleman toorder !" On another occasion, he insistedthat Sir Robert, who was readinga roll of paper which he had takenfrom the table, should lay it down, andattend to the business of the house.One day, Walpole and Barnard, whileriding with different parties, it is said,happened to approach so near to eachother, that they were separated onlyby a thick and impervious hedge;Barnard being engaged in discoursewith bis friends, one of Walpole'scompanions inquired " Whose voice isthat ?" " It is one I shall never forget,"replied Sir Robert : " I haveoften felt its power." While LordGranville was in office, if any representationwere made to him by themerchants of London, he was accustomed,invariably, to ask, " What doesSir John Barnard say to this? Whatis his opinion ?" Pulteney frequentlyvisited and consulted him ; the firstWilliam Pitt often styled him " thegreat commoner;" and George theSecond once offered him the chancellorshipof the exchequer, which, however,Sir John thought proper to refuse.CRAGGS, (JAMES,) the son of acommon barber, who rose to be jointpost-master-general, through the interestof the Duchess of Marlborough,commenced his education at a Frenchschool at Chelsea, and completed itabroad. He was attached to variousembassies, and carried the news ofQueen Anne's death to the British residentat Hanover. Lord Sunderlandset him up as a rival to Walpole ; and,it is probable, that, had he lived longenough, if he did not coalesce with,he would have been exceedingly troublesometo, that celebrated minister.He succeeded Addison as secretaryof state ; and, on several occasions,acted as a lord justice, during theking's visits to Hanover. He becamedeeply involved in the South Seabubble, having, with his father, accordingto the report of the committee ofsecresy, held fictitious stock to theamount of 36,000. Pending the parliamentaryinquiry on the subject thatensued, he fell sick of the small-pox ;and died, at an early age, in 1720.The Duchess of Marlborough woremourning on account of his death,which she was absurdly accused ofhaving disgracefully regretted. Craggsappears to have been a man of pleasure,talent, and great suavity of manner.He patronized Pope, who wrotean epitaph to his memory; Gay, towhom he made a present of South Seastock ; Addison, Warburton, Kneller,and Fenton ; the latter of whom heengaged as a tutor, but treated as afriend, with a view of increasing hisclassical attainments, which are said tohave been very limited. He frequentlydeplored the meanness of hisbirth, for which he was sometimessneered at by his noble contemporaries.On one occasion, he remarked, to theDuke of Buckingham, who had spokenwith great severity against ministers,Let what will be said, your graceknows that business must be carriedon ; and the old proverb is true, thatthe pot must boil.' " " Ay," repliedthe duke ; " and there is, as you know,Mr. Secretary, as old, and as true aproverb, that, ' when the pot boils, thescum floats uppermost.' "Wykeham, (Sir WILLIAM,) a baronet,descended from an ancient family,was born in 1687, and receivedhis education at Eton, and Christen urc1i,Oxford. On quitting the university,he went abroad, and soon after hisreturn, was elected a knight of theshire, for his native county, Somerset,which he represented during the remainderof his life. He was successivelyTHE SENATE.lively appointed master of the hart andbuck hounds ; secretary at war ; and,in 1713, chancellor of the exchequer.On the accession of George the First,he received his dismissal from office,and thenceforth acted with the opposition.He strenuously defended theimpeached lords, in 1714; and, on thebreaking out of the rebellion, in thefollowing year, was arrested, as a suspectedpartisan of the Stuartss, by oneof the king's messengers, from whom,however, he contrived to escape ; butsurrendered himself, on a proclamationbeing issued for his apprehension,and was committed to the Tower.He regained his liberty, at the closeof the insurrection, without havingbeen brought to trial, and continuedhostile to government up to the periodof his death, which took place in 1740.He was twice married ; first, to adaughter of the proud Duke of Somerset,by whom he had a son, who afterwardsbecame Earl of Egmont ; and,secondly, to the Marquess of Bland-ford'swidow. During a considerableportion of his career, Sir WilliamWyndham was a staunch Jacobite; buthe, at length, softened down into aTory. His abilities and virtues wereequally great ; his manners were fascinating;his person was handsome ; andhis powers, as an orator, rendered himexceedingly formidable to his politicalopponents. Pope, with whom he wasintimate, thus mentions him :-Wynilham, just to fr:eilom :and hiBECKFORD, (WILLIAM,) was bornin 1690, and, after having acquired considerablewealth by commercial pursuits,obtained a seat in parliament,about 1746, for the borough of Shaftsbury.He was afterwards returned forMiddlesex, and, eventually, for the cityof London, of which he became, insuccession, alderman, sheriff, and, ontwo occasions, lord-mayor. He was astaunch supporter of Wilkes, and, likehis friend Sawbridge, distinguishedhimself by advocating all the popularmeasures brought forward during hissenatorial career. He originated a billfor preventing bribery at elections, whichbeing opposed, in a vehement speech,by Thurlow, then a member of thehouse of commons, Beckford thus laconicallyreplied : " The honourablegentleman, in his learned discourse,first gave us one definition of corruption,then another, and, I thought,at one time, he was about to give us athird ; but, pray, does he imagine thatthere is a single member of this housewho does not know what corruptionis ?" During his second mayoralty, in1769-70, he presented an address to thethrone, declaratory of the deep concernfelt by the citizens of London, attheir previous remonstrance against theconduct of his majesty's ministers havingbeen visited with the royal censure; to which the king replied, thathe should have been wanting to thepublic, as well as to himself, if, on theoccasion in question, he had refrainedfrom expressing his dissatisfaction attheir sentiments; and Beckford, in rejoinder,is stated to have delivered, extemporaneously,a remarkably forcibleand eloquent speech. On returning tothe city, he was asked what he hadsaid to the king: "he confusedly replied,"it is said, " that he did not wellknow ; but repeated something as wellas he could recollect;" from which agentleman, high in his confidence, drewup the celebrated oration which isengraved on the pedestal of his statuein Guildhall. On attending at thepalace, about a week afterwards, with acongratulatory address, on the birth ofthe Princess Elizabeth, the lord chamberlaininformed him, prior to his introductionto the royal presence, that itwas expected he would never reply tohis majesty again. On the 30th of thefollowing month, (June, 1770) this able,fearless, and patriotic man, expired, athis estate in Wiltshire, on which hisson afterwards erected the celebratedFonthill abbey.ONSLOW, (ARTHUR,) was born in1691, and sat, as member for Guildford,from 1719, until 1726-7, when he wasreturned for the county of Surrey, whichhe represented, and also filled thespeaker's chair, during that and thefour succeeding parliaments. In July,1728, he became a privy-counsellor;in May, 1729, chancellor to QueenCaroline; and, in 1734, treasurer of thenavy. In 1737, he was chosen highsteward of Kingston-upon-Thames, andAPPENDIX.formed one of the committee appointedto ascertain the merits of an instrument,invented by Harrison, for discoveringthe longitude at sea. In 1740, on presentingthe money-bills, by which fourmillions sterling were granted to carryon the war, after reminding the kingof the largeness of the sum, he expresseda hope, that it would, as his majesty'sconduct gave the house reason to expect,be wisely applied. In May, 1743,he resigned his office of treasurer of thenavy, but continued to act as speakerof the house of commons until 1761,when age and infirmity compelledhim wholly to retire from public life.He was rewarded for his long andarduous services, by a grant of 3,000a-year, during his own life and that ofhis son, George, afterwards Earl ofOnslow. The freedom of the city ofLondon was also presented to him, inagold box, value 100, " as a gratefultestimony of the respectful love andveneration which the citizens entertainedfor his person and distinguishedvirtue." He died on the 17th of February,1768, and was buried at ThamesDitton, by the side of his wife, Anne,daughter of John Bridges, Esq. of thatplace. Nearly all the writers of hisday, who have mentioned him, concurin attributing to Speaker Onslow, anuniform zeal for the public service,solid abilities, and unimpeachable probity.For his first elevation to thechair of the house of commons, he wasindebted, it is said, to the interest ofSir Robert Walpole, who expected tohave found in him a pliant politicaltool. Onslow's integrity, however,soon became so apparent, that, aftervarious hints had proved ineffectual, hereceived an angry remonstrance againsthis upright conduct from the minister ;to which he replied, " that, although heconsidered himself under obligations toSir Robert, he had a certain feelingabout him, when he occupied thespeaker's chair, that prevented himfrom being of any party whatever."This story is, however, at variance inits preliminary point, with the statementof Browne Willis, who observesof Onslow, that " he was elected speakerby as unanimous a concurrence of allthe members in general, as any ofthem had been by their constituentsin particular ; and as he enjoyed thiseminent station a longer time than anyof his predecessors, so he executed thismost important trust with equal, if notsuperior, abilities, to any of those whohad gone before him." He was aliberal patron of literature and science ;and various works were gratefully dedicatedto him, by his learned contemporaries.For Bowyer, he procured theoffice of printer of the votes; and forRichardson, the author of Pamela, &c.,that of printer of the journals of thecommons. On one occasion. Sir CharlesHanbury Williams complained to him,that a grievous error had appeared inthe report of a speech, in which hehad, at great length, and with muchseverity, censured certain justices formisconduct at an election. " Impossible!" exclaimed Onslow ; '" for I examinedthe proof sheet myself." " Andyet," rejoined Sir Charles, " in the conclusionyou are made to observe, thatmuch more might have been said;whereas, your words must surely havebeen, much less might have been said."He was, for some time, it is stated, inthe habit of seeking relaxation from thecares of office, in the kitchen of a publichouse, called the Jews-harp, situateabout a quarter of a mile from the topof Portland-place ; where, seated in thechimney-corner, he frequently enjoyedthe low jokes of the landlord's humblestcustomers, until he found, by the unusualrespect with which he was treated,that his rank had been discovered.HERVEY, (JOHN, Lord,) the eldestson of the first Earl of Bristol, whosurvived him, was born on the 15th ofOctober, 1696. He concluded hisscholastic studies at Clare hall, Cambridge,where he obtained the degreeof M. A. On the arrival of the Princeof Wales in this country, he was appointeda gentleman of the bedchamberto his royal highness, on whose accessionhe was made a privy-counsellor,and, subsequently, became vice chamberlain,keeper of the privy-seal, and alord justice of the kingdom during oneof the king's visits to Hanover. Afterhaving, for some time, representedBury, he was called to the peerage, in1733, as Baron Hervey of Ickworth,He distinguished himself as an oratorin both houses of parliament, andwarmly supported the administrationTHE SENATE.of Walpole, with whose political antagonist,Pulteney, who had ridiculedhis person, he fought a desperate duel.He suffered so much from epilepsy,that he was compelled to use emeticsdaily, and to restrict himself to a certainregimen, of which asses' milk formed apart. He painted his face to concealits ghastly appearance ; but, notwithstandingthe emaciation of his person,the Princess Caroline fell in love withhim, and he obtained the hand of thebeautiful Mary Lepell, by whom hehad several children. Pope ridiculedhim with malignant acrimony, underthe appellation of Spores, and LordFanny ; terming him a thing of silk,a mere white curd of asses' milk,and a painted child of dirt His deportmentwas insinuating, and his dispositionsprightly. He displayed muchskill as a pamphleteer; wrote severalpleasing little poems ; and retorted onPope, with considerable success, in apoetical Epistle from a Nobleman to aDoctor of Divinity. Middleton praisedhim profusely ; but Coxe attributes tohim extreme affectation, bitterness ofinvective, prodigality and flattery, andgreat servility to those above him. Hedied on the 8th of August, 1743.Sandys, (SAMUEL, Lord Sandys,)whom Smollett calls the motion-maker,born about the year 1697, was descendedfrom an honourable, loyal,and learned family in Worcestershire;the county town of which he represented,for a considerable period, inparliament, and distinguished himselfby his indefatigable opposition to Walpole.He was, successively, a privy-counsellor,chancellor of the exchequer,cofferer of the king's household, wardenand chief justice in Eyre south of theTrent, speaker of the house of peers,and first lord of trade and plantations.George the Second created hima peer, by the title of Baron Sandys,about the year 1743. He married adaughter of Sir Thomas Tipping, bywhom he left several children. Hisdeath, which occurred in March, 1770,in the seventy-fourth year of his agewas occasioned by the injuries he receivedon being overturned in his carriage,while descending Highgate hill.RUSSELL, ( JOHN, Dukeof Bedford,)was born on the 30th of September,1710, and became a lord commissionerof the admiralty, and member of theprivy-council, in 1744; warden of theNew Forest, and lord-lieutenant of thecounty of Bedford, in 1745 ; one of theprincipal secretaries of state, in 1747 ;a governor of the Charter-house, in1748 ; knight companion of the Garter,in 1749 ; lord-lieutenant of the city ofExeter and county of Devon, in 1751 ;governor-general of Ireland, in 1756 ;a lieutenant-general in the army threeyears after wards; vice-admiral of Devonshire,lord high constable, and keeperof the privy-seal, in 1771; ministerplenipotentiary to the court of Versailles,in 1762 ; and president of thecouncil, in 1763. He was also colonelof the first regiment of Devonshiremilitia ; high steward of the corporationof Huntingdon ; recorder of Bedford; an elder brother of the Trinityhouse ; president of the Foundling hospital;and, on three occasions, a lordjustice of the kingdom, during Georgethe Second's visits to Hanover. Hedied, leaving several children, on the15th of January, 1771. In one of hismost vehement and bitter Philippics,Junius accuses the duke of outragingthe royal dignity with peremptory conditions,and then condescending to thehumility of soliciting an interview withhis sovereign ; at which, it is stated,Lord Bute, who was present, said thatlie was determined never to have anyconnexion with a man who had sobasely betrayed him ; of mixing withjockeys, gamesters, blasphemers, gladiators,and buffoons ; of openly avowing,in a court of justice, the sale of aborough, the purchase-money of which,it is added in a note, he was compelledto refund ; of being the littletyrant of a little corporation ; and ofhaving received private compensationfor sacrificing public interests whileambassador to the court of France."Your friends will ask," continues theanonymous author, " Whither shallthis unhappy old man retire ? Can heremain in the metropolis, where hislife has been so often threatened, andhis palace so often attacked ? If hereturn to Woodbury, scorn and mockeryawait him. He must create a solituderound his estate, if he would avoidthe face of reproach and derision. AtApple Nix.Plymouth, his destruction would be morethan probable; at Exeter, inevitable."In another kingdom, indeed," Juniusironically adds, alluding to the fact ofthe duke having been governor-generalof Ireland, " the blessings of his administrationhave been more sensiblyfelt ; his virtues better understood ; or,at worst, they will not, for him alone,forget their hospitality. As well mightVerres have returned to Sicily !" Thefollowing are among the notes to theletter, from which the foregoing passagesare extracted, and to another,from the same pen, under the signatureof Philo-Junius: " Mr. WestonHumphrey, a country attorney, horse-whippedthe duke, with equal justice,severity, and perseverance, on thecourse at Lichfield. This gave rise tothe following story: When the lateking heard that Sir Edward Hawkehad given the French a drubbing, hismajesty, who had never received thatkind of chastisement, was pleased toask Lord Chesterfield the meaning ofthe word. ' Sir,' says Lord Chesterfield,' the meaning of the word buthere comes the Duke of Bedford, whois better able to explain it to your majestythan I am.' " " Within a fortnightafter [his son] Lord Tavistock'sdeath, [his duchess] the venerableGertrude, had a rout at Bedford-house.The good duke (who had only 00,000a year) ordered an inventory to betakenof his son's wearing apparel,down to his slippers ; sold them all,and put the money in his pocket. Theamiable marchioness, shocked at suchbrutal, unfeeling avarice, gave the valueof the clothes to the marquis's servantout of her own purse." It is scarcelynecessary to hint, that it would be farfrom just to form an estimate of thisnobleman's character, from the stricturesof an anonymous writer, whodisplayed the most rancorous hostilitytowards many, besides the duke, whosepolitical opinions did not agree with hisELLIS, (Welcome, Lord Mentis,)a younger son of a Bishop of Meath,and nephew of a Roman catholic prelate,was born in 1714. From a king'sscholarship, at Westminster, he waselected, in 1732, to a studentship, atChristchurch college, Oxford. Soonafter quitting the university he wentinto parliament, and, in 1749, was appointeda lord of the admiralty; in1755, he became vice-treasurer of Ireland; and, in 1763, secretary at war.On the accession to power of the Rockinghamparty, he retired from office ;but when Lord North became premier,he again accepted the vice-treasurershipof the navy. In 1782, by the king'sexpress desire, he took the colonialsecretaryship ; which, however, he soonrelinquished. He supported the coalitionministry of Fox and Lord North ;and opposed Pitt until 1793, when,with other alarmists of his party, heseceded from the opposition. In 1794,he was created a peer, by the titleof Baron Mentis. From that time heamused himself by collecting a valuablelibrary, at Pope's villa, at Twickenham;and died, without issue, althoughhe had been twice married, on the 2ndof February, 1802. He possessed considerabletalents ; and his conduct, was,on the whole, entitled to approbation.He has, however, been severely ridiculed.Junius describes him, as a littlemanikin, and the most contemptiblepiece of machinery in the world, who,whether he made or suppressed amotion, was equally sure of disgrace.His oratory has been described as astream that flowed so smoothly, andwas so shallow, " that it seemed to designto let every pebble it passed over be distinguished;" and his manners were socourteous, that, it is said, " had he beena hermit, he would have bowed to acock-sparrow."BARRINGTON, (SHUTE, ViscountBarrington,) son of the first ViscountBarrington, was born in 1717, and wentinto parliament, as member for Berwick,in 1739. In 1740, he married Mary,heiress of William Lovell, Esq. andwidow of Samuel, eldest son of LordBrimstone, by whom he had twochildren, but neither of them survivedhim. During the last-mentioned year,he was appointed one of the lords commissionersof the admiralty; in 1754,master of the great wardrobe ; in 1757,a member of the privy-council ; in 1761,secretary at war, and chancellor of theexchequer; and, in 1762, treasurer ofthe navy. For some time, he was anobject of popular odium, on account ofTHE SENATE.his having employed the military inquelling some serious disturbances inthe neighbourhood of the King's Benchprison. In 1765, he was re-appointedto the office of secretary at war, whichhe continued to hold until 1768, inwhich year he retired from public life.During the latter part of his parliamentarycareer, he represented Plymouth,for which he was first electedin 1754. His death took place on the1st of February, 1793.MONTAGUE, (JOHN GEORGE, Earlof Sandwich,) known by the soubriquetof Jemmy Twitcher, was born inNovember, 1718. From Eton, he wasremoved, in 1735, to Trinity college,Cambridge, which he quitted, withouthaving taken a degree, in 1738:during that and the following year, hevisited the countries bordering on theMediterranean, where he made a valuablecollection of antiquities. Fromthe time of his taking his seat in thehouse of lords, he acted in oppositionto government, until 1744, when hewas appointed a junior lord of the admiralty.He afterwards became, successively,plenipotentiary to the congressat Breda, in which capacity hesigned the treaty of Aix-la-chapelle ;a privy-counsellor ; one of the lordsjustices during the king's absence inGermany ; an elder brother of theTrinity-house ; joint vice-treasurer ofIreland ; ambassador to the court ofSpain ; first lord of the admiralty ; secretaryof state for the home department;D. C. L. ; secretary of state forforeign affairs ; a second time first lordof the admiralty; and ranger of theparks. He was also governor of Greenwichhospital, president of the Egyptianclub, and a leading member of severalcharitable institutions. He died on the30th of April. 1792, leaving one son, byhis wife, Dorothy, third daughter ofViscount Fane. A few years after hisdeath, a narrative of his voyage roundthe Mediterranean, drawn up by himself,with a memoir of his life prefixed,was published by the Rev. J. Cooke,his chaplain. Bishop Douglas declaredthis narrative to be an honour to hismemory ; adding, " the public will nowconsider him a learned author as wellas an able statesman." It is also termedone of the most classical productions ofthe age, by Cradock, who not onlyclaims for Lord Sandwich the reputationof a good classical scholar, linguist,and antiquarian, but labours hard toprove that he was both a great and agood man. The earl does not, however,appear to have been conspicuous,either for his virtues or abilities. Aman of enterprise himself, he promoteddiscovery, and zealously patronised thecelebrated navigator, Captain Cook : torthis he deserves considerable praise.His political opinions frequently renderedhim odious to the people, especiallyabout the time of the great riots,in 1780; during which he nearly fellasacrifice to the fury of a mob. " Noman," says Cradock, " for awhile couldbe more persecuted. He bore dailyinsults and mortifications rather as astoic than an injured and a feelingman ; and he could not be accused ofever retaliating in the usual mode ofmore modern politicians. Others receivedgreat emoluments for what theysustained ; Lord Sandwich was contentto deserve them." It is true that hedoes not appear, on retiring, to haveprocured any pension for his politicalservices ; but it may be observed, thathe had been long enough enjoying thesweets of office amply to remuneratehimself for its toils. In 1773, heprosecuted the printer of the LondonEvening Post, for having accused himof corruptly selling an appointment,and obtained damages to the amountof 2000, which he generously presentedto the Marine Society. He appearsto have been a great favouritewith George the Third, who visited thefleet twice while the earl was at thehead of the admiralty. On one of theseoccasions, the king told his lordship,that he should like to taste some of thepork and pease-soup, on which themen were about to dine. The earlhastened to gratify his majesty's inclination,but, on applying for a mess,he met with a polite but peremptoryrefusal, on the ground of irregularity ;it being," as the purser stated, " quiteagainst the discipline of the navy, tovictual any man in a king's ship withouta warrant from the captain." Thenecessary document being procured,Lord Sandwich, good-humouredly, requestedthe purser to pick out, for hismajesty, a nice piece of pork. " AvastAPPENDIX.there, my lord," was the reply; " nofavouritism! You must prick in thetub, and take your chance like therest." Lord Sandwich will be knownto posterity, chiefly, perhaps, from thecircumstance of his unfortunate keptmistress, Miss Ray, having been shotwhile stepping into the earl's carriage,at the entrance to Covent garden theatre,in the month of April, 1779, byher disappointed lover, the Rev. Mr.Hickman, who was soon afterwardsexecuted at Tyburn for the offence.SELWYN, (GEORGE AUGUSTUS,)was born in 1719, and, for some, studiedat Oxford, whence he was compelledto remove for irreligious conduct. Herepresented Gloucester in parliament,and afterwards Ludgershall, one half ofwhich borough is said to have been hisown property. Through the interestof his connexions, he obtained manylucrative posts under government, andalthough exceedingly dissipated, and atonetime, a gambler, he amassed a largefortune. Having being deprived of avaluable office by Burke's bill, Pitt, asarecompense for the loss, appointedhim to the surveyor-generalship ofcrown-lands, which he held during theremainder of his life. He was a manof so much wit, that nearly all thecurrent bon-mots of his day were attributedto him. The comic effect of hisrepartees was considerably heightenedby his inanimate manner: he alwaysappeared to be half asleep, and frequentlyattracted notice, during a dulldebate, by snoring in unison with LordNorth. On one occasion, while travellingin a stage-coach, one of his companions,a stranger, supposing, from hisappearance, that he was unwell, repeatedly,and at very short intervals,inquired, with apparent solicitude, asto his health ; until, at length, in replyto the fiftieth repetition of the question,How are you now, sir ?" Selwyn said,Very well, I thank you, and I meanto continue so all the rest of thejourney." It is stated that he took abrutal delight in executions j which, itis added, to avoid detraction, he sometimesattended in female attire ; andit is admitted that he went over toParis to see Damien broken on thewheel, for attempting to assassinateLouis the Fifteenth. Towards theclose of his career, disease, the consequenceof his excesses, compelled himto abandon his profligate habits, and hebecame devout and repentant. He diedon the 25th of December, 1791 ; leaving,by his will, a legacy of 30,000, to aMiss Fagnani, who had been mysteriouslyconfided to his care, when achild, by her mother, an Italian marchioness.Seville, (Sir GEORGE, Baronet,)was born in 1721. After having madea tour on the continent, he obtained hiselection for the county of York, whichhe represented in five successive parliaments; and greatly distinguished himselfby his strenuous opposition to theAmerican war ; by his two celebratedbills, one, for a limitation of the claimsof the crown upon landed estates, andthe other for relieving catholics fromthe penal laws enacted against them inthe reign of William and Mary ; and byhis zealous support of Pitt's motion, in1783, for a reform in parliament. Hisdeath occurred on the 9th of January,1784. He did not frequently addressthe house, nor was he considered abrilliant orator, although his speechesare stated to have been clear, forcible,and persuasive. In an address to theelectors of Bristol, Burke spoke of himin the following terms:" He is atrue genius; with an understandingvigorous, acute, refined, distinguishingeven to excess, and illuminated with amost unbounded, peculiar, and originalcast of imagination. With these, hepossesses many external and instrumentaladvantages, and he makes useof them all. His fortune is amongstthe largest ; a fortune, which, whollyunencumbered as it is with one singlecharge from luxury, vanity, or excess,sinks under the benevolence of his disposer.His private benevolence expandingitself into patriotism, rendershis whole being the estate of the public,in which he has not reserved apeculium for himself of profit, diversion,or relaxation. During the sessions, thefirst in and the last out of the house ofcommons; he passes from the senateto the camp; and, seldom seeing theseat of his ancestors, he is always inparliament to serve his country, or inthe field to defend it." Shortly afterhis return from abroad, while attendingTHE SENATE.a county meeting, he received a petitionfrom one of his tenants whoseproperty had been destroyed by fire ;to which he merely replied, " I willconsider of it:" but the gentlemenpresent, it is added, commiseratingthe sufferer's situation, immediatelycommenced a subscription for his relief;to which every one at the meetingcontributed, except Seville; who, however,on subsequently ascertaining thetruth of the man's statement, presentedhim with 500; at the same time exactingfrom him a promise that the donationshould be kept a secret. Shortlyafterwards, being in company withsome of his fellow-tenants, who werebitterly abusing their landlord for nothaving afforded him any relief, theobject of Sir George's generosity burstinto tears, and, notwithstanding thepromise he had made, could not, it isstated, refrain from setting his benefactor'scharacter in its proper light.On one occasion, while acting as aspecial juryman, on the trial of a causefor the recovery of about 1,500, hediffered with the whole of his fellow-jurors; but, being unable, on accountof the natural weakness of his constitution,to bear a protracted confinement,after having in vain attempted to convincethem of the evident justice of theplaintiff's demand, he reluctantly acquiescedin their finding for the defendant: no sooner, however, had heleft the box, than he presented theplaintiff with a cheque for the amountof his claim.Rugby, (RICHARD,) the son of alinen-draper, who had enriched himselfwhile factor to the South Sea company,was born in 1722. After receiving anacademical education, he travelled forsometime on the continent, and subsequentlyimpaired his fortune by highplay and electioneering. Attachinghimself to the party headed by thePrince of Wales, his royal highness, towhom, perhaps, he politely lost moneyat the gaming-table, promised appointhim a lord of the bedchamber, as soonas a vacancy should occur ; but findingit convenient to break his word, he attemptedto sooth Rigby by a considerablepresent ; which, however, thelatter declined, observing, " I shallnever receive pay for a service of whichI am not deemed worthy; but ratherthink it my duty to retire from a courtwhere honour, I find, has no tie." TheDuke of Bedford now advanced him asufficient sum to extricate himself fromthe embarrassments into which hisdissipation had plunged him. Whenthat nobleman became lord-lieutenantof Ireland, Rigby was appointed hissecretary; and, soon afterwards, obtaineda sinecure worth about 4,000 a year.Through his patron's influence, he subsequentlybecame member for Tavistock,and a privy counsellor. The duke alsonominated Rigby his executor, andannulled the debt which the latter owedhim, by a special bequest. In 1778,Rigby became paymaster of the forces,and retained office until about twoyears before his death, which took placeon the 8th of April, 1788. He wasnever married, but had a naturaldaughter, to whom he left 4,000. Hewas a frequent speaker during theAmerican war, and supported the measuresof his superiors in office, withunflinching ardour, great intrepidity,and considerable talent. Though naturallyrough in his manners, he could,when he pleased, be very insinuating.He is accused of having purloined thepublic money while paymaster of theforces; and of defeating the prosecutionagainst Sir Thomas Humboldt, becausethe latter had previously assisted himwith sufficient cash to make up his largedefalcations. Thurlow, Sandwich, andWeymouth were his social companions ;and Junius has noticed the blushinghonours with which convivial excesseshad bedecked his countenance.HUTCHINSON, (JOHN Held,) theson of a Mr. Held, was born in Ireland,and educated at the university of Dublin.In 1748, he was called to the Irishbar, at which he obtained a silk gown,and the office of prime sergeant. He materiallyincreased his personal influence,by marrying a rich heiress (afterwardscreated Baroness Donoughmore) whosename of Hutchinson he added to hisown. In the Irish parliament he distinguishedhimself as an antagonist toFlood; and, at length, in 1774, thegreediness for place which he had longevinced was gratified, by his appointmentto the office of secretary ot statefor Ireland, and to the provostship ofAPPENDIX.Trinity college, Dublin. These, as wellas many valuable sinecures, he held uptothe period of his death, which tookplace in September, 1794. He was aman of talent, but of little scholasticlearning. During his senatorial career,he advocated octennial parliaments,free trade, catholic emancipation, andparliamentary reform. While provost,he was perpetually quarrelling with thefellows and students of his college ;some of whom, it is said, on account ofhis harsh and fatal treatment to one oftheir body, broke into his house, andwould, perhaps, have wreaked summaryvengeance on him, had he notreceived intelligence of their design,and effected a retreat. He challenged onegentleman, aged seventy, and fought aduel with another, while suffering undera fit of the gout. His rapacity foroffice was insatiable. At a time whenalready in possession of several lucrativeposts, he applied for some furtheremoluments to Lord Townshend, whojestingly told him, that he had nothingto offer him, but a majority of dragoons ;which the secretary, it is said, unblushinglyaccepted ; and had its duties performedby a deputy, to whom he allowedsuch a remuneration as left aconsiderable surplus out of the pay.On his first attendance at a levee, inEngland, the king asked Lord Northwho he was. " That is your majesty'sprincipal secretary of state for Ireland,"replied the witty premier, "a man, onwhom, if your majesty was pleased tobestow the united kingdom, would askfor the Isle of Man as a potato garden."BARRE, (ISAAC, Colonel,) was bornin Ireland, about the year 1726. Heserved at Quebec, under Wolfe, in thepicture of whose death, by BenjaminWest, his figure is conspicuous. TheEarl of Shelburne procured him a seatin parliament, where, acting in oppositionto government, he was not onlydeprived of his offices of adjutant-general,and governor of Stirling castle,which he had received as a reward forhis services in America, but dismissedfrom the service. During the Rockinghamadministration, he was compensatedfor the loss which he had thussustained, by being voted a pension of3,200 per annum ; which he subsequentlyrelinquished, pursuant to anarrangement with Pitt, on obtainingthe clerkship of the Tells. He usuallytook office when his party predominated ;and was, in the course of his career, aprivy-counsellor, vice-treasurer of Ireland,paymaster of the forces, and treasurerof the navy. His best speecheswere delivered during the North administration,on the American war, towhich he appears to have been inflexiblyopposed. His oratory was powerful,but coarse ; his manner rugged, hiscountenance stern, and his stature athletic.He was suspected, but apparentlywithout reason, of having assisted inwriting the letters of Junius. For thelast twenty years of his life, he wasafflicted with blindness, which, however,he is said to have borne with cheerfulresignation. His death took place onthe 20th of July, 1792.CAULF1ELD, (JAMES, Earl ofCharlemont,) son of Viscount Charlemontand Baron Caulfield, was born inIreland, on the 22nd of August, 1728,and succeeded to his father's title andestates when only six years old. Afterreceiving a private education, he travelledfor about fifteen years, duringwhich period he made a valuable collectionof pictures and antiquities,and, with these, on his return to Ireland,he embellished his beautiful residencein the neighbourhood of Dublin.It had been his intention to remaina bachelor, until, one day, his brother,Major Caulfield, to whom he waspointing out the classical improvementshe had made in his grounds,happened to remark, that when theproperty came into his hands, heshould at once do away with its decorations,and devote the land to the moreprofitable purposes of growing corn andgrazing cattle. This observation gavethe future earl so much offence that hedetermined to marry; and, in July,1768, he was united to Mary, thedaughter of an officer on half-pay,named Hickman, who bore him severalchildren. He took his seat in theIrish house of peers when about thirtyyears of age ; and, subsequently, withsome reluctance, accepted the earldomof Charlemont; annexing, however, tothe patent of his creation, an apologyto his successors, written by himself,for having consented to receive it at aTHE SENATE.time when titles were obtained withsuch facility as to render the peeragealmost disreputable. On account ofthe ardent zeal which he had evincedfor the interests of his country, and thetalent and energy he had displayed invindicating the rights of the people, hewas appointed, in 1779, commander-in-chiefof an association of volunteers,amounting to nearly eighty thousandmen, whose imposing attitude tendedmaterially to procure from the Britishlegislature a repeal of the obnoxiousstatute of the sixth of George the First,by which it was declared, inter (ilia, thatIreland was bound by British acts ofparliament, if named therein ; and thatthe Irish house of lords had no jurisdictionin matters of appeal ; the dernierressort, in all cases, being to the peersof Great Britain. In 1783, he wasinstalled a knight companion of theorder of St. Patrick ; and, in the followingyear, he risked, but did not lose,his great popularity, by opposing concessionto the catholics. Early in 1786,he procured letters patent for the institutionof The Royal Irish Academy, ofwhich he became a zealous and efficientpresident. During the king's illness,in 1788, the Irish parliament, havingpassed a series of resolutions, declaratoryof the heir-apparent's right to anunrestricted regency, Lord Charlemont,with five other peers and commoners,were delegated to present them to hisroyal highness. It appears, however,that the deputation did not reach Londonuntil the king had recovered ; andthe glorious half-dozen," as its memberswere termed, consequently becamethe subjects of numerous caricaturesand political squibs. In one of the latter,the earl was thus apostrophized :Hear me, simpering Charlemont,With thy Machiavellian front,With thy opera lips and smile |Israelite that knows no guile;Compound sort ol often rant,Faction's gentle figurant !During the remainder of his life hetook, comparatively, hut little interest inpublic affairs Continuing, however, to beanactive patron of the fine arts nearlyup to the period of his death, which occurredon the 4th of August, 1799. Hedid not distinguish himself as a speaker,but, it is said, his numerous protests inthe journals of the Irish house of peersare compositions of uncommon brilliancyand vigour." Although, by hismunificence, as a promoter of art, anda collector of rare paintings, sculptures,articles of virtu, &c., his paternal fortunebecame greatly impaired, he never,it is said, attempted to obtain a pensionor place of profit ; nor did he, it isadded, require any political subserviencyfrom his borough nominees,among whom was the celebrated G rattan; permitting them, on the contrary,to give such votes as they deemedmost beneficial to the interests of theircountry. Some observations which hehad made during his travels appearedin the Transactions of the Royal IrishAcademy ; and a quarto volume ofletters, principally from his lordshipand Edmund Burke, to the RightHonourable Henry Flood, was publishedin 1820.Cambridge, (GEORGE,) a nativeof Kent, was born about 1730. His paternalinheritance is said to have beenprincely ; and, in November, 1763, heobtained a dowry of 100,000 with hiswife, a daughter of Sir Orlando BridgeBaronet Within two months afterhis nuptials he became a widower; andsubsequently married the second daughterof Sir William Stevenson, lord-mayorof London. In 1768, he wentinto parliament, as member for Hythe ;and, in the following year, was chosenone of the sheriffs of Middlesex, in whichcapacity, with his colleague, he returnedWilkes to parliament, five successivetimes, in defiance of the house of commons,and the threat of a bill of painsand penalties by government. Duringthe same year, he was elected aldermanfor Langbourn ward; and, in 1776, obtainedthe mayoralty. At length, hewas returned a member for the city ofLondon, which he continued to representduring several parliaments, withgreat credit to himself and satisfactionto his constituents ; particularly distinguishinghimself by his efforts toalleviate the burthens of the people ;his hostility to the American war; andhis strenuous exertions in favour of parliamentaryreform. He is described ashaving been benevolent, hospitable, andaccomplished ; a frequent, and rather anable speaker ; an excellent magistrate ;APPENDIX.and, according to the Annual Register,a pattern of moral excellence. For along period, he displayed great activityas commanding officer of the East Kentmilitia; but during the last ten years ofhis life, he was incapacitated by bodilyafflictions, from attending to any of hispublic duties. He died on the 21st ofFebruary, 1795, leaving a widow andthree children.HILL, (Sir RICHARD, Baronet,) brotherto the Rev. Rowland Hill, and uncleto the gallant Lord Hill, was born atHawkstone, Salop, in 1733. Afterhaving taken the degrees of B. A. andM. A. at Magdalen college, Oxford,he went abroad with Earl Elgin. Onhis return, he became intimately acquaintedwith several Calvinistic divinesin the established church, and displayedgreat zeal in supporting theiropinions. He represented the countyof Salop in parliament, from 1780 untilwithin about a year of his death, whichtook place in the month of November,1808. His conduct in the house ofcommons, as in private life, was eccentric,but apparently conscientious. Ingeneral, he voted with ministers, but onmany occasions divided against them,particularly during the American war.Of the motions in favour of parliamentaryreform, brought forward by Pitt,Sawbridge, and Grey, he most cordiallyapproved ; and, at a late period of thecontest, urged a speedy termination ofhostilities with revolutionized France,the commencement of which he appearsto have as warmly recommended. Duringthe celebrated debates on the Indiabill, he censured the frequent appearanceof the Prince of Wales in the house ofcommons, " lest his gesticulation orbehaviour might operate as a means ofinfluence." In 1800, he supported amotion for leave to bring in a bill forthe suppression of bull-baiting; andwhen Mr. Dent subsequently broughtforward a similar measure, " he stoodforth," as he said, " in the character ofan advocate, on behalf of a race of poorfriendless beings, who could not speakfor themselves." He is stated, by an ;eloquent cotemporary, to have been imore troublesome to his friends than tohis enemies, on account of his propensityto the indecorous use of Scripturalphrases. Of this, the following instance isgiven : During the memorable strugglebetween Pitt and the coalesced opposition,headed by Fox, in allusion to thepowerful influence of the former atcourt, and of the latter in the house ofcommons, he spoke of "the honestIsraelite, Mordecai, repairing to thepalace, and averting the danger whichthreatened the people, from Hainan'sambition." This comparison of Pittto the " Israelite Mordecai," althoughevidently intended as a high compliment,was received by the youthfulpremier without a smile; his being,perhaps, the only countenance in thehouse that did not wear one. In theRolled, the subject of our notice wasmost severely satirized for his union oflow jokes with quotations from thesacred writings, on which account hewas termed, in that production, TheScriptural Killigrew. In private life hebore an irreproachable character. Hischarities were extensive, and, as one ofhis biographers states, " administeredwith tenderness and secresy." Hepublished several pamphlets in defenceof Calvinism, against Bishop Madam,Archdeacon Daubeny, Wesley, Fletcher,and others ; and frequently preachedamong the dissenters, for whom heerected a chapel, near his residence atFolkestone. He died unmarried.DUIGEN AN, (PATRICK,) descendedfrom a Roman catholic family, wasborn in Ireland, in 1735, and educatedat Trinity college, Dublin, where heobtained first a scholarship, and thena fellowship. When Hutchinson becameprovost, he wrote a poem, entitledLachrymal Academical, on the then deplorablestate of the college, from whichhe soon after retired ; but still continuedto reflect on the provost, whom, underthe appellation of Prancer, he severelyridiculed, for endeavouring to introducegymnastics as a branch of academicaleducation, in a series of pieces, thatwere afterwards collected into a volume,styled Pranceriana. At length he receiveda challenge from one of the students,for his abuse of Hutchinson;which, after some subterfuge, he accepted; but, at the place of meeting,terrified his adversary into a compromise,by appearing armed with a blunderbuss.He was called to the Irishbar, in 1767, and eventually obtained aTHE SENATE.silk gown. He was also a member ofthe Irish parliament, in which he wasthe first proposer of the union. In theimperial parliament, he representedArmagh, and opposed the catholic claimswith such violence as to render hishostility harmless. After describinghim as being brief and sturdy in hisperson, limited and tenacious in histhinking, antique in his manners andopinions, a friend to emancipation observes," with all his eccentricities, Inever see him rise without pleasure,because I consider him as being, though,no doubt, unconsciously, one of the bestfriends whom the catholics can boast."He wrote several political pamphlets;and, in one of them, reflected severelyon a Mr. Lattin,who brought an actionagainst the publisher, and obtained averdict for .500 damages. Althoughtwice married, he left no issue. Atthe time of his death, which happenedon the llth of April, 1816, he was anIrish privy-counsellor; vicar-general ofthe metropolitan court of Armagh, ofthe dioceses of Meath and Elphin, andof the Consistorial court of Dublin ;judge of the Prerogative court; king'sadvocate-general of the high court ofAdmiralty ; professor of civil law in theuniversity of Dublin, and L.L.D.LENNOX, (CHARLES, Duke ofRichmond,) was born on the 22nd ofFebruary, 1734-5, and succeeded to hisfather's titles and estates at the age ofsixteen. Shortly afterwards, he enteredthe army ; and, after having served,with considerable credit, in severaldescents on the French coast, and particularlyin the expedition against St.Gas, he was sent to Germany, wherehe so highly distinguished himself at thebattle of Minded, as to obtain the specialapprobation of the commander-in-chief.On taking his seat in the house of peers,in 1756, during which year he obtainedthe colonelcy of the thirty-third foot,he associated himself with the Whigs.In 1758, he became colonel of theseventy - second ; and subsequentlyrose, through the intermediate gradations,to the rank of field-marshal. Onthe accession of George the Third, hewas appointed a lord of the bed-chamber; but his dismissal speedily followed,on account, it is said, of his havingboldly expostulated, in the royal closet,against the king's marked attention tohis sister, the beautiful Lady SarahLennox. To the administration ofLord Bute, and to that of his successor,George Grenville, the duke was anactive opponent ; and when the Whigswent into office, under Lord Rockingham,he was rewarded, for his exertionsin support of his party, by beingappointed lord-lieutenant of the countyof Sussex, and ambassador to the courtof France. He was, however, shortlyafterwards recalled ; but soon obtainedthe seals of secretary of state for thesouthern department ; which he resigned,on the downfal of the Rockinghamadministration, ' and became apowerful opponent to the two succeedingcabinets, particularly to that ofLord North, the whole of whose measuresrelative to the colonies, he visitedwith unqualified censure. His zealagainst government, on the subject ofthe American war, induced him to oppose,with great vehemence, the admissionof Lord George Germaine tothe house of lords, when created ViscountSackville, and nearly involvedhim in a duel with Lord Rawdon.On his party being again called to office,he was made a knight of the Garter,and procured the master-generalship ofthe ordnance, which he retained untilexpelled, with such others of the Rockinghamparty, as had clung to office,under Lord Shelburne, after the deathof their leader, by Fox and LordNorth ; on whose dismissal, a fewmonths afterwards, the duke resumedhis former post. About this period,he brought forward a plan for parliamentaryreform, which was rejectedby a large majority. Undismayed bydefeat, he redoubled his exertions, " toobtain a renovation of the rights of thepeople, by means of annual parliamentsand universal suffrage ;" and,for some time, presided over the ConstitutionalSociety, established, as it isstated, under his auspices, for thepurpose of effecting the restoration ofa genuine house of commons. Asmaster-general of the ordnance, herendered himself conspicuous by hisproject for defending the coast, whichexposed him to considerable ridicule;and some blame was attached to himon account of the Duke of York'sarmy, in Flanders, being improperlyAPPEN DIX.supplied with ammunition. In 1795,he resigned his office ; and, during thesame year, obtained the command ofthe horse-guards blue. At the time ofhis death, which took place on the 27thof December, 1806, he held, in additionto his military rank and lord-lieutenancy,the high stewardship ofChichester, and was a fellow of theRoyal Society. His wife, Mary, adaughter of the Earl of Aylesbury,died, without issue, in 1796. To MissLe Clerc, her protegee, he left 2.000per annum ; to his housekeeper, Mrs.Bennett, his estate at Earl's Court,Kensington; and 10,000 to each ofher three illegitimate children. Hisabilities were above mediocrity, hisacquirements extensive, and his motivesapparently patriotic. He was a patronof literature and the fine arts, an indulgentmaster, an affectionate relative,and a steadfast friend. His dispositionis said to have been benignant, and hisdeportment elegant and condescending.ROCHE, (Sir BOYLE, Baronet,)was born in Ireland about 1736. At anearly age he entered the army, which,however, he abandoned in disgust,after having highly distinguished himselfat the capture of Savannah ; and,obtaining a seat in the Irish parliament,became so strenuous a supporter of government,that, in 1782, he was madea baronet; and, subsequently, masterof the ceremonies at Dublin castle. Hewas married to Mary, eldest daughterof Admiral Sir Thomas Franklin ; butdied without issue, on the 5th of June,1806. No man of his day, it is said,enjoyed more esteem, on account of hisperfect urbanity, and amiable qualitiesin private life, or excited so muchlaughter by the oddities of which hewas unconsciously guilty in parliament.Of these, the following are specimens:He said, one night, during a stormydebate, that it was impossible for a manto be in two places at once, unless he wasa bird or a fish! An opposition memberhaving moved, that, for the purpose of illustratingone of his arguments, an enormousmass of official documents shouldbe read, Sir Boyle Roche, with themost profound and unaffected gravity,proposed that, as the clerk at the tablewould not be able to get through thepapers before morning, a dozen ortwo of the committee-clerks should becalled in to his assistance. " The documentsmay be divided amongst them,"continued Sir Boyle; "and as theycan all read together, the whole willbe disposed of in a quarter of anhour." His speeches, on importanttopics, were prepared for him by Mr.Edward Cooke ; and, as his memorywas particularly retentive, he seldomcommitted himself, except when herose to utter an original remark. Onenight, being unprepared with a speech,and yet feeling a strong inclinationto deliver his sentiments, he retiredto a coffee-house, in order to mouldthem into the form of an oration.While engaged in this fruitless attempt,he was accosted by Serjeant Stanley,a ministerial member, whose custom itwas to rise, towards the close of a discussion,and deliver a long harangue,ingeniously compiled from the speechesof those who had addressed the housebefore him. For this debate, he was,however, in a situation to speak earlierthan usual, having, with great labour,produced an original composition ; priorto the delivery of which, he had steppedinto the coffee-house, in order to refreshhis memory by looking once morethrough the manuscript. This, unfortunatelyfor himself, he happened todrop, on retiring: Sir Boyle snatchedit up ; and, after reading it twice orthrice, (so powerful was his memory,)found himself master of the whole.Hastening to the house, he resumedhis seat, and delivered the speechwith admirable correctness, to the unspeakableamazement and mortificationof the proprietor, who, it appears, hadnot succeeded in catching the speaker'seye. Meeting Stanley again at thecoffee-house, in the course of the night,Sir Boyle returned him his manuscript,with many thanks for what he waspleased to term the loan of it ; adding,I never was so much at a loss foraspeech in my life, nor ever met withone so pat to my purpose ; and sinceit is not a pin the worse for wear, youmay go in and speak it again yourself,as soon as you please."Courteney, (JOHN,) a native ofIreland, and the nephew of Lord Bute,was born in 1741 ; and, having enteredthe army, had risen to the rank ofTHE SENATE.captain, when the Marquess Townshend,then lord-lieutenant of Ireland, appointedhim his secretary. He was electedmember for Tamworth, in 1780, 1784,and 1790; and afterwards representedAppleby. Attaching himself to the oldWhigs, he became surveyor of the ordnance,and secretary to the master-general,when his party took office, in1783. On the resignation of his friends,he returned to the opposition benches,where he continued until 1806, whenhe acted as a commissioner of the treasury,during the Fox and Grenville administration.His death took place onthe 24th of March, 1816. As an orator,Courtenay amused more frequently thanhe convinced : his speeches aboundedwith playful satire; and he often displayeda glittering but harmless poignancy,which almost amounted to wit.Though a staunch Whig, he wrote alaudatory poem on the moral and politicalcharacter of Johnson, than whomno man was a more uncompromisingTory. He was also the author of ASeries of Poetical Epistles on the Manners,Arts, and Politics of France andItaly; of Philosophical Reflections (addressedto Priestley) on the Revolutionin France ; and of a Poetical and PhilosophicalEssay on the same subject,dedicated to Edmund Burke. To usea Johnsonian phrase, he was eminentas a talker. Gibbon having, in his company,one day, remarked, that the Beggar'sOpera had refined the Macheathsof the day, and rendered them politeand gentlemanly, Courtenay observed,that " Gay was certainly the Orpheusof highwaymen."EDEN, (WILLIAM, Lord Auckland,)third son of Sir Robert Eden, Baronet,was born about the year 1742. FromEton he proceeded to Christchurch,Oxford, in 1763, and took the degree ofM. A. in 1768. In the following yearhe was called to the bar; in 1771, hebecame auditor and one of the directorsof Greenwich hospital ; in 1772, anundersecretary of state; in 1774, memberof parliament for the borough ofWoodstock ; in 1776, a lord-commissionerof the board of trade and plantations;in 1778, one of the commissionersappointed to negociate a peacewith America; in 1780, chief secretaryfor Ireland, an Irish privy-counsellor,and a member of the Irish parliament ;in 1783, a privy-counsellor of England,and vice-treasurer of Ireland; in 1784,chairman of the committee appointedto inquire into the illicit practices usedin defrauding the revenue ; also, of theselect committee to examine the reportsof the directors of the East IndiaCompany; in 1785, a lord of the committeeof trade and plantations, andenvoy extraordinary to the court of Versailles; in 1788, ambassador to Spain;in 1789, ambassador to the UnitedProvinces, and an Irish peer, by thestyle and title of Baron Auckland ; in1793, the representative of Great Britainat the congress of Antwerp, and a Britishpeer, by the title of Baron Auckland,of West Auckland, in the county ofDurham ; in 1796, chancellor of the Marischalcollege of Aberdeen; and in 1798,postmaster-general. He retired fromoffice in 1801, with a pension of 2,300P'.T annum, for himself; and another, of700 per annum, for his wife, Eleanor,daughter of Sir Gilbert Elliott, Baronet,by whom he had several children. Hisdeath took place on the 28th of May,1814. He was a skilful diplomatist ; a correct,fluent, and argumentative speaker;and a writer of considerable ability. Hepublished A Concise Account of NewHolland ; Principles of Penal Law ; fourletters addressed to Lord Carlisle, (in1779,) On the Spirit of Party, The Circumstancesof the War, The Means ofRaising Supplies, and The Representationof Ireland respecting a FreeTrade ; Remarks on the Apparent Circumstancesof the War; Speeches insupport of an income tax, and theunion with Ireland; and some otherpieces. Among the various measureswhich he introduced for the considerationof parliament, were, bills to authorizethe punishment by hard labourof offenders liable to transportation ;to amend the laws respecting transportation,to enforce attention to thehealth and morals of prisoners, toestablish a system of solitary confinementfor certain crimes, and to erectpenitentiaries; to establish a nationalbank in Ireland ; to repeal so much ofthe sixth of George the First, as affectedthe legislative independence of the sisterkingdom; and to prevent adultery, byprohibiting marriage between the guiltyparties. Besides his other honours, heAPPENDIX.was a doctor of civil law and fellow ofthe Royal Society.VVHITWORTH, (CHARLES, EarlWentworth,) the son of a baronet, wasborn in 1744, and educated at Tunbridgegrammar school ; on quittingwhich, he obtained a commission in theguards, but soon abandoned militaryfor civil pursuits. In 1786, he was sentout as ambassador to Poland, then aboutto be dismembered ; two years afterwards,he proceeded from Warsaw, asenvoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiaryto Russia; and while therewitha view to give greater dignity tohis mission, the object of which was acoalition against trance, George theThird created him a knight of the Bath.On his return to England, in 1800, hewas raised to the Irish peerage, by thetitle of Baron Wentworth ; and shortlyafterwards, he went on an embassy tothe court of Denmark, where he succeededin effecting a temporary adjustmentssome differences that had arisen,in consequence of the right of searchclaimed and exercised by British ships.In April, 1801, he married the DowagerDuchess of Dorset; and, in the followingyear, having previously been sworn amember of the privy-council, he wasaccredited as plenipotentiary to Paris;where, after he had been exposed tomuch annoyance, and even insult, hismission was terminated by the abruptrenewal of hostilities, in May, 1803.When this country was threatened withan invasion, he displayed his spirit andpatriotism, by raising and clothing, athis own expense, a corps of six hundredmen. In 1813, he became a lord of thebedchamber; in the following year aBritish peer, and successor to the Dukeof Richmond, as viceroy of Ireland,where he remained until 1817; having,in the mean time, received one of thetwelve civil grand crosses of the Bath,and been raised to an English earldom.He died without issue, on the 13th ofMay, 1825, at Knowles, in Kent, highlyesteemed for his virtues, and honouredfor his abilities.ROSE, (GEORGE,) a native of Scotland,and the son of a non-juring divine,was born on the llth of June,1744. After having acquired the rudimentsof learning at a private schoolnear Hampstead, he was apprenticedto an apothecary in that neighbourhood;but his indentures were sooncancelled, his master, it is said, notbeing anxious to retain so unwilling aservant. He then went to sea, eitheras a steward or captain's clerk; andafter filling some minor situation at theadmiralty, became deputy chamberlainto the tally court of exchequer. Beingsubsequently employed to arrange thepublic records, he executed his task inso able a manner, that, in 1767, he wasappointed to superintend the completionof the journals of the house of lords.In 1784, he became joint secretary tothe treasury, and, soon after, obtaineda seat in parliament. On the formationof the Addington cabinet, he retiredfrom office; but, on the return of hisfriend and patron, Pitt, to the directionof public affairs, he was sworn aprivy-counsellor ; and, in addition tothe treasurership of the navy, obtained,first, the chair of vice-president, andafterwards, thatof president, atthe boardof trade. He lost his employments onthe death of Pitt, but regained them onthe downfal of the Grenville ministry,and continued in office up to the timeof his death, which took place in 1818.He was a staunch supporter of theprinciples of Pitt ; and few men of hisday, it is said, addressed the house sooften, or upon such a variety of subjects,with equal effect. Among hispublications, are two fac-simile copiesof Doomsday Book ; Journals of theHouse of Lords, in thirty-one volumes,folio ; A Brief Examination into theIncrease of the Revenues, Commerce,&c. ; A Tract on Friendly Societies;Considerations on the Debt due by theCivil List ; Observations on the PoorLaws ; Observations on the HistoricalWork of the Right Honourable C. J.Fox ; A Letter to Lord Melville, onthe Erection of the Naval Arsenal, atNorthwest ; A Speech on the BullionCommittee ; and A Translation of theHistory of Poland, not printed. By hiswife, a native of Dominica, he hadseveral children, neither of whom, ashedeclared, ever caused him one hour'spain. In politics, he was an absoluteoptimist: no gloomy predictions, it hasbeen observed, are to be found in hispamphlets; he appears to have enjoyedall the golden visions arising out ofTHE SENATE.the hopes of uninterrupted prosperity ;and, at one time, maintained, notwithstandingthe pressure of the incomeand other taxes, that the people ofEngland actually "reposed on a bedof roses !"HOWARD, (CHARLES, Duke ofNorfolk,) son of Charles Howard, Esq.,of Greystock, Cumberland, was bornon the 15th of March, 1746, and educatedpartly at home and partly inFrance. At the age of thirty-one,when he had been twice married, theduchy of Norfolk devolving on hisfather, he assumed the titular distinctionof Earl Surrey. In 1780, heabjured the Roman catholic religion, inwhich he had been brought up; and,in the course of the same year, becamemember of parliament for Carlisle. Hewas soon afterwards appointed, by hisfather, deputy earl marshal ; and, on thedownfal of Lord North, to whom he hadbeen particularly hostile, he obtained,from the Rockingham ministry, the lord-lieutenancyof the west riding of Yorkshire.He opposed the Shelburne cabinet,and, on its dissolution, went intooffice with the Portland party, as acommissioner of the treasury ; but wasdismissed, with his friends, in a fewmonths, on the accession to power ofthe celebrated Pitt. He now began todistinguish himself as a strenuous advocatefor reform in parliament, andbecame, successively, a member of TheConstitutional Society; of that termedThe Friends of the People ; and of theWhig Club. In 1784, he was createdD. C. L. by the university of Oxford ;and, two years after, he succeeded tothe titles, hereditary office of earlmarshal, and estates of his father. Atthe trial of Warren Hastings, findinghimself in a minority on the first andsecond charges of the impeachment, heimmediately unmoved, and ceased toact as a judge. To the war with revolutionizedFrance, he was one of themost determined opponents; and byhis general hostility to government,became so obnoxious to the cabinet,that, in 1798, he was dismissed from hislord-lieutenancy, Ostensibly, for having,as chairman of the Whig Club, givenout, among other toasts that had beenset down by the committee for himto propose, The Majesty of the People.On the death of the Duke of Richmond,in 1806, the Whigs being then in office,he was complimented with the vacantlord-lieutenancy of Sussex, and immediatelyafterwards appointed himselfcolonel of the militia of that county.During a debate on the second readingof the property-tax bill, in May, 1815,he dissented from the opinions of thosewith whom he had been accustomed toact, declaring that so far from consideringthe impost then under considerationas unequal, vexatious, and oppressive,(which Earl Grey had declared it to be)he thought it the most fair and equitablethat had ever been devised. He also,on this occasion, in opposition to hisparty, fully agreed with ministers inthe necessity of making preparationsfor war. This was almost the last actof his public life ; for he soon afterwardsbegan to decline, and died, withoutissue, on the 16th of December, inthe same year. For some time beforehis death, he had been president of theSociety of Arts. His character was madeup of inconsistencies and contradictions.Avowedly an advocate for reform in parliament,he was, practically, a supporterof boroughmongering. In divorce cases,he was particularly solicitous to obtain"suitable provisions for the frail andunhappy females;" yet, according tohis biographer in the Annual Obituary,of those who called themselves hischildren, some were entirely forgotten,while others were scantily provided for;more especially one, whom he admittedto his house and treated with a degreeof kindness, that gave a right to expectation."He was, however, sufficientlyliberal, it is said, to make provisionsfor several of his cast-off mistresses ; tosome of whom he occasionally delivereda gratuitous lecture on morals. Gilraycaricatured him as Silenus ; and it wasjocosely said of him, that he thoughtproper to be depicted as Solomon, in thepicture of Queen Sheba feasting at Jerusalem,on the window of his baronialhall, because he had as many concubinesas that monarch. He expended immensesums in the re-edification of Arundelcastle : his plate was magnificent, hisbanquets princely, his servants splendidlyappointed, and his mode of livingin the country pompous and stately ; yethe prided himself on possessing so muchshrewdness as not to be overreachedAPPENDIX.in the most trifling transaction. Hefrequently dined, when in town, on achop at The Shakespeare, where, fromhis convivial qualities and unostentatiousdeportment, he acquired the nameof The Social Duke. He was so careless,and even slovenly, in his dress, that,on one occasion, he created "a buzz ofwonder" in the house of lords hy appearingin a new coat ; on another,while sitting in the front row of a box atthe theatre, he was supposed to be aplace-keeper, and threatened with anignominious expulsion for not retiringat the end of the first act; and, on athird, being at the cock-pit, the company,for some time, tacitly declinedbetting with a man of his appearance,until, at length, it is said, a smart youngfellow, slapping him on the shoulder,exclaimed, " Come, my honest butcher,I'll take your offer!" In some instances,he acted most nobly to thosewho reposed confidence in him; andwas constant, in others, to such of hisfriends as happened to be plunged intoadversity ; but, on the other hand, inthe final disposition of his property,he is said to have entirely forgottenone gentleman with whom he formedan acquaintance in early life ; in whomhe was accustomed to delight in hissocial and unreserved moments ; withwhom he kept up a regular uninterruptedfriendship, and whom he sawand detained for hours with him on hisdeath-bed." The same writer statesthat he was entitled to great, but not touniform praise, as a patron ; havingactually impounded the translationof Plato, (by Taylor,) and conductedhimself in a way that Jonson wouldhave disdained, and Curl himself wouldscarcely have practised." He zealouslyupheld the liberty of the press, andwarmly encouraged the caricaturists,whose satirical sketches against theTories were sent to him regularly asthey appeared, by Holland, the print-seller,of whom he was a liberal supporter,until finding, one day, a graphicsquib on his dismissal from the lord-lieutenancyof the West Riding in Holland'sshop, he deliberately rolled it up,put it into his capacious pocket, ejaculated" So, Mr. Holland ! " and then,according to Henry Angelo, " turnedhis back upon his astounded print-merchantand protege for ever." Whenyoung, he is described as having beenof a particularly spare habit of body ;but, in the decline of life, "his figure,"says the last-mentioned amusing writer,as seen behind, might be likened toa square, elongated to a short proportionedoblong." It would be unjustto his memory to omit stating that, onsucceeding to the dukedom, he directedthat certain stipends, which a numberof Roman catholics had been accustomedto receive from his predecessor, shouldbe continued to them for life ; and thathe was one of the most zealous advocates,in the upper house, for the abolitionof the slave trade.GRANT, (CHARLES,) was born inScotland, in 1746, a few hours previouslyto the death of his father, whofell at the battle of Culloden. Afterhaving received a good education atElgin, he was sent to India in a militarycapacity, which, however, he soonabandoned for a civil employment atBengal, where he married a young lady,named Frazer. In 1773, he becamesecretary to the board of trade at thatplace ; and, after having filled variousother situations in the company's service,he returned to England, and waselected, in 1794, a member of the boardof East India directors ; of which hewas chosen deputy-chairman, in 1804,and president in the following year.He represented the county of Invernessin three successive parliaments ; andhighly distinguished himself as a memberof the house of commons, by hisprofound knowledge of East Indianaffairs. As a writer, he rendered himselfconspicuous by a letter addressedto the board of which he was a member,recommending the propagation ofChristianity, by means of missionaries,in the east; and by his valuable tract,entitled, Observations on the State ofSociety among the Asiatic Subjects ofGreat Britain, which the house of commonscaused to be printed, for the useof its members. He contributed greatly,by his munificence, and personal exertions,to the diffusion of the Gospelamong the inhabitants of India; andjoined Mr. Wilberforce, with whosereligious opinions he seems to haveagreed, in some speculation, whichproved unsuccessful, relative to the settlementat Sierra Leone. He was aTHE SENATE.member of the Society for PromptingChristian Knowledge ; a vice-presidentof the Bible Society ; and one of thecommissioners appointed to superintendthe building of new churches. SirPhilip Francis, his opponent in politicalopinions, declared, in the house of commons,that there could not be a morecompetent witness on East Indian affairs,nor any human evidence less tobe suspected ; and the Rev. DanielWilson, in his funeral sermon, ascribedto him, apparently with justice, " thosequalities which are generally understoodto constitute greatness of character."He died on the 31st of October,1823, leaving two sons, Charles andRobert, who have each acquired distinctionin parliament.FITZPATRICK, (RICHARD,) secondson of the Earl of Upper Ossory,was born on the 30th of January, 1747.Entering the army, he rose to the rankof general, and acquired some distinctionas a military man, during the earlypart of the American war. He wentinto parliament, in 1780, as member forTavistock ; and, subsequently, representedthe county of Bedford. He proceededto Ireland in 1782, as secretaryto the Duke of Portland, then lord-lieutenant; and, in the following year,obtained the office of secretary of war,which, however, he soon resigned ; butheld it again during the administrationof Fox and Lord Grenville. At thetime of his death, which took place onthe 25th of April, 1813, he was a generalin the army, colonel of the forty-seventhregiment, and a privy-counsellor. Amodest epitaph, in verse, written byhimself, is inscribed on his monument,in the church-yard of Sunning Hill,where he was buried. He appears tohave been possessed of such talents, asmight, combined with more energy,have raised him to greater distinction.When Fox and Sheridan spoke afterhim, on the celebrated motion respectingLafayette, Duncan, his political opponent,observed, that " the gallant general'sfriends had only impaired the impressionmade by his speech." He issaid to have been a handsome man, andone of the prince's circle, which, itis added, he adorned by his wit andcourtly manners. He wrote variouspoetical trifles ; the best of which, was,perhaps, his inscription on the Templeof Friendship, at St. Anne's hill. Aconstant associate of Fox, he impairedhis fortune by gambling; and prematurelyinjured his health, to such anextent, by dissipation, that, accordingto Croly, for some years before hisdeath, he could scarcely be said to live.Wentworth, (WILLIAM, EarlFitzwilliam,) was born on the 30th ofMay, 1748, and educated at Eton andKing's college, Cambridge. He commencedhis parliamentary career, as adetermined opponent to the Americanwar; and, by various harassing motions,it is said, contributed, in somemeasure, to the downfal of Lord North.To the administration of his uncle, theMarquess of Rockingham, which succeeded,he gave his most cordial support;and, on the death of that nobleman,severely animadverted on theconduct of Lord Shelburne, whom heaccused of having produced the schismwhich then took place among the Whigs.Adhering to the principles of Fox, headvocated that statesman's celebratedIndia bill, with such zeal, that itis said, he lost much of the influencewhich he had previously enjoyed in thecounty of York. On the breaking outof the French revolution, he seceded,with other alarmists, from his party ; andwas consequently made president of thecouncil, in 1794, and lord-lieutenant ofIreland in the following year ; but hisrecal speedily ensued. He shortly afterwardspublished two letters on thesubject, in which he spoke of Mr.Beresford, whom he had dismissed fromall his employments, but who hadalready been reinstated, in such termsas, it was feared, would have led to aduel. Although now unconnected withgovernment, he continued to supportthe war with France; and, in 1798-9,obtained the lord-lieutenancy of theWest Riding of Yorkshire ; from whichhe was dismissed, in 1819, for havingattended a meeting, held at York, topetition that an inquiry should bemade as to the conduct of the Manchestermagistrates. He had previouslybeen created D. C. L. by the universityof Oxford, and filled the office of lordpresident of the council, for the secondtime, during the brief ascendancy ofthe Whigs, in 1806. The character ofAPPEN DIX.this nobleman is deservedly admired :his public spirit, and the liberality ofhis opinions, are equalled by the virtuesof his private life. An advocate forcatholic emancipation, an indulgentlandlord, and an enemy to all kinds ofoppression or corrupt practices, he becameso popular while lord-lieutenantof Ireland, that the day of his departureis said to have been one ofgeneral sorrow in that kingdom. Heappears from his youth to have beendistinguished * for active benevolence ;his schoolfellow, Lord Carlisle, havingthus eulogized him, while a student atEton:Who aids the old, who soothes the mother'! cry ?Who wipes the tear from off the virgin's eye ?Who feeds the hungry ? Who assists the lame ?All, all re-echo with 1'itzwilliam's name.He is particularly attached to the sportsof the field, but evinces a laudableanxiety to do no injury to the farmerwhile pursuing his favourite pastime.On one occasion, he presented a banknotefor jglOO to one of his tenants,whose young wheat had been apparentlyinjured, by his hounds and theirfollowers. Some time afterwards, thetenant called upon him for the purposeof stating, that, as the ground, whichhad been trodden by the horses anddogs would evidently yield a bettercrop than his other land, he wished toreturn the money with which he hadbeen presented by the earl ; who, however,it is said, not only refused toaccept it, but insisted on giving thefarmer another note of a similar amount,as a reward for his honesty. He wasmarried, in 1770, to Lady CharlottePonsonby, daughter of the Earl ofBesborough, by whom he has one son.HOWARD, (FREDERICK, Earl ofCarlisle,) eldest son of Henry, the fourthearl, by his second wife, Isabella,daughter of the fourth Lord Byron,was born in 1748, and educated at Eton,and King's college, Cambridge. Onquitting the university, he proceeded tomake the grand tour; and, while atTurin, in 1763, was invested with theinsignia of the Thistle. He took hisseat in the house of peers, in 1769, and,soon afterwards, married one of thedaughters of the Marquess of Stafford.In 1777, he was appointed treasurerof the king's household, and a memberof the privy-council. In 1778, he wasdespatched to America, with GovernorJohnson and Mr. Eden, for the purposeof endeavouring to effect a pacificationbetween Great Britain and the revoltedcolonies. The mission proved unsuccessful,and Lord Carlisle soon returnedto England. In 1780, he obtained thevicegerency of Ireland, of which hewas deprived, on the sudden dissolutionof the Rockingham cabinet, in 1782.He then joined the coalition headed byFox and Lord North, with whom heappears to have subsequently held office,as steward of the household and lordprivy seal. On the downfal of hisparty, he returned to the ranks of opposition,in which he continued untilthe commencement of the French revolution,when he became an alarmist,and gave his support to ministers ; forwhich, in 1793, he was rewarded withthe insignia of the Garter. His leisurehours, from this period, were apparentlydevoted to literature j but he continuedto take a prominent part in politicsduring the remainder of his life, whichclosed on the 4th of September, 1825.The Asylum, and The Foundling Hospitalfor Wit, contain many of his juvenilecompositions; besides which, hepublished in 1773, a quarto volume oforiginal pieces and translations, includinga version of Dante's Ugolino; in1794, A Letter to Lord Fitzwilliam;in 1798, Unite, or Fall, a tract; and,in 1801, an elegant edition of his works,including his two tragedies, entitled,The Stepmother, and The Father's Revenge.Dr. Johnson observes of thelatter, in a communication to Mrs.Charon, " Of the sentiments, I remembernot one that I wished omitted.In the imagery, I cannot forbear to distinguishthe comparison of joy succeedinggrief, to light rushing on the eyeaccustomed to darkness. It seems tohave all that can be desired to make itplease. It is new, just, and delightful."Lord Byron, his nephew, whom the earlhad bitterly offended, notices him, as atragic writer, in the following terms :So dull in youth, so drivelling in age,But managers, for once, cried, " Hold '. Enough ! "Nor dragged their audience with the tragic stuff.When young, the Earl of Carlisle wasremarkable for the courteous gaiety ofTHE SENATE.his manners: and, at one time, he is describedas having been the best dressedman about town, with the exception ofFox.GORDON, (Lord GEORGE,) thirdson of the Duke of Gordon, was bornon the 19th of December, 1750. Atan early age he entered the navy,which he quitted during the Americanwar, in consequence of an altercationwith the Earl of Sandwich relative topromotion. Obtaining a seat in parliamentfor the borough of Ludgershall,he soon signalized himself by attacking,with great freedom and some wit, allclasses of politicians ; in consequence ofwhich, it became a common sayingthat there were three parties in thehouse ; namely, ministers, the opposition,and Lord George Gordon. Beingavowedly hostile to the catholics, hewas placed at the head of The ProtestantAssociation ; and, in his zeal forthe established religion, he encouragedthe cry of " No Popery !" ac some largemeetings of the lower orders, overwhich he presided. At length, in 1780,during a discussion on a bill which hadbeen introduced for the relief of Romancatholics from certain penalties anddisabilities, he marched in procession,with an immense mob, to the house ofcommons, for the purpose of presentinga petition against the proposed measure.Terrific riots ensued ; during which,prisons were broken open, and thecatholic chapels in the metropolis, aswell as various dwelling-houses, weredestroyed. The rabble, at length, endeavouredto effect an entrance intothe house of commons ; and had theirattempt been successful, Lord GeorgeGordon would, perhaps, have fallen avictim to the indignation of the members; many of them having protestedthat, on the appearance of a single rioterwithin the doors, they would instantlyput him to death. For the share he had| taken in these excesses, which wereI with great difficulty suppressed, he wascommitted to the Tower, and broughtto trial, in the court of Kings's Bench,early in 1781 ; when, chiefly throughthe powerful eloquence of Erskine, heobtained an acquittal, on the groundthat his motives had not been treasonableor malicious. In 1786, h? exposedhimself to excommunication by refusingto give his testimony in an ecclesiasticalsuit; and two years after, he was convictedof having published libels onthe Queen of France, the French ambassador,and the criminal judicature ofEngland. He now retired to Holland,in order to evade capture, but was sentback to Harwich, whence he proceededto Liverpool, where he was apprehendedwhile suffering under the initiatoryrites of Judaism, to which he hadbecome a proselyte. Being committedto Newgate, he presented a petition tothe National Assembly ; in consequenceof which, he was visited by severaleminent revolutionists, and strong interestwas exerted, but without effect,to procure his liberation. After havingundergone his sentence of three yearsimprisonment for the libels alreadymentioned, and two more for anotheron the Empress of Russia, being incapableof obtaining the necessary securitiesfor his future good behaviour,he died in Newgate, of a deliriousfever, on the 1st of November, 1793.During his confinement, he addressedseveral letters to the printer of thePublic Advertiser ; generously relievedthe wants of his fellow-prisoners ; andamused himself by studying ancientand modern history. His person wasspare, his complexion pale, his deportmentcourtly, and his conversation interesting.His last moments are saidto have been embittered by the knowledgethat he could not be buried amongthe Jews.HARE, (JAMES,) " the Hare withmany Friends," as the Duchess ofGordon termed him, in consequence ofhis being so universal a favourite, wasthe grandson of Bishop Hare, and theson of an apothecary at Winchester.At Eton, he laid the foundation of alasting friendship with Fox, whom heis said to have assisted in his schoolexercises ; and while at Oxford, displayedsuch extraordinary abilities, thatFox said, when complimented on hisown maiden speech in parliament,Wait till you hear Hare. When,however, the supposed phenomenonmade his first essay as an orator, theexpectation of his friends was completelydisappointed. Notwithstandinghis failure, being a wit and a scholar,he continued, through life, to be theAPPENDIX.favorite associate of the convivial leadersof his party. By the prince, he appearsto have been greatly admired for hissocial pleasantry, which, although frequentlyindulged at the expense of hisfriends, is said to have been more playfulthan poignant. After having representedKnaresborough for a considerabletime, he died on the 17th ofMarch, 1804. Like most conversationalwits, his recorded ban mots injure,rather than enhance, his traditionaryreputation. Of these the following arespecimens: Being told that Fox, whosecomplexion was particularly dark, hadbecome a suitor to " the pale MissPulteney," daughter of the Countessof Bath, Hare observed, that, if theymarried, they would certainly have afamily of duns. Having asked Fitzpatrickif he had heard of Burgoyne'sdefeat, and being answered in the negative,he said, " Then take it from measa flying rumour." Just after thedismissal of the coalition, Fox havingbegged to be excused, on account ofhaste, for appearing en dishabille at theprince's table, Hare exclaimed, " Makeno apology : our great guns are discharged,and now we may all do withoutpowder." These puns, and two orthree others equally bad, are all thathave been preserved of " those flashesof merriment" by which Hare, whilein the company of such men as Fox,Erskine, and Sheridan, was "wont toset the table in a roar."ELLIOTT, (Sir GILBERT, Baronet,Earl of Minto,) was born in 1751, and,after having taken a degree at Christchurch,Oxford, became a student at law,and was called to the bar; but, on succeedingto the title and estates of hisfather, in 1777, he abandoned the profession,and obtained a seat in the houseof commons; where he so distinguishedhimself by his talent and application topublic business, that, on the death ofCornwall, he was proposed as speaker,but without success, in opposition toGrenville. In 1793, he was sent out asone of the commissioners to make arrangementsfor securing to England thepossession of Toulon, which had thenbeen recently captured. Two yearsafterwards, he was nominated viceroyof Corsica; the evacuation of which, heconducted with such ability, that, in1797, the king created him Lord Minto,of the County of Roxburgh. In 1799, hewas despatched as envoy-extraordinaryand minister-plenipotentiary to thecourt of Vienna, where he remaineduntil 1801. In 1806, he became presidentof the board of control ; and, in the followingyear, governor-general of Bengal,in which capacity he so distinguishedhimself, particularly by his well-concertedexpeditions against the isles ofFrance and Bourbon, in 1810, andagainst Java, in 1811, that he receivedthe thanks of both houses of parliament,and, in 1813, obtained the titlesof Viscount Melgund and Earl Minto.He returned to this country in May,1814, apparently in good health, butdied at Stevenage, on the 21st of thefollowing month ; leaving, by his wife,Maria, daughter of Sir George Amend,three sons and three daughters. Hedisplayed great skill as a debater, muchability as a politician, and uncommonenergy, prudence, temper, and zeal, asagovernor.COMBE, (HARVEY CHRISTIAN,) theson of an attorney, was born at Andover,in 1752, and is said to have beendestined for the legal profession, butpreferring commerce to law, he becamea corn-merchant, in London, and eventuallysucceeded to the extensive businessof his maternal uncle, Mr. BoyceTrees.whose daughter, Catherine, he hadpreviously married. Having acquiredgreat wealth and reputation, he was successivelychosen sheriff, alderman, oneof the city members, and, in 1800, lord-mayor.He appears to have been anactive supporter of the Whig party, fromthe commencement of his parliamentarycareer, in 1796, until disabled by infirmityFrom attending to public affairs ;on account of which, in compliance withthe wishes of his constituents, he resignedhis seat, in 1817. He died onthe 4th of July, in the following year,leaving ten children, among whom hebequeathed property to the amount of200,000. He was, it is said, at onetime, the best whist-player in London ;and prior to any important match,mortified his appetite with a view toensure a perfect command over hisfeelings and faculties. His passion forplay never appears to have diverted himfrom the performance of his variousTHE SENATE.important duties as a senator, a magistrate,and a man of business. Reactedfor some time as lieutenant-colonel ofthe Lydgate volunteers ; distinguishedhimself as a member of the Whig Club ;and, in conjunction with his brotherand another gentleman, originated thefirm of Combe, Delafield, and Co.,whose celebrated establishment beingone day visited, it is said, by theDuke and Duchess of York, and theDuke of Cambridge, a table was laidout, covered with clean hop-sacks, inthe centre of the brew house, and theroyal guests were regaled with brownstout, in wooden vessels ; and rump-steaks,broiled by the stoker, morequorum, on his shovel, and served uponpewter trenchers.PONSONBY, (GEORGE,) third sonof the Honourable John Ponsonby,speaker of the Irish house of commons,was born in Ireland, on the 5th of March,1755. After having spent some timeat Cambridge, he became a student atlaw ; in 1780, he was called to theIrish bar; and, subsequently, althoughhis love of the chase is said to haveinterfered with his professional pursuits,he obtained a silk gown, and thelucrative appointment of counsel to therevenue commissioners, of which hewas subsequently deprived by the Marquessof Buckingham. He then becamea member of the Whig Club, anda vehement parliamentary opponent togovernment. When his friends werecalled to office, in 1806, he was madelord chancellor of Ireland ; but, losinghis post on their dismissal, he returnedto the ranks of opposition, of which hebecame a very distinguished leader.During a debate, in the year 1817, hewas attacked by a paralytic fit, anddied, on the 8th of July, in that year;leaving, by his wife, a daughter of theEarl of Gainsborough, one child, whowas married to a son of Lord Finally.He was a man of unsullied honour, andliberal disposition; amiable in privatelife, and respected, perhaps, more thanhe was admired, as a senator. In aclever parody on Moore's song of, " Oh !believe me, if all those endearing youngcharms, &c." his name has been thusintroduced :And Ponsonby leaves the debate when he lets,Just as dark as it was when he rose.LEGGE, (GEORGE, Earl of Dartmouth,)was born on the 3rd of October,1755, and completed his educationat Christchurch, Oxford, wherehe took the honorary degree of M. A.in 1775, during which year he becamemember for Plymouth. In 1780, hewas returned for Staffordshire, andwarmly supported the coalition. In1782, he was appointed a lord of thebedchamber to the Prince of Wales;and, in the following year, obtained aseat at the board of admiralty ; which,however, he lost, on the dismissal ofFox and Lord North. In June, 1801,he was called to the upper house, bythe title of Baron Dartmouth ; and, inthe following month, succeeded to hisfather's earldom. During the sameyear, he was made president of theboard of control; in 1802, steward ofhis majesty's household ; and, in 1804,lord chamberlain. His health compelledhim, in 1807, to resign the commandof the Loyal Birmingham Volunteers,which he had for some time held ; andhe died, at his seat in Cornwall, on the2nd of November, 1810. He appearsto have been a man of considerableability ; and it has been said of him,that he possessed all the virtues of hisancestor, whom Charles the First wasaccustomed to call "Honest Will Legge."Hutchinson, (RICHARD Held,Earl of Donoughmore,) was born inIreland, on the 29th of January, 1756,and educated at Eton, Oxford, andTrinity college, Dublin, of which hisfather was provost. He entered thearmy at an early age, but distinguishedhimself rather as a senator than asoldier. Having obtained a seat in theIrish house of commons, he commencedhis career, as a parliamentary orator,in 1778, by speaking, with much force,in support of a bill for removing theprohibition on catholics from takinglong leases. "If those whom I advocate,"said he, on this occasion, " areformidable, chain them to the land, bypassing this bill, and you will bind themclosely to the state." In 1781, he wasappointed a commissioner of the customs; and, on the death of his mother,in 1788, he succeeded to the barony ofDonoughmore. In 1794, he raised, itis said, with amazing rapidity, tworegiments of foot, the ninety-fourthApple Nix.and the hundred-and-twelfth ; of thelatter he was appointed lieutenant-colonel,and subsequently rose to therank of lieutenant-general in the army.In reply to an address of condolencefrom the Roman catholics, on thedeath of his father, in 1795, he said,You have adopted my family andmyself as your hereditary advocates:it is our post of honour, and we willnot desert it." He was created ViscountSuirdale, in 1797; appointed tothe command of the Cork legion, on thebreaking out of the rebellion ; raised tothe earldom of Donoughmore, in 1800 jelected one of the Irish representativepeers shortly afterwards ; made a privy-counsellor,and joint postmaster-generalfor Ireland, in 1806 ; and created apeer of the united kingdom, by dietitle of Viscount Hutchinson, of Knock-lofty,in 1821. He died at the houseof his brother and heir, Lord Hutchinson,the successor of Abercrombie inEgypt, on the 22nd of August, 1825,deeply regretted by the Irish catholics,who had, for a long period, consideredhim their most eloquent, zealous, andindefatigable advocate in the house oflords. To him their general petitionshad usually been confided ; he hadenergetically supported every measurebrought forward for their relief, anddied, it is said, in the discharge of hisduty as their hereditary champion ;having brought over their petition, in1825, in direct opposition to the solemnadvice of his physicians ; to whom, ontheir telling him that the journey wouldcertainly prove fatal, he replied, " Ican meet no death so honourable oragreeable." Throughout his career, asaBritish senator, he appears to haveacted with the popular party, exceptwith regard to the bill of pains andpenalties against Queen Caroline, ofwhose guilt he seems to have felt decidedlyconvinced.ABBOT, (CHARLES, Lord Colchester,)was born at Abingdon, in 1757,and elected from Westminster schoolchristchurch, Oxford, in 1775. Twoyears afterwards, he gained a prize foraLatin poem on the Czar Peter,which also procured him a gold medalfrom the Empress of Russia. For sometimehe studied civil law, at Geneva ;and, in due course, after his returnto this country, was called to the bar,at which he practised with considerablesuccess. In 1795, he enteredparliament, as member for Nelson ;and, after having rendered himself particularlyconspicuous by his ferventsupport of the seditious meetings' bill,he was appointed chairman of thefinance committee. In 1801, he broughtforward the population bill; and, onthe formation of the Addington cabinetwas appointed chief secretary forIreland, and keeper of the privy-seal.He had already commenced a reformin the Irish government offices, when hewas elected speaker of the house ofcommons. He gave his casting voteagainst Lord Melville, in 1805; and,during the debate on the relief bill, in1815, spoke warmly against the clausefor admitting catholics to the legislature.Two years after, a severeattack of epilepsy compelled him toresign the chair ; on which occasion hewas called to the house of peers, by thetitle of Baron Colchester, and granteda pension of 4,000 a-year. He subsequentlyresided for some time on thecontinent, for the benefit of his health ;and, in 1827, paid a visit to Scotland,where he had the satisfaction of witnessingthe benefits produced by theSociety for the Improvement of theHighlands, of which he had, manyyears before, been nominated chairman.He died on the 8th of May,1829, leaving two sons, by his wife,Elizabeth, daughter of Sir Philip Gibbet,Baronet. With him originated theroyal record commission ; the institutionof a private bill-office ; and animprovement in the printing of votes.He was a man of sound practical abilities; and, while speaker, greatly facilitatedthe progress of public business,by his energy and skill. His officialspeeches to those naval and militaryofficers, who were honoured with thethanks of parliament during the timethat he filled the chair, are designatedas masterpieces of that style of oratoricalcomposition to which they belong.A collection of them has been published,for private distribution, since his decease.He edited six of his ownspeeches on the catholic question ; and,while at the bar, printed a work,entitled, The Practice of the ChesterCircuit, in the preface to which heTHE SENATE.suggested various improvements inWelsh judicature, which have sincebeen carried into effect.SPENCER, (GEORGE JOHN, EarlSpencer,) was born on the 1st of September,1758, and educated at Harrowschool, and Trinity college, Cambridge.He obtained the degree of M. A. in1778; and, subsequently, at both universities,that of D. C. L. After havingperformed the grand tour, he was returnedto parliament, in 1780, as memberfor Northampton ; and, joining theWhig party against Lord North, became,on the accession to power of theMarquess of Rockingham, a lord-commissionerof the treasury. Shortlyafterwards, he abandoned his borough,for which he had been again elected,on being chosen one of the representativesof the county of Surrey. In1783, he succeeded to his father's earldom; and, in the house of lords, distinguishedhimself as a staunch Whig,until the breaking out of the Frenchrevolution, when, with other alarmistsof his party, he gave his support toMr. Pitt; by whom, in 1794, he wasmade first lord of the admiralty. In1795, he was elected a brother, and,four years after, master, of the Trinityhouse. About the same time, he receivedthe insignia of a knight of theGarter; and, in 1800, resigned his officeof first lord of the admiralty, on beingappointed lord privy seal. He retiredwith Pitt, in 1801, and appears to haveheld no post under government untilFox and Lord Grenville coalesced, in1806; when, on their being called tothe direction of public affairs, he wasappointed secretary of state for thehome department; and, shortly afterwards,one of the commissioners of inquiryas to the conduct of the Princessof Wales. He was dismissed, with hisfriends, on the failure of their attempt toprocure catholic emancipation, of whichhe appears to have been a most zealousand consistent supporter. He has alsodistinguished himself as an advocate forthe repeal of the test and corporationacts ; and for the removal of all unduerestraints on civil and religious liberty.Much praise has been accorded to himas a patron of literature and the arts :he was one of the most conspicuousmembers of the Roxburgh club, duringits zenith ; and has formed a most rareand costly library, of which an accountis extant, in three volumes, by the celebratedFrognall Dibdin, his librarian.He married, in the year 1781, LadyLatina Bingham, daughter of Charles,first Earl Lucan, by whom he has severalchildren.MAITLAND, (JAMES, Earl of Lauderdale,)was born in 1759, and educatedat the universities of Edinburghand Glasgow, under the superintendenceof the celebrated Andrew Dalzell,with whom he made a tour on the continent.On his return to England, heobtained a seat in parliament for theScotch burghs of Lauder, Jedburgh,&c.and immediately attached himself tothe party headed by Fox and LordNorth. In 1787, he was nominatedone of the managers of the impeachmentagainst Warren Hastings ; and,in 1789, after having highly distinguishedhimself by a speech in favourof the abolition of the slave trade, hesucceeded to his father's earldom andestates. Vacating his seat in the houseof commons, he was soon afterwardselected one of the representative pee rsof Scotland. In 1792, he visited Paris,with Dr. Moore ; and, while there,formed a close intimacy with Bristol,who headed the moderate republicans.On his return to this country, he opposedhostilities against France withsuch vehemence, and became so virulentan antagonist to ministers, that meanswere adopted to preclude his return tothe house of lords at the next electionof representative peers. He now becamea citizen of London, having purchasedhis freedom from the needle-makers'company ; and attempted, butwithout effect, to procure the shrievalty.His ultimate object, which, however,he did not attain, apparently was, byabandoning his peerage, to obtain a seatin the house of commons. During thebrief ascendancy of his party, in 1806,he was intrusted with the great seal ofScotland, sworn of the privy-council,raised to the British peerage, nominatedambassador to Paris, where heappears to have been duped and insultedby Buonaparte and Talleyrand ;and, but for the dismissal of his friends,he would, it is supposed, have beenappointed governor-general of India.APPENDIX.Although he is said to have enjoyed theenure confidence of the Princess Charlotte,he was hostile to her mother ; afact, which, according to his biographers,is altogether inexplicable. He has opposedthe measures of all the Tory administrations,since the commencementof his public career, and advocated popularopinions with great zeal, and considerabletalent, but with an impetuosityof temper that has often neutralizedhis efforts. He has published severalpieces on finance, paper currency, andthe affairs of India ; the most importantof which is, An Inquiry into the Natureand Origin of Public Wealth, firstprinted in 1804. He was married, in'1782, to Eleanor, daughter of AnthonyTodd, Esq., secretary of the post-office,by whom he has a son.PRATT, (JOHN jEFFREYs,Marquessof Camden,) son of the Lord ChancellorCamden, was born on the llth ofFebruary, 1759, and completed hiseducation at Trinity college, Cambridge,where he obtained the honorarydegree of M. A. He became a memberof the house of commons, in 1780;and, during the same year, one ofthe tellers of the exchequer. In 1782,he was appointed a lord of the admiralty; and shortly afterwards, while hisfriend, Pitt, was in office, a commissionerof the treasury. In April, 1794,he succeeded to his father's earldom,and, soon afterwards, accepted the vicegerencyof Ireland, which he governedwith considerable energy and prudence,during one of the most turbulent periodsin the history of that country.In 1804, he was made secretary of statefor the war department; and, in 1805,lord-president of the council. He resignedhis office on the death of Pitt,but resumed it on the downfal of theGrenville administration. In September,1812, he was created Marquess Camdenand Earl Brecknock ; and, soon afterwards,in consequence of the clamourraised against those who held valuablesinecures under government, he set anoble example, by resigning, for thepublic benefit, between 30,000 and40,000 per annum, out of the emolumentsof his exchequer eldership. Byhis wife, Frances, only daughter andheiress of William Molesworth, Esq.,he has four children. He is lord-lieutenant,custos-rotulorum, and vice-admiralof the county of Kent, andrecorder of Bath. The following anecdoteis related of him ; for the truth ofwhich it would, however, be imprudentto vouch : Conceiving the brown hueof a windmill, that had recently receiveda coat of pitch, to mar the effectof an otherwise picturesque view fromhis residence, he obtained the miller'spermission to change its colour; anddirected one of his tradesmen to paintit white, on that side only whichfronted his estate. A few hours afterwards,he was told that his orders hadbeen executed ; but, the next day, perceivingthe mill to be still brown, hesent for the painter, whom he reprimandedwith great warmth for havingdeceived him ; nor could his indignationbe appeased until he was informed,that the wind having changed duringthe night, the mill, presented a differentside to that which, in obedience tohis lordship's commands, had been carefullywhitened in the course of the precedingafternoon.RYDER, (DUDLEY, Earl of Harrowby,)was born on the 22nd of December,1762, and proceeded to the degreesofM.A.and LL.D., at St. John's college,Cambridge. After having been for sometimeunder-secretary to the Duke ofLeeds, he went into parliament, asmember for Tiverton, and warmly supportedthe measures brought forwardby Pitt, to whom, in his duel withTierney, he acted as second. Prior tosucceeding to the title of his father, thefirst Lord Harrowby, in 1803, he had,successively, been made comptroller ofthe household, joint paymaster of theforces, treasurer of the navy, and amember of the board of control. In1804, he accepted the foreign secretaryship;which, however, he soonafterwards exchanged, on account ofillness, for the less laborious post ofchancellor of the duchy of Lancaster.His next official employment was in thecapacity of ambassador to the court ofBerlin, where he succeeded so far inthe object of his mission as to procurethe assent of Prussia to an offensivetreaty with Great Britain, whichwas actually prepared for signature,when the battle of Austerlitz totallychanged the prospects of our proposedTHE SENATE.ally, and the peace of Pressure ensued.During the Fox and Grenville administrationhe held no office ; but, on itsdismissal, he was appointed president ofthe board of control ; and, in 1809, wascreated Viscount Wanton and Earl ofHarrowby. In the following year, hewarmly supported a grant of 10,000to the poor clergy ; declaring, that, inremote villages, their pay did not exceedthat of common labourers; and adding,that the pluralists would always befound among the richer divines, theincumbent of one large living beingmuch more likely, from his station andconnexions, to obtain another, than theincumbent of a small one. In 1812,he succeeded Lord Sidmouth as presidentof the council ; and, in 1819, hewas placed at the head of the secretcommittee, appointed to inquire intothe affairs of the bank of England. Inthe next year, he sanctioned the introductionof the bill of pains and penaltiesagainst Queen Caroline, but strenuouslyprotested against the divorce clausewhich it contained. He continued inoffice during the premiership of Canning,and that of his successor, LordGoderich, but retired on the formationof the Wellington cabinet. As aspeaker, says a cotemporary writer, LordHarrowby has been forcible, thoughnot piquant ; his deportment has beeneminently urbane ; and his conduct, onthe whole, even in the opinion of thosewho are opposed to him in politics,decidedly meritorious. He was married,in 1795, to Lady Susan LessonGower, daughter of the first Marquessof Stafford, by whom he has issue.Watchman, (ROBERT,) a nativeof Wrexham, North Wales, was bornof humble parentage, in 1764. Becomingan orphan when only a fewmonths old, he was placed at the schoolof a Mr. Moore, by his uncle ; on whosedeath, about 1778, he obtained a situationat Reading, whence he proceededto London, and entered into the serviceof a respectable linen-draper, withwhom he continued until he became ofage. He then entered into business, atthe south end of Fleet-market, whence,some years after, he removed to thecorner of Bridge-street. He appearsto have commenced his political careerin 1794, when he brought forward aseries of resolutions, at a common-hall,animadverting upon the war with revolutionizedFrance, and enforcing thenecessity of a reform in parliament.In 1818, after having been defeatedon several previous occasions, he obtainedhis election as one of therepresentatives of the city of London ;and, shortly afterwards, became aldermanof the ward of Warrington Without.On the 25th of January, 1819, hemade his maiden speech in parliament,on the presentment of a petition prayingfor a revision of the criminal code,the existing state of which he severelycensured. On the 1st of the followingmonth, he took occasion to declare hishostility to a renewal of the insolventdebtors' act ; the effect of which hadbeen, as he contended, to break downthe fair trader, to encourage vice,to give a deadly blow to commercialconfidence, and even to supersede thetrial by jury. During the same year,he supported Mr. Surges Bourne'smotion for investigating the poor-laws ;that of Mr. D. W. Harvey, for inquiryinto exchequer prosecutions ;that of Sir F. Burdett, for parliamentaryreform ; and that of Sir W. DeCrespigny, for a committee to ascertainthe practicability of adopting Mr.Owen's system with advantage; butopposed the insolvent debtors' bill, thebill to amend the clergy act, the foreignenlistment bill, and the seditiousmeetings' bill. Towards the close of thesame year, the court of aldermen commencedproceedings against him forhaving obstructed the election of a lord-mayor.Shortly afterwards, parliamentwas dissolved ; and, at the next generalelection, he was one of the unsuccessfulcandidates for the city of London, althoughhe polled above four thousandvotes. On the 10th of June, 1820, therule obtained against him in the Courtof King's Bench, by his brother aldermen,was discharged with costs. Afortnight afterwards, he became sheriffof London and Middlesex ; in whichcapacity, on the day of the queen'sfuneral, he rendered himself particularlyconspicuous ; and, it is said, wasassaulted by the soldiery, while endeavouringto preserve the peace, atKnightsbridge. In October, 1823, hewas chosen lord-mayor; and, in July,1826, again became one of the cityAPPENDIX.members. On the opening of parliament,in November, he animadvertedupon the dangerous consequences ofthe bubble companies ; and, in thefollowing month, brought forward amotion, for inquiring into the conductof such members of parliament as hadbeen connected with them. On the25th of February, 1828, he contendedagainst a proposition for increasing thearmy ; on the 30th of June, he opposedthe additional churches' bill; and, inFebruary, 1830, on moving for certainaccounts relative to British and colonialproduce, he maintained, that, in consequenceof existing systems, the exporttrade of this country had diminishedto an alarming extent. AldermanWatchman is said to have made a considerablefortune by business, fromwhich he retired, some years ago, infavour of his sons. His wife, whom hemarried about the year 1786, died in1827.Creeper, (THOMAS,) was bornabout the year 1767, and took the degreesof B. A. and M. A. at Queen'scollege, Cambridge. After having beencalled to the bar, and practised, it issaid, for some time in India, he wentinto parliament as member for Thetford.In March, 1802, he voted in the minority,on Mr. Calcraft's motion as tothe embarrassments of the Prince ofWales. In 1804, he supported the motionfor an inquiry into the conduct ofthe Irish government ; moved for documentsrelative to the hostilities againstCeylon ; and opposed the additionalforce bill. In 1805, he animadvertedupon the appointment of Mr. Fordyceto a new office, after that individualhad become largely indebted to government;voted with those who broughtforward the charges against Lord Melville; and opposed the bill for grantingcompensation to the Duke of Athol,relative to the Isle of Man. He subsequentlyassisted in drawing up thearticles of impeachment against LordMelville; and, during the Fox andGrenville administration, acted as secretaryto the commissioners for conductingthe affairs of India. In 1808. he opposeda motion for lending 1,200.000 jto the East India company, and deprecatedthe erection of new buildings inHyde park. In the next year, hecalled for the production of papers,relative to the Duke of Gloucester'sannuity ; and attempted, but withouteffect, to carry a vote of censure againstthe lords of the treasury, for grantinga crown lease, which, as he stated, wasworth 9.000, to the president of theboard of control. In 1810, he censuredthe licensing system ; supported the petitionfrom Westminster, praying forthe enlargement of Sir Francis Burdett;and brought forward a motionfor the production of correspondencerelative to the disturbances in India.In 1811, he endeavoured to procurecopies of documents to be laid beforethe house, as to certain proceedings inthe civil courts of Madras. In 1812, heopposed the additional grants to theprincesses; censured Lord Glenberviefor having, as surveyor-general, madeagreements with himself, as proprietorof the Regent's canal ; and called theattention of the house to the fellowshipsof the exchequer, the yearly emolumentsof each of which, as he stated,although the duty was performed bydeputy, exceeded ths total amount ofpensions granted for highly meritoriousservices to Nelson, Wellington, Duncan,and St Vincent. Having, in the earlypart of 1813, been sentenced to pay afine of 100 for a libel on an inspector-generalof taxes, and the court of King'sBench having declared, that his privilegeas a member of parliament didnot protect him from being prosecutedfor what he said or published out ofthe house, he brought forward a motionon the subject, on the 25th of June, inthat year; which, however, on the suggestionof Lord Castlereagh, he consentedto withdraw. In 1814, he movedfor the production of a letter, written bythe president of the board of control, tothe directors of the East India company,recommending the revival and augmentationof the expired pensions to theMarquess Wellesley and others. In1818, and again in 1820, he was returnedmember for Appleby. During the progressof the bill of pains and penaltiesagainst Queen Caroline, he declared theinjustice of the measure to be so great,that the evidence went for nothing.He subsequently opposed a motion forthe house to resolve itself into a committeeof supply, because nothing hadbeen done with a view to retrenchingTHE SENATE.the public expenditure ; animadvertedupon the act by which the king wasenabled to remunerate persons holdinghigh offices ; contended that provisionought to be made for the catholic priesthoodout of the funds of the protestantchurch ; and supported, with much zealandtalent, various economical, tolerant,and popular measures.Paul, (JAMES,) the son of a clothierand tailor, was born at Perth, in1770 ; and, after concluding his educationat the university of St. Andrew's,was articled to an attorney in his nativeplace ; but soon abandoned the law,and went out, as a writer, to India;where, in less than two years, he acquiredsufficient to remit home the expencesof his outfit, and to allow hismother, then a widow, a small annuity,which he increased as his circumstancesimproved. After an absence of fourteenyears, he revisited this country,but soon returned to India; and was,for some time, employed at Lucknow ;where, being permitted to trade forhimself, he acquired considerable property,and attained such importance,as to become a delegate, from a respectablebody of merchants, to theMarquess Wellesley, then governor-general,with whom, it is said, he hadthe honour of a familiar correspondence.Some misunderstanding, however, atlength arose between them, in consequenceof which he returned to England,in 1804, and, as it is stated, became a frequentvisitor to the Prince of Wales. In1805, he obtained a seat in parliament,and immediately rendered himself conspicuous,by severely animadvertingupon the conduct of Lord Wellesley, inIndia; declaring, on a motion for paperswhich he made, preliminary to hisintended proposition for an impeachment,that, during the administrationof the marquess, India had been delugedwith blood, its princes dethroned,its ancient families ruined, and thespoils of our nearest allies added to theresources of the company. Althoughabandoned, as he stated, by the Whigs,who had promised him their assistance,and disappointed in his hopes of obtainingthe support of an exalted personage,on which, as he declared, he hadbeen induced to rely, he persevered inhis fruitless hostility to the marquess,until parliament was dissolved. At theensuing general election, he became acandidate for Westminster in oppositionto Sheridan; and being unsuccessful,presented a petition against the highbailiff's return ; which, however, wasdismissed. On the next dissolutionof parliament, he called a meeting ofhis friends at the Crown and Anchortavern, by an advertisement, in whichhe stated, that Sir Francis Burdett(who had contributed j6l,000 towardsthe expenses of his proposed measuresagainst Lord Wellesley) would takethe chair. Sir Francis, however, whocontemplated becoming a candidate forWestminster himself, disclaimed allprevious knowledge of the meeting: anangry correspondence ensued; and, atlength, a duel took place between theparties, in which both were wounded.At the election, Sir Francis obtaineda large majority over Mr. Paulll, whopresented a petition, which proved unsuccessful,against the return. He thenpublished a pamphlet, animadvertingon the conduct of his opponent ; who,however, made no reply, nor ever afterwards,as it appears, spoke of Mr. Paulllwith disrespect. The latter had, bythis time, dissipated the greater part ofhis fortune in election expenses, in supportinghis petitions, and in the prosecutionof his charges against LordWellesley : his reason had also becomeaffected by his disappointments, andthe failure of some commercial speculationsin which he had embarked. Onthe 14th of April, 1808, he is said tohave lost upwards of one thousandsix hundred guineas, at a gaming-house,in Pall Mall ; and, in the courseot the next afternoon, he committed suicide.This unfortunate man, whosechief characteristics appear to have beenindomitable perseverance, and extraordinaryardour of temperament, is reportedto have said, a few days beforehe put an end to his existence, " WhenI die, and I shall soon, I trust thatmy body will be conveyed to the EastIndies, and be there blown up !"WOOD, (MATTHEW,) the son of atradesman, was born at Tiverton, inDevonshire, about the year 1770. Afterhaving been for some time a commercialtraveller, he entered into partnershipwith an opulent gentleman,APPENDIX.named Wigan, and began business, asadruggist, in the neighbourhood ofFalcon-square, Cripplegate. He became,successively, common-councils,deputy, and alderman of theward in which he resided ; in 1809,sheriff of London and Middlesex; and,in 1817, chief magistrate of the metropolis; in which station he conductedhimself so much to the satisfactionof his fellow-citizens, that, inthe following year, he was re-elected tothe civic chair; and, during his secondmayoralty, obtained his return to parliament,as one of the city members.Early in 1818, he moved for a selectcommittee to inquire into the state ofthe metropolitan prisons ; and, shortlyafterwards, presented a petition fromthe corporation, against the indemnitymeasure. On the 16th of March, hebrought forward a bill for erecting abridge across the Thames, at Otherswhich, however, he declined tosupport, unless some compensation wereafforded to the watermen ; and in April,he spoke and voted in favour of theabolition of what were termed, blood-moneyrewards. At the election forthe city of London, in August, he wasplaced at the head of the poll. InMarch, 1819, he supported Mr. Littleton'smotion against lotteries; and afew months afterwards, obtained leaveto bring in a bill, (which was afterwardsthrown out,) to enable the Duke ofKent to dispose of his property, atCastlebar, by way of lottery, for thepurpose of paying his creditors. Duringthe same session, he opposed the grantfor the aid of persons emigrating tothe Cape ; and supported Sir FrancisBurdett's motion in favour of parliamentaryreform. In 1820, he movedfor a secret committee to inquire intothe conduct of Edwards, the politicalspy ; and, during the same year, renderedhimself particularly conspicuous,by his zealous exertions on behalf ofQueen Caroline ; to whom, after havingaccompanied her to this country, fromSt. Omer, he resigned his hous-.', in SouthA audley-street. His daughter, also, officiatedas a maid of honour to her majesty;whose remains he attended totheir place of sepulture, at Brunswick.In 1822, he presented a petition fromMr. Henry Hunt, respecting his closeconfinement in Rochester gaol ; andopposed Mr. Brougham's motion for thesecond reading of the beer bill. Hispopularity had so much decreased, in1826, that, at the election in that year,he was last on the poll of the membersreturned for the city. In 1828, he becamean active supporter of the LondonUniversity ; and presented a completeset of journals of the house of commonsto the committee appointed to form alibrary for the use of the corporation.During the same year, he opposed thebuilding of additional churches ; and,shortly before the demise of Georgethe Fourth, obtained leave to bring inabill for the purpose of preventing theincrease of canine madness. AldermanWood has distinguished himself as asteady advocate of reform, retrenchment,and other liberal measures. Heis said to have realized a considerablefortune by his fortunate speculations inhops.HUME, (JOSEPH,) was born at Aberdeen,in the year 1777 ; and, afterhaving received a moderately goodeducation, was apprenticed to a medicalpractitioner, for the term of five years.At the expiration of that period, he proceededto the university of Edinburgh.About the age of twenty-three, he joinedthe British army, under Lord Lake,then engaged in the Mahratta war, asan assistant-surgeon. He now devotedhis leisure time to the study of theeastern languages, with such success,that, on Colonel Auchmuty being attackedby severe indisposition, he wasselected to succeed that officer as interpreterto the forces. The assiduityand skill which he displayed, in thisimportant office, not only procured himunqualified approbation, but severallucrative situations ; so that, on hisreturn to England, in 1808, he is saidto have been in rather opulent circumstances.To recruit his health he nowresided, for some time, at Bath andCheltenham ; and, subsequently, visitedPortugal and Greece. In 1812, heobtained a seat in the house of commons,for the borough of Weymouth ;and, shortly afterwards, brought forwardseveral motions relative to theadministration of justice in India. Atthe next general election, he was anunsuccessful candidate for the royalburghs of Montrose, &c. ; for which,THE SENATE.however, he was returned in 1820,and continued to represent them until1826, when he became member forAberdeen. During the proceedingsagainst Queen Caroline, he renderedhimself conspicuous, as one of her majesty'sactive supporters ; and, subsequently,acquired considerable reputation,by his severe and perseveringinvestigation of the public accounts,and his constant exertions to reducethe national expenditure. Among hismultitudinous labours in parliament, itis proper to notice, his attempt to precludecivil officers in the ordnancefrom voting for members of parliament;his thirty-eight resolutions onthe financial circumstances of the country,censuring the borrowing system,and the sinking fund ; his propositionto abolish tithes in Ireland, and to providefor the clergy out of the rental ofthe church-lands ; his hostility to thecontinuation of the vice-regal office inthat kingdom ; his motion in favour ofthe Ionian Islands; his defence of arepeal of the combination laws, on theground that masters, for the most part,were oppressive to their workmen ; hisopposition to the building of additionalchurches ; his support of the catholicrelief bill, and of the repeal of the testand corporation acts.HORNER, (FRANCIS,) the son of alinen-draper, was born at Edinburgh,on the 12th of August, 1778. Fromthe high-school, at which he hadgreatly distinguished himself, he proceededto the university of his nativecity, where, under the roof of DugaldStewart, he formed a close intimacywith Lord Henry Petty; who, on becomingchancellor of the exchequer, in1806, procured his return for theborough of St. Ives. At the next election,he lost his seat ; and, becoming alaw-student, was, in due time, called tothe bar. On the resignation of ViscountMason, he succeeded that nobleman,as member for Wendover ; and was,about the same time, nominated a commissionerfor investigating the claimson the nabob of Ascot. In 1810, hebecame a member of the celebratedbullion committee, whose report hesubsequently brought up ; and, withconsiderable eloquence, unsuccessfullyurged a return to cash payments. Hesupported Alderman Combe's motionto pass a vote of censure on ministers,for having obstructed an address to hismajesty, from the lord-mayor and corporationof the city of London; and, onthe regency question being discussed,proposed the appointment of a regentby address, rather than by bill, because,as he contended, by the lattermode, parliament would usurp the legislativepower of the crown, and, by agross and illegal fiction, steal the semblanceof an assent, where there couldbe no negative. During the debate, in1812, relative to the two fellowships ofthe exchequer, he made seven distinctmotions on the subject, with a view toconfine those sinecures to fixed annualsums, all of which, were, however, negatived.He distinguished himself onvarious other occasions, and applied soclosely to public business, and privatestudy, that his constitution became seriouslyimpaired. In the hope of derivingbenefit from a warmer climate,he proceeded to France, and thence toItaly ; but died at Pisa, in February,1817. He was one of the earliest andmost able writers in the EdinburghReview ; a chaste, correct, and forciblespeaker; a respectable scholar, a deepthinker, a close reasoner, and a mostamiable man.SPENCER, (JOHN CHARLES, ViscountAlthorpe,) eldest son of EarlSpencer, was born on the 30th of May,1782, and completed his education atTrinity college, Cambridge, where heobtained the honorary degree of M. A.At the age of twenty-one, he becamemember for Northampton ; and, on thedeath of Pitt, offered himself as a candidatefor the representation of theuniversity of Cambridge ; but lost theelection by a large majority. In thesame year, (1806.) after a very severestruggle, he obtained his return forNorthamptonshire ; and, during theFox and Grenville administration, heldoffice as a lord of the treasury. Atthe next general election, he was againreturned for the county of Northampton,which he represented in every succeedingparliament, up to the demise ofGeorge the Fourth. In March, 1809,during a debate on the evidence takenwith regard to the conduct of the Dukeof York, he proposed the followingAPPENDIX.amendment, to a motion brought forwardby Mr. Bathurst, namely: "thatthe duke having resigned, the housedid not think it necessary to proceedfurther," &c. ; observing, that the resignationof the commander-in-chief oughtto occasion no regret, as his royal highnesshad previously lost the confidenceof the country ; and adding, that he(Lord Althorpe) was averse to peopleof high rank holding responsible situations.In May, 1810, in reply toMr. Banks, who had declared thatsinecures ought not to be abolished, hemaintained that they were not only anunfit reward for public services, butthat none were ever vacant when meritoriousindividuals had powerful claimson the tangible gratitude of the country.In June, 1812, he opposed the additionaltax on leather, because it wouldfall chiefly on the poor, and especiallyon agricultural labourers ; and, in May,1813, he supported a bill, to repeal theacts imposing an additional duty onhides and skins. In April, 1815, hevoted in favour of an amendment onthe subject of Buonaparte's escape fromElba, praying the Prince Regent topreserve the peace of Europe ; and, inthe following month, moved for a committeeto inquire as to the expenditureof the sum of 100,000, granted to hisroyal highness by way of outfit. In1816, he presented, and supported, apetition from Northampton, prayingfor a reduction of the peace establishment; strenuously urged the necessityof economy, to which, he said, ministersstood pledged ; and moved for acommittee to ascertain what diminutionin the public expenditure had takenplace since 1798. In 1817, he supporteda motion for an address to thethrone, praying for a reduction of thenumber of the lords of the admiralty;opposed the suspension of the habeascorpus act ; deprecated the maintenanceof a large standing army in time ofpeace ; brought in a bill to abolish theadditional duty on leather; protestedagainst the continuation of the alienact ; and opposed the additional grantof .(5,000 per annum to the Duke ofKent. In 1819, he moved for an inquiryas to the state of the nation ; andopposed the adoption of Mr. Owen'splan for improving the condition ofthe poor. In 1820, he attempted, butwithout effect, to ameliorate the insolventdebtors' act ; and supported amotion for an inquiry as to the countervailingduties on British goods, importedby Ireland. In 1822, he repeatedlyurged a mitigation of thepublic burthens. In the following year,he moved for a repeal of the foreignenlistment bill, maintaining that neutralitywas the most prudent policy ;and opposed a renewal of the Irish insurrectionact. In 1824, he endeavouredto obtain a committee of inquiry as tothe general state of that country, allcoercive measures against which hevehemently deprecated ; and broughtforward a bill for facilitating the recoveryof small debts. In 1825, he opposed thesuppression of the catholic association ;and, in 1827, supported Canning's projectrelative to the corn laws. In 1828,Lord Goderich, in opposition to thewishes of Mr. Herries, appears to havebeen desirous of appointing him chairmanof a contemplated committee offinance. During the same year, hemoved the first reading of the bill torepeal the test and corporation acts ;and opposed the grant of 2,000 perannum to the family of Canning. In1829, he expressed his warm approbationat the course adopted by theWellington cabinet, with regard to thecatholic claims ; and opposed Mr.Hume's motion for resolving the houseinto a committee on the corn laws.On the 19th of February, 1830, hedeclared, that, in his opinion, the reductionsproposed by the chancellor ofthe exchequer would be of but littleavail to the people; and, on the 15th ofMarch, when the budget was produced,he protested against subjecting the nationto additional burthens, for the sakeof supporting the sinking fund. Thelast act of his career, during the reignof George the Fourth, was to supportMr. Hume's motion for abolishing thelord-lieutenancy of Ireland, on theground that, in consequence of the facilityof communication, the sister kingdomstood no more in need of a separategovernment than any of the northerncounties. He was married, in 1804,to Esther, daughter of Richard Ack-hom, Esq. who died in child-bed, aboutfour years afterwards.DISSENTERS.POMFRET, (SAMUEL,) was born atCoventry, in 1650, and proceeded, at aproper age, from the grammar-schoolof his native city to the university ofCambridge ; but, as it is said, the tendernessof his conscience not allowinghim to comply with the customs therepractised, he removed to Dr. Button'stheological academy, at Islington, wherehe completed his studies. At the ageof nineteen, while plunged in thedeepest grief, by the death of hismother, he believed himself to be speciallyconverted, but regretted " thathe had not been called" at an earlierperiod of his life, frequently repeatingthe exclamation of St. Austin, " fiery teainavl, Domine /" Unwilling to preachbefore he had arrived at manhood, hebecame chaplain to Sir William Dyer,whom, however, he soon quitted ; and,feeling anxious to see the world, embarkedfor Smyrna, on board a merchantman,which being attacked bytwo Algerine vessels, in the Mediterranean,he was requested to go below,by the captain, to whom he replied :They are the enemies of Christ andhis kingdom : I will remain on deck,and live and die by you." It isadded, that he behaved with great gallantryduring the action, which terminatedin the defeat of the corsairs.Soon after his arrival at Smyrna, beingrequested to read the burial serviceover a child of the English consul, hestated, that as he could not conform tothe established church in his own country,he must be excused from adoptingits ritual abroad. "If, however," added,he, " the consul will admit of my servicesin my own way, I am ready togive them." His offer being accepted,he delivered so affecting a discourseover the child's grave, that, at its conclusion,the consul exclaimed, " If thisbeyour way, I judge it preferable to myown." He had, it appears, embarked50 in a venture of hats, all of which,however, he gave away to the sailors,on condition " that they should no moreprofane the name of God." On hisreturn to England, he collected a congregationin the metropolis, which hequitted, by invitation, to become pastorof a more numerous flock, at Sandwich,where he officiated for aboutseven years. Being persecuted, as anon-conformist, he then returned toLondon, and gradually formed an importantconnexion, first in Winchester-street,and, afterwards, in Gravel-lane,Houndsditch. Enthusiastic as Whitefield,he wore out a strong constitutionby his incessant labours for the advancementof Calvinism. When notengaged in his ministerial labours, hewas usually occupied in reading ormeditation, for the purpose of improvinghis utility as a pastor. He had, itis said, a marvellous way of strikingthe consciences of sinners, and fewcould attend his preaching withoutbeing greatly affected. Shortly beforehis decease, which took place on thellth of January, 1722, he invited afriend " to come and see a dying man,under exquisite pains, and yet notafraid to die."CLARKE, (MATTHEW,) was theson of an ejected non-conformist divine,and, at a very early age, is said to havefelt convinced that he was speciallyordained to preach the Gospel. Afterhaving rendered himself familiar withLatin, Greek, French, Italian, andseveral oriental languages, he qualifiedhimself for the ministry, by studyingunder Workhouse, an eminentdissenting teacher in Shropshire. Hefilled the office of pastor, successively,at Little Bowden, Sandwich, andMile's-lane, London ; and, in 1695,became one of the lecturers at Pinners'hall ; where he usually preached, twicea-day. to large congregations. His incessantlabour, at length, brought on soviolent a fever, that no hopes were entertainedof his recovery. He had alreadytaken leave of his family and friends,when, as a desperate experiment, his5(i8APPENDIX.his medical attendants administered tohim a large quantity of the strongestcordial they could prepare. Within aquarter of an hour after, he exclaimed,This medicine is from God!" and inashort time he became convalescent.On the death of George, Prince of Denmark,he was deputed by the dissentersto present their address of condolenceto Queen Anne. About seven yearsafterwards, he broke his leg, and thuslamed himself for the remainder of hislife. In 1722, he went to court, at thehead of a deputation of his sect, to congratulatethe king, it is said, " on thediscovery of the popish plot." Theclose of his life appears to have beenmuch embittered by the divisions producedamong the dissenters by theArian controversy. He is described ashaving united elegant manners to deeperudition, unaffected piety, universalbenevolence, and extraordinary powersas a preacher. " His subjects," saysNeal, " were well chosen, and hebrought down the most sublime truthsto the level of his hearers ; for thoughhis language was too chaste and correctto offend the most learned, it was sosimple and lucid, that it must have beenpeculiarly instructive to the young, thepoor, and the illiterate. Free from allthat could be called cant, he might havebeen understood by those who neverheard before the language of any religiousparty ; while he preached thedoctrines of the Gospel so fully, that itwas evident he loved them ; and withsuch fervour, that it was manifest hedeemed them essential to the eternalsafety of his hearers." He died on the27th of March, 1726.BRADBURY, (THOMAS,) a nativeof Wakefield, in Yorkshire, was bornin 1677. While yet a mere child, hisfather, being afraid to leave home, onaccount of his debts, was in the habitof sending him to a public-house, wherea newspaper was frequently read, byone of the customers, for the entertainmentof the rest; the boy's memorybeing so retentive, that, on his return,he could accurately repeat nearly thewhole of what he had heard. He acquiredthe rudiments of education in afree-school, at Leeds, where he chieflydistinguished himself by his eccentricityand satirical wit. At the age of eighteen,he became a preacher in the metropolis.Shortly before he entered the pulpit, forthe first time, a person, to whom he wasunknown, thus accosted him: " Pray,sir, who preaches to-day ?" He replied,Mr. Bradbury." " If that be thecase," rejoined the inquirer, " I shall goelsewhere." He commenced his discoursein great trepidation, but soonconvinced his hearers, it is said, thathe was young only in years. Fromthat hour, as lie states, he never knewthe fear of man. After having officiated,successively, with but little pecuniaryadvantage, at Beverley, ,Stephen, and Fetter-lane,he was appointed to the pulpitof a chapel in New-court, Carey-street,which he retained during theremainder of his life. He publishedsome pieces against Dr. Watts, on thedoctrine of the Trinity, and two volumesof sermons, which rendered him exceedinglypopular among the Calvinisticdissenters. His chapel, when hepreached, was crowded to excess, andhis pulpit eloquence, which resembledthat of Burgess, is said to have beenremarkably powerful ; although his discourseswere debased by humoroustales, and jocose observations. Oneday, as it is related, a man fell on hisknees, and addressed him to the followingeffect: "The Roman catholics, bywhom, it is well known, you are regardedwith great abhorrence, have hiredme to assassinate you ; I have, consequently,in order to become well acquaintedwith your person, forsometimepast, been a constant attendant at yourchapel ; your pious exhortations have,however, not only induced me to abandonmy murderous intention, but made meone of the most devout members of yourcongregation." At a meeting, whichwas held on the subject of the Ariancontroversy, in Salters' hall, he strenuouslyupheld the divinity of Christ jand concluded by exclaiming, " You,who are not afraid to avow the Deity ofour Lord, follow me into the gallery !"The opposite party beginning to expresstheir disapprobation as he ascendedthe stairs, he turned round andsaid, " I have been pleading for himwho bruised the serpent's head : nowonder that the seed of the serpentshould hiss !" He was of a particularlyjovial disposition ; and is stated to haveDISSENTERS.sung, at a dinner in honour of the revolution," Oh ! the roast beef of oldEngland!" with great spirit. He wasmuch esteemed by Archbishop Wake,Bishop Burnet, and other eminentepiscopal divines: Grainger calls himThe Patriarch of the Dissenters ; andNoble speaks of him in the followingterms : " He was the social, pleasantcompanion j and more famed for hismirth than for long harangues. Heoften vented coarse witticisms from thepulpit, and particularly delighted inridiculing the devotional poetry of Dr.Watts. Yet he was a singularly honest,upright man ; and his sermons, thoughnot elegant, were bold and decisive."When upwards of fifty, he married alady of fortune, named Richmond, muchyounger than himself, by whom he hadtwo daughters. His death took placeon the 9th of September, 1759.NEAL, (DANIEL,) the historian ofthe Puritans, was born in London, onthe 14th of December, 1678-9. Becomingan orphan at an early age, thecare of his education devolved uponhis uncle; who. about the year 1686,placed him at Merchant Tailors' school ;whence, after refusing an exhibition toSt. John's college, Cambridge, he removedto Mr. Rowe's academy foryoung men who intended to becomedissenting ministers. He subsequentlystudied at the universities of Utrechtand Leyden, under Burma and Grievous.In 1706, he was appointed pastorof a congregation, in Aldersgate-street;whence, on account of the increase ofhis flock, he subsequently removed toa more commodious building, in SewingNotwithstanding his indefatigableexertions as a preacher, he foundleisure to become a voluminous author.In 1720, he published A History of NewEngland, in two volumes, octavo; and,in the following year, the university ofCambridge, in America, conferred onhim the degree of M. A. In 1722, appearedhis Letter to Dr. Francis Hare,bishop of Chichester, in reply to someremarks which that prelate had made onthe dissenters, in a visitation sermon.In 1732, he produced the first part ofhis History of the Puritans; the second,third, and fourth volumes of which appeared,respectively, in 1733, 173G, and1738. Warburton,on finding this work,which is highly honourable to the abilitiesof its author, in the library at Durham,without a reply, determined onanswering it himself. He says, " I tookit home to my house, and, at breakfasttime, filled the margins quite through ;which I think to be a full confutationof all his false facts and partial representations."The notes which Warburtonmade on this occasion, were subsequentlyprinted in a volume, entitled,Tracts by Warburton and a Warbur-ionian.Neal's History was also attackedby Bishop Maddox, to whom he publisheda reply; and, by Dr. ZacharyGrey, whose objections were answeredby Dr. Toulon, in a new edition of thework, which appeared in 1797. In 1740,Neal delivered a course of lectures, insupport of the reformed religion, againstpopery, which, it is said, " crowds ofpersons eagerly attended." About theyear 1738, his health began to decline,and, after having suffered much fromparalytic attacks, he died at Bath, onthe 4"th of April, 1743, leaving a son,by his wife, who was a sister of thecelebrated Dr. Lardner. Besides theproductions already mentioned, Nealpublished A Narrative of the Methodand Success of Inoculating for the SmallPox, in New England ; which led toan interview between him and thePrincess Caroline of Wales ; who, notwithstandingthe violent prejudices thenentertained against the practice, shortlyafterwards caused her children to beinoculated. He was beloved by hisfamily and friends, revered by his congregation,and admired by the whole ofhis sect ; although he appears to havegiven some temporary offence, by withdrawingfrom those who subscribed tothe doctrine of the Trinity, in which,however, he is said to have fully believed.His disposition was particularlymild, and his aversion to anyappearance of bigotry so great, that herepelled no denomination of Christiansfrom his communion.GALE, (JOHN,) a native of London,and the son of an eminent merchant,was born in 1679. After having obtainedthe degrees of master of artsand doctor of philosophy at the universityof Leyden, he proceeded to Amsterdam,when about nineteen years ofage, and there studied theology underAPPENDIX.Limborch and Leclercq. Returningto England, he published Reflectionson Wall's History of Infant Baptism,in 1711; and, about the same period,or soon afterwards, became pastor ofa Baptist congregation, in Barbican,where he continued to officiate duringthe remainder of his life, which wasterminated by a malignant fever, inDecember, 1721. Four volumes of hissermons were posthumously published ;and he appears to have left some manuscriptson theological subjects, whichwere not sufficiently complete for thepress. He is said to have possessed allthe requisites for a pulpit orator, andto have enjoyed extraordinary influenceover his sect, on account of his zeal,piety, and talents. According to oneof his biographers, " he was master ofa solid morality, founded on the principlesof reason, and aided by revelation,which made him proof against thecorruptions of vice, and led him to thepractice of every virtue."Bowman, (MosES,) a native ofLondon, was born in 1680, and, afterhaving studied at Utrecht and Leyden,became assistant minister, in 1710, toa dissenting congregation at Clapham,of which, about four years afterwards,he was chosen pastor, and officiatedthere in that capacity during the remainderof his life. Although, as awriter, he displayed much ability, andacquired considerable reputation, heprepared his sermons in so slovenly amanner, that one of the most intelligentof his hearers, as it is alleged, nevercould understand him. His works consistof, A Paraphrase and Notes on theRevelations; A Dissertation on the CivilGovernment of the Hebrews; An Argumentto prove, a priori, the Unity andPerfection of God ; The Argument fromProphecy in Proof that Jesus is theMessiah, vindicated; some pieces in aperiodical, entitled, The OccasionalPaper; a volume of tracts.; and a fewsingle sermons. Dr. Chandler said ofhim, that his morals and integrity wereuntameable ; that he lived honoured,useful, and beloved, and met his dissolution(which occurred in 1752) witha well-grounded comfort and hope.EVANS, (JOHN,) a native of Wrex-hamlin Denbighshire, was born in 1680 ;and, after having studied for some timeunder the eminent dissenting teachers,Rowe and Jollie, he is stated to havegone through Poole synopsis, and theChristian writers of the three firstcenturies, with James Owen, in Shropshire.He passed the week preceding hisordination, which took place at Wrexham,about the month of August, 1702,in solitary contemplation, prayer, andabstinence from all food but dry bread,with which he drank nothing butwater. In 1704, he was chosen assistantto Dr. Williams, whom he succeeded,in 1716, as pastor of an independentcongregation, by which thechapel in Broad-street, Petty France,was subsequently founded. He alsobecame a lecturer at Sailers' hall ; and,for his learning and ability, was madeD. D. by the universities of Edinburghand Aberdeen. He took a part in theArian controversy, pending which herefused to sign any articles of faith.As a preacher, he displayed considerableeloquence ; and, as a writer, he is saidto have been admired by divines of alldenominations. His works consist ofPractical Discourses concerning theChristian Temper, which Dr. Wattsdeclared to be the most completesummary of those duties which makeupthe Christian life, that had beenpublished during the author's time ;several occasional sermons ; a valuablework addressed to young people ; andNotes for Illustrating the Epistle tothe Romans, of which Doddridge said,the exposition of the Romans, begunby Henry, and finished by Dr. Evans,is the best I ever saw." He alsoundertook a History of Nonconformity,but did not live to complete it. Shortlybefore his death, which happened on the16th of May, 1730, he said, " althoughI cannot affirm, with Lorimer, that Ihave no more doubt of my acceptancewith God than I have of my own existence,yet I have a good hope throughgrace, and such as I am persuadedwill never make me ashamed."ERSKINE, (EBENEZER,) was bornin the prison of the Bass, where hisfather, a Scotch pastor, was confined,by the Scotch privy-council, on the 22ndof June, 1680. He completed his educationat the university of Edinburgh,where he took the degree of M. A. inDISSENTERS.1697. About three years after, he becamechaplain and tutor in the familyof Lord Toties ; and, in 1703, ministerof Portman, in Fife. In 1724,he would, it appears, have obtainedthe pastoral office, at Kirkaldy, butfor the part he had taken in whatwas termed, the Marrow controversy.In 1731, he removed to Stirling; and,being chosen moderator of the Synodthere, he preached a sermon, in thatcapacity, against the system of privatepatronage, pursued by the general assembly.For this, a prosecution wasinstituted against him, which not onlyproved unsuccessful, but led to the secessionof a large body of its membersfrom the Scotch church. He appearsto have been regarded as the head ofthe original seceders, who erected ameeting-house for him, in Stirling,where he officiated with great zeal,during the remainder of his life. Forsome time previously to 1749, he hadfilled the divinity chair in the presbytery,which, however, he was compelled,by infirmity, to resign in thatyear. He died, on the 2nd of June,1754 ; having been twice married ; first,to Alison Turpin, daughter of a writerto the signet, by whom he had tenchildren ; and, secondly, to Mary, thedaughter of James Webster, a Scotchminister. Four volumes of his sermonswere printed at Glasgow, in 1762,and another, at Edinburgh, in 1765,under the patronage of the Duchess ofNorthumberland, with whom one ofhis sons lived in the capacity of gardener.His life and diary have latelybeen published, by the Rev. DonaldFraser, who says of him, that, " thoughnot equal in all respects to his coadjutors,he was unquestionably possessedof high endowments, well-suited to thepre-eminence assigned by him, in frontof the battle, both by his friends andenemies, as father of the secessionchurch."BROWN, (SiMON,) was born, in1680, at Shelton Mallet, in Somerset-shire; and becoming, at an early age, anaccomplished scholar, obtained the pastoralcharge of a congregation at Portsmouth,before he had completed histwenty-first year. In 1716, he removedto London, and became pastor of achurch in the Old Jewry ; but losinghis wife and only son, in 1722, he wasafflicted, about that period, with a derangementof his mental faculties, whichinduced him altogether to abandon hisministerial functions, and he even refusedto join in any public or privateexercise of devotion. When urged, byhis friends, to let them know the causeof the singular change in his conduct,he informed them, after much solicitation,that he had fallen under the peculiardispleasure of God, who hadlevelled him with the brutes, by deprivinghim of his soul; and that itwould be profane in him to pray, as hecould no longer be considered a moralagent, or a proper subject either forreward or punishment. His congregation,after having waited two yearsfor his recovery, chose another minister,and he retired to Shelton Mallet,with a contribution of 300, in additionto his private fortune. Though he stilllaboured under the same melancholydelusion, he displayed his intellectualpower in the translation of several ofthe Greek and Latin poets ; wrote booksfor the education of children, and othersto facilitate the study of the classics ; inall of which he exhibited a combinationof taste, learning, and argument. Theyear before his death, he wrote anadmirable answer to Dr. Woolston'sfifth discourse on The Miracles of ourSaviour ; and even in the very year inwhich he died, published A Defence ofthe Religion of Nature and the ChristianRevelation, than which, nothingsuperior was produced in the courseof the deistical controversy that hadgiven rise to it. This work he dedicatedto Queen Caroline, in a prefacewhich his friends thought necessary tosuppress. Declining to take either airor exercise, he died of a mortification,in 1753. Towards the close of his life,he used to request that prayers might beoffered up for him in his family, whichproves that the delusion under whichhe laboured, must have been sometimessubdued.WRIGHT, (SAMUEL,) a native ofNottinghamshire, was horn in 1683,and became, successively, chaplain toLady Susanna Lord; assistant-preacherat Crosby-square ; Sunday evening lecturerat St. Thomas's, Southwark ; and,in 1707, pastor of a congregation atAPPENDIX.Blackfriars, where he officiated duringthe remainder of his life ; during thelatter part of which, he also lecturedat Sailers' hall, and at Little St. Helen's.Being particularly hostile to the highchurch party, his meeting-house wasnearly destroyed, by a Sacheverell mob,in 1709. During the Arian controversy,he refused to subscribe to any declarationof faith ; and being, it is said, animpassioned friend to liberty, he wasinduced to assist in conducting TheOccasional Paper. On account of hisknown tendency to presbyterianism,(which, however, he would not admit),as well as of his learning and zeal forthe advancement of religion, the universityof Aberdeen presented himwith a diploma of D. D. In the pulpit,he was so remarkably eloquent, especiallywhen praying, that Dr. Herring,afterwards Archbishop of Canterbury,frequented, it is said, the meetinghouseat Blackfriars, with a view toobtain hints for his own improvementin elocution. Dr. Wright though reproachedwith great naughtiness ofmanners, has been highly extolled forthe benevolence of his disposition. Hepublished thirty-seven sermons, andsome other pieces of considerable merit jin the preface to one of which, he says,I had rather be the author of the smallbook that shall be instrumental in savinga soul from sin and death, than of thefinest piece of science and literature inthe world, that tends only to accomplishme for the present state of being."According to Dodd ridge, his TreatiseOn Being Born Again, was one of themost useful works produced during theage in which he lived ; his Self-possession,one of the best pieces of Christianphilosophy that ever was printed ;and his Great Concern, much preferableto The Whole Duty of Man. Hedied on the 3rd of April, 1746, leavingone daughter, by the widow of hispredecessor, in the pastoral office atBlackfriars, whom he had married inor about the year 1708.LELAND, (Jon,) a native of Lancashire,was born in 1691, and privatelyeducated at Dublin, where he becamejoint pastor of a congregation, in 1716.In 1733, he published an answer, intwo volumes, to Tindal Christianityas old as the Creation; and, in 1737,The Divine Authority of the Old andNew Testament asserted against theAspersions and False Reasonings of aBook, entitled, The Moral Philosopher,by Dr. Morgan. In these productionshe displayed so much learning andability, that the university of Aberdeenpresented him with the degree of D. D.In 1742, he produced a reply to apamphlet, entitled, Christianity notfounded in Argument ; in 1753, Reflectionson the late Lord Bolingbroke'sLetters on the Study and Use of History;and, in 1754, A View of thePrincipal Deistical Writers, to whichhe afterwards added a second, andeventually, a third volume, containinga reprint of his reflections on the lettersof Bolingbroke. When upwards ofseventy years old, he printed a work intwo volumes, quarto, entitled, The Advantageand Necessity of the ChristianRevelation, shewn from the State ofReligion in the Ancient Heathen World,especially, with respect to the Knowledgeand Worship of the One TrueGod ; A Rule of Moral Duty, and AState of Future Rewards and Punishments.After his decease, which occurredon the 16th of January, 1766,four volumes of his sermons were published; to the first of which was prefixedan account of his life. While veryyoung, he is said to have lost the powerof memory; for which, however, in hismaturity, he was so distinguished, asto obtain the soubriquet of The WalkingLibrary. The learning, industry, zealandtalent, which he displayed as anadvocate of Christianity, not only procuredfor him the admiration of hissect, but the gratitude and applause ofmany distinguished divines in the establishedchurch.GILL, (JOHN,) a Baptist divine ofconsiderable celebrity, was born on the23rd of November, 1697, at Kettering,in Northamptonshire. His parents,who were indigent dissenters, procuredhis admission, at an early age, to aneighbouring free grammar-school,where his advancement in learning wassurprisingly rapid, but from which heappears to have been expelled, solelybecause his relatives were not membersof the established church. He wasthen presented to the conductors of adissenting academy, who, however,Dissenters.declined to receive him, for this extraordinaryreason ; namely, " that shouldhe continue, as it might be expected hewould, making such rapid advances,he would go through the commoncircle of knowledge, before he wouldbe capable of taking care of himself,or of being employed in any publicservice." He continued to prosecutehis studies with great ardour ; and, atthe age of nineteen, had carefully readthe principal Latin and Greek authors,completed a course of logic, rhetoric,and moral philosophy, and acquiredsome knowledge of Hebrew. In J717,he began to officiate, occasionally, at aBaptist meeting-house in his nativetown; whence he removed, in 1718,to Higham Ferrets; and, in 1719, becameminister of a congregation atHorselydown. He now applied himselfto the study of oriental literature,and read the Targets and Talmud witha Jewish priest. In 1748, he publishedA Commentary on the New Testament,in three volumes, folio, and shortlyafterwards received a diploma of D. D.from the Marischal college of Aberdeen.His subsequent productions were, ACommentary on the Old Testament, insix volumes, folio; A Body of Divinity,in three volumes, quarto ; a very elaboratework, entitled, Discourses on theCanticles ; The Cause of God andTruth ; A Defence of Calvinism ; ADissertation on the Antiquity of theHebrew Tongue ; and a variety of sermons,controversial tracts, and otherpieces. He died in 1771, leaving twochildren, the surviving issue of an earlymarriage. His moral character wasexcellent; and he appears, upon conviction,to have been an ultra-Calvinist.As a preacher, he was destitute of tasteor eloquence ; and, as a writer, possessedneither judgment nor genius.Endowed with extraordinary powersof acquirement, and enamoured of laboriousresearch, he became eminentlylearned, and collected a vast mass ofvaluable materials, which he had notthe talent to digest, or the skill to arrange.Saunders, Lord Lyttelton's assistant,ridiculed him, under the appellationof Dr. Half-pint, in a scurrilousnovel, entitled, Gaffer Grey-beard.FOSTER, (JAMES,) was born atExeter, on the 16th of September, 1697.When five years old, he was placed atthe grammar-school of his native city,where he studied for about eight years ;and then, as it is supposed, became assistantto his father, who was a labouringfuller. He began to preach in1718; and officiated, successively, atMelbourne Port, Mentis, and Trowbridge.At the commencement of hisclerical labours, he was an Arian ;subsequently, he became a Socinian ;and, after having published a treatiseagainst the doctrine of the Trinity, heappears to have been converted, by Dr.Gale, to the opinions of the Baptists.On quitting Trowbridge, he would, itis said, have abandoned the pulpit, onaccount of his poverty, for the tradeof a glover, had not a gentleman offortune, named Houston, appointedhim his chaplain. On the death of Dr.Gale, he succeeded that divine as pastorof the general Baptist congregation inBarbican ; and also became, some timeafterwards, Sunday evening lecturer ata meeting-house in the Old Jewry. In1731, he published A Reply to Tindal'sChristianity as Old as the Creation;and, about the same period, produceda collection of sermons, in four volumes,which involved him in a controversywith Stabbing. In 1744, he was chosenpastor to the congregation of Pinners'hall ; and, in 1746, attended, to thescaffold, the unfortunate Earl of Kilmarnock,whose execution, of which hepublished an account, had such aneffect upon his spirits, that, during theremainder of his life, he was alwaysmelancholy. About five years beforehis death, which took place on the 5thof November, 1753, he received a diplomaof D. D. from the Marischal collegeof Aberdeen. As a pulpit orator,he was exceedingly admired. His appearancewas dignified, his action judicious,and his voice harmonious andpowerful. " At his chapel," it is said,there was a confluence of persons ofevery rank, station, and quality ; wits,free-thinkers, and numbers of the regularclergy ; who, while they gratifiedtheir curiosity, had their prepossessionsshaken, and their prejudices loosened."He was highly extolled by many of hiscontemporaries, and bitterly reviled byothers, some of whom denounced himas an infidel, who denied the divinityof Christ, the atonement, and theAPPENDIX.influence of the Holy Spirit When hewas buried, one of his admirers havingexclaimed, " There is a good man goneto glory!" another bystander replied,But he has taken away my Lord, andI know not where he has laid him."The Rev. Mr. Blake, in a tract, entitledKilmarnock's Ghost, accused him of nothaving faithfully instructed the Jacobiteearl, as to his awful situation, and theduties which it rendered necessary.Bolingbroke states, that he originatedthe declaration that " where mysterybegins, religion ends;" and Pope saidof him,Let modest FoTen metropolitanr, if he will, excelHis extraordinary talent, as a pulpitorator, is stated to have been first madegenerally known by the laudatory reportof a fashionable physician, who hadsought shelter from a shower of rain inachapel where Foster was preaching.Besides the productions already mentioned,he published two quarto volumesOn Natural Religion and Social Virtue ;a volume of funeral sermons ; and somecontroversial tracts on heresy.FLEMING, (CALEB,) was born atNottingham, in 1698. After having declinedan offer of ordination, and aliving in Cumberland, he became pastorto a congregation of dissenters, inBartholomew-close, where he officiatedfrom 1738, until 1752, when he waschosen assistant-preacher, at Pinners'hall, to Dr. James Forster ; whom hesoon afterwards succeeded. Some yearsbefore his death, which took place in1779, he received a diploma of D. D.from one of the Scotch universities.He is described as having been a manof great ability, learning, and socialworth ; a sincere Unitarian in his principles; a resolute asserter of the rightsof conscience and private judgment;and a determined opponent to the interpositionof human power in mattersof religion. He was the author of severalpieces in favour of a repeal of the testand corporation acts ; The Fourth Commandmentabrogated by the Gospel ; AShort Dissertation on Providence; SomeThoughts upon the Grounds of Man'sExpectation of a Future State from thePrinciples of Reason ; The Religion ofNature not set up in opposition to theWord of God, nor that of Christ to theReligion of Nature, &c. ; Truth andModern Deism at Variance, TrueDeism the Basis of Christianity ; AnApologetic View of the Religious andMoral Sentiments of Lord Bolingbroke ;Christ's Temptation in the Wilderness,a Proof of a Divine Mission ; and numerouscontroversial tracts, and otherpieces.BENSON, (GEORGE,) was born inCumberland, on the 1st of September,1699, and completed his education atthe university of Glasgow ; from which,it is said, he subsequently receiveda diploma of D. D. Through theinterest of Dr. Calamy, he obtainedthe charge of a presbyterian congregation,at Abingdon, Berks, in 1722 ;and, after having officiated there forabout seven years, he became ministerof a chapel in St. John's court, Southwark.In 1740, he was chosen assistant,at Crutched Friars, to Dr.Lardner, whom he succeeded in 1751.He died, without issue, although he hadbeen twice married, on the 6th of April,1762. In the History of the Dissenters,by Bennet and Bogue, he is describedas having been indefatigable in his exertions; by no means deficient in learning;but impenetrably dull. The sameauthors assert, that, while preaching,he sometimes gave quotations ofGreek or Hebrew two or three minuteslong. They also state, that in thefirst year of his ministry, he was aCalvinist ; and, while at Abingdon,published three practical discourses toyouth on orthodox principles, which heendeavoured to suppress, on subsequentlybecoming a convert to Socinianism.Although he acquired greatreputation as a writer, and diligentlylaboured to excel as a preacher, regularlybeginning, as soon as he returnedfrom the afternoon service on oneSunday, to prepare for the next, hiscongregation gradually diminished untilit became numerically insignificant. Besidesthe discourses already mentioned,he wrote A History of the ApostolicChurch ; A Treatise on the Evidencesof Christianity ; A Life of Christ ;Tracts on Persecution and the Reasonablenessof Prayer ; An Account ofCalvin's Share in the Burning of Servetus; Paraphrases of some of theDISSENTERS.Epistles of St. Paul ; A History of thePlanting of Christianity ; and somepieces which were published after hisdecease, in one volume quarto, by Dr.Amor. He is said to have enjoyedthe friendship of Herring, Hoadly,Butler, Conybeare, and many othereminent divines of the establishedchurch.Osgood, (Micah,) the son ofa physician, was born at Axminster,Devon, on the 6th of December, 1700.After having received a good education,he was ordained pastor, in 1722 ; andofficiated, first, at Moreton Hampstead,(where he married a young lady namedHawker,) and, subsequently, at Creditor,both in his native county. Aboutthe year 1735, he produced a tract, entitled,Recovery from Sickness ; in 1737,High-flown Episcopal and PriestleyClaims freely Examined ; in 1739,The Deserter's Apology; in 1741, apamphlet in favour of the war withSpain; in 1745, a tract against thePretender's legitimacy ; and, in 1746,and the two following years, a series ofletters, entitled, The Dissenting Gentleman'sAnswer to Mr. White, which,being afterwards collectively published,reached a sixth edition in 1787. In1748, he produced an attack on thecharacter of Charles the First ; and, in1750, several pieces in favour of infantbaptism. In 1761, he became lectureron the New Testament, at an academyfor the education of young men who intendedto become dissenting ministers,at Exeter, whither he had previouslyremoved from Creditor. He resignedhis office of lecturer in 1769, but continuedto preach until 1784. His deathoccurred on the 31st of January, 1792.He appears to have been a man of extensivereading, exemplary in the dischargeof his duties as a pastor, andhighly amiable in private life. Shortlyafter his decease, a memoir of him waspublished by Manning, in which it issaid, that " his religious sentimentswere such as were deemed highlyheretical, when he first entered uponpublic life; on which account lie foundsome difficulty in procuring ordination,and experienced the resentment ofbigots long after : but," continues thebiographer, " they would be esteemedwhat is termed orthodox by many inthe present day ; as he attributed toChrist a high degree of pre-existentdignity, and considered him as a properobject of religious worship."MASON, (JOHN), the son of a dissentingminister, was born at Dunno, in1705, and educated principally by Mr.Jennings, of Kibworth. In the twenty-firstyear of his age, he became chaplainand private tutor in the family of GovernorFears, at Hatfield ; and, in 1728,he was chosen pastor of a congregationat Dorking ; whence he removed, in1746, to Cheshunt ; where, in additionto his ministerial labours, he superintendedthe education of several youngmen, who afterwards became eminentpreachers. He distinguished himselfmore as a writer than as a divine : hisfirst work, A Plain and Modest Pleafor Christianity, was published anonymously; the name of its author, however,soon became known, and theuniversity of Edinburgh, by the recommendationof Dr. Walker, of Horton,conferred upon him the degree of M. A.,by diploma. He subsequently publisheda valuable Treatise on Self Knowledge;Essays on Christian Morals;Student and Pastor ; Essays on Elocution; and fifty-two sermons on themost important subjects in divinity,under the title of Lord's Day EveningEntertainment. He also printed ASermon on the death of George theSecond, in which he stated, " that theTories, who had laboured to restore theStuartss, were most clamorous for nonresistanceunder the worst government,and most forward to resist the best."He was a staunch advocate for civiland religious liberty; a zealous pastor;a grave and impressive, but not veryeloquent, preacher ; and a good man.The whole of his works appear to haveexcited attention, at the time of theirappearance ; and some of them stillcontinue to be admired, particularlythe Treatise on Self Knowledge; whichis, perhaps, one of the most popularbooks of its class extant. His deathtook place in October, 1763.WESLEY, (CHARLES,) brother tothe celebrated John Wesley, was bornat Epworth, on the 18th of December,1708. After having been, for sometime,a student at Westminster, he wasAPPENDIX.admitted, in 172), a scholar on thefoundation ; and, eventually, becamecaptain of the school. In 1726, hewas elected to Christchurch, Oxford,where he took the degree of B. A. in1729, and that of M. A. in 1732. Hehad previously rendered himself conspicuousas a member of the smallreligious society, from which ArminianMethodism may be said to have sprung ;and, in 1735, his zeal for religionPrompted him, after having been ordaineddeacon and priest, to accompanyhis brother John, on a mission toGeorgia, in the capacity of secretary toGovernor Oglethorpe. He labouredassiduously as a preacher among theIndians and colonists until the followingyear, when he returned to England,and soon after commenced his brilliantand successful career as a dissentingpastor. In some important points of doctrinehe differed from his brother John,to whom, however, as a preacher, he was,by many of their contemporaries, deemedat least equal, if not superior. He is thusspoken of by an individual, who heardhim address a congregation in a fieldnear Bristol : " I found him standingon a table-board, in an erect posture,with his hands and eyes lifted up toheaven in prayer ; he prayed with uncommonfervour, fluency, and varietyof proper expressions. He preachedabout an hour, in such a manner as Iscarce ever heard any man preach.Though I have heard many a finer sermon,according to the common taste oracceptation of sermons, I never heardany man discover such evident signs ofa vehement desire, or labour so earnestlyto convince his hearers, that they wereall, by nature, in a sinful, lost, undonestate ; with uncommon fervour, as anambassador of Christ, beseeching themin his name; and praying them in hisstead, to be reconciled to God. Althoughhe used no notes, nor had anythingin his hand but a Bible, yet hedelivered his thoughts in a rich, copiousvariety of expression, and with so muchpropriety, that I could not observe anythingincoherent or inanimate throughthe whole performance." He publisheda collection of hymns, for the use of thewesleyan methodists, which has passedthrough a vast number of editions ; anda sermon, from the text, " Awake, thouthat steepest," of which, it is said, morethan a hundred thousand copies havebeen sold. Lay preaching, when itwas first proposed by his brother, he denouncedas a pestilent error; nor couldhe be prevailed upon to countenanceit, until satisfied that their originalproject of obtaining the co-operationof regular divines, was utterly hopeless.He died in 1788, leaving two sons, whoacquired great reputation for their musicaltalents.GIB, (ADAM,) a native of Derbyshire,was born in 1713, and completed hiseducation at the university of Edinburgh,where he took the degree ofM. A. About the year 1730, he appearsto have obtained a pastoral charge,from which, however, he was dismissed,three years afterwards, for joining withErskine and other seceders, in attackingthe system of private patronage,pursued by the general assembly of theScotch church. In 1741, he was appointedpastor to a congregation of thenew sect ; of which, he continued to beadistinguished supporter, until 1746,when a schism arising as to the oathstaken by burgesses, he became leader ofthe party termed the Anti-burghers.His productions consist of A Displayof the Secession Testimony, in twovolumes, octavo; Sacred Contemplations,to which was appended, An Essayon Liberty and Necessity, in answer toLord Kames ; and some minor pieces.He is described as having been pious,talented, and amiable, but " rathertoo pertinaciously attached to his ownopinions." His death took place atEdinburgh, on the 18th of June, 1788.Morton, (Jos,) was born at Shrewsbury,on the 4th of September, 1717.After having acquired the rudimentsof learning, at the free-school of hisnative place, he studied, for about ayear, under Dr. Owen, at Warrington;whence he proceeded to the dissentingacademy, founded at Northampton, bythe celebrated Doddridge, to whom hebecame assistant-tutor in 1739. Aboutthe same time, he commenced his ministeriallabours, and preached, occasionally,at various places in Northamptonshire,until 1741 ; in which year, heaccepted the office of pastor to theunited independent and presbyteriancongregation at Shrewsbury, which heDISSENTERS.held, until compelled, by ill health, toresign it, in 1765. Shortly afterwards,he retired upon a small independence,which had been bequeathed to him bya distant relative, to the neighbourhoodof Kidderminster, where he died, onthe 19th of July, 1783. During thelatter part of his life, which was muchembittered by nervous irritability, sostrictly regular were his habits, that,it is said, the children, in the streetwhere he lived, invariably ran honteto dinner, as soon as they espied himreturning from his morning walk ; andif any of his friends remained at hishouse after the clock had struck nine,he became uneasy, and soon gave thema hint to depart, by saying, " Won'tyou take another glass of wine, beforeyou go?" "If Job Orton," observesDr. Bogue, "had had a good, cheerfulwife, and two or three rompingchildren around him, they would haverubbed off his corners, dispelled his lowspirits, and made him a much moreuseful and a happier man." He wassincerely attached to his hearers atShrewsbury, (who were neither richnor numerous,) and disinterestedly refusedto quit them, although he might,it is said, have succeeded Dr. Hughesin the metropolis, or Dr. Doddridge atNorthampton. Many years before hisdeath, he was complimented with thetitle of D. D. which, however, with hischaracteristic modesty, he declined toadopt. His writings are sensible, perspicuous,and energetic, but not brilliant:they consist of Memoirs of Dr. Dod-bridge; A Summary of Doctrinal andPractical Religion, by way of Questionand Answer; Three Discourses onEternity ; Discourses to the Aged ; Discourseson Practical Subjects ; SacramentalMeditations ; and some otherpieces ; besides two posthumous works,one in six volumes, entitled, A Plainand Short Exposition of the Old Testament,and the other, in two volumes,Letters to a Young Clergyman.FORDYCE, (JAMES,) was born in1720, and educated at the Marischalcollege of Aberdeen. Obtaining a licenseto preach, he became, at an earlyage, second minister of the collegiatechurch of Beechen ; and subsequentlyobtained the living of Alloa, near Stirling.In 1760, he published a discourse,which he had delivered before the generalassembly of the Scotch church,On the Folly, Infamy, and Misery ofUnlawful Pleasures ; and was, shortlyafterwards, complimented with the degreeof D. D. from the university ofGlasgow. About 1762, he accepted aninvitation, from the presbyterian congregationin Monkwell-street, London,to become assistant to their pastor, Dr.Lawrence, whom he subsequently succeeded.For many years, he enjoyedgreat popularity as a preacher ; but, in1775, a difference with his coadjutor ledto a division of his flock ; and, from thatperiod, his reputation and influence appearto have been on the wane. Mortifiedto perceive that his hearers weregradually diminishing, and becomingsensible of the increasing infirmities ofage, he resigned his pastoral charge, in1782, and died suddenly, at Bath, on the1st of October, 1796. His figure wastall and commanding, his countenanceintelligent, and his delivery studiouslyimpressive. He cultivated his naturaltalent for pulpit eloquence, with greatassiduity ; and bestowed extraordinarycare in polishing his style. Those apparentlyspontaneous gestures, withwhich he sometimes amazed and oftendelighted his congregation, were, it issaid, purely artificial; and that easyelegance of language, for which hiscompositions were so much admired,although apparently natural, was theresult of hard application. Besides thepiece already mentioned, and his celebratedSermons to Young Women, andAddresses to Young Men, in which, ithas been justly observed, religion isrepresented in her most attractive form,he published a volume of poems, andAddresses to the Deity. In noticing hisSermons to Young Women, which appearedanonymously, the Critical Reviewers,of 1766, observe of the writer :While he remains concealed, wemay apply to him the observation thatwas made on the unknown author ofThe Ladies' Calling, ' that, like theriver Nisus, which gives fertility andblessing wherever he passes, he concealshis head, and permits himself onlyto be known by the blessings he dispenses.'"FURNEAUX, (PHILIP,) a native ofTotness, in Devonshire, was born inAPPENDIX.172(5; and, after having studied theology,under Jennings, an able dissenter,became, at the age of twenty-one, to a presbyterian congregationin Southwark. He was afterwardsappointed Sunday eveninglecturer at Sailers' hall ; and, in 1753,succeeded the Rev. Moses Bowman,at Clapham. He enjoyed extraordinarypopularity as a preacher, until1777; when, becoming insane, he wasconsigned to a private mad-house,where he died, in 1786. A zealous advocatefor religious liberty, he warmlyencouraged the application to parliamentfor relief from subscription to theThirty-nine Articles, and published awork against Blackstone's Expositionof the Act of Toleration ; to a secondedition of which, he appended thespeech, delivered by Lord Mansfield inthe house of lords, relative to the importantcase between the dissenters andthe corporation of London, in 1767;which, it is said, although of two hours'duration, he wrote down, from memory,so accurately, that its learned speakercould not detect above two or threetrifling errors in the transcript. Theother productions of this unfortunatedivine (who received a Scotch diplomaof D. D. in 1770) consist of a few sermons; and an Essay on Toleration, inwhich he displayed considerable liberality,learning, and acuteness. In doctrine,he is said to have been strictlyorthodox, but not always sufficientlyevangelical for his congregation ; and,it is added, he marred the effect of hispulpit orations, which were elegantlycomposed, by a whining delivery, andan ungraceful mode of poring over hismanuscript.Haywood, (EDWARD,) was bornin 1729, at a village in Lancashire,and completed his education at one ofMr. Coward's dissenting academies. In1750, he became assistant to the masterof a boarding-school, at Pelham, inSurrey ; and preached occasionally forDr. Benson, at Crutched Friars. " In1754," he says, " I removed to Singleton,in Cheshire, where I taught at agrammar-school, delivered up to me byone of the most ingenious and learnedmen I have ever known, the Rev.William Turner; with whom I livedin friendship and harmony, for sevenyears, preaching alternate Sundays, totwo small societies, at Whitelocke, inCheshire, and Leek, in Staffordshire.In 1765, I was invited to take chargeof a very small church, in Bristol ; but,upon publishing a second edition ofThe Supremacy of the Faith, writtenby one Williams, I was, every week,calumniated in the Bristol paper, as anArian, a Socinian, a Deist, and worsethan a Deist." He was also accused, itis said, of immoral conduct ; and his incomesuffered so material a diminution,that he was compelled to resign hisoffice. Proceeding to London, he madean attempt to procure employment inthe British Museum ; which provingunsuccessful, he supported himself byliterary labour, and teaching the classics,until about the year 1780, when anattack of the palsy reduced him to sohelpless a state, that, during the remainderof his life, he depended, chiefly,for the means of existence, on an allowancefrom the Literary Fund, and thecontributions of the benevolent. Hedied, miserably poor, on the 14th ofJanuary, 1794, leaving one son, and awidow, the daughter of Dr. Chandler,who had procured for him, in 1768, adiploma of D. D., from the universityof Edinburgh. Besides many highlyinteresting critical and historical communicationsto the Gentleman's Magazine,and other periodicals, he publishedAn Introduction to the Study of the NewTestament ; A View of the PrincipalEditions of the Greek and RomanClassics; A Liberal Translation of theNew Testament into modern English ;Five Dissertations relative to Arianismand Socinianism ; The Life and Characterof Jesus Christ delineated ; Miscellaniesof Abauzit, translated fromthe French; An Edition of the NewTestament, in Greek, with EnglishNotes ; The Melancholy Doctrine ofPredestination exposed, and the DelightfulTruth of Universal Redemptionrepresented; The Great Duty andDelight of Contentment ; A Discourseon St. Paul's Description of Death ; avolume of sermons ; and various otherpieces, of minor importance.PALMER, (JOHN,) a native ofSouthwark, and the son of an undertaker,was born in 1729. In 1755, hebecame assistant-preacher, and, in 1759,Miss ENTERS.sole pastor, of a congregation, in NewBroad-street ; on the dissolution ofwhich, in 1780, having previously marrieda lady of fortune, he retired toIslington, and passed the remainder ofhis life as a private gentleman. Heis stated to have abandoned Calvinism,in which he had been brought up, forSocinianism ; and to have been anavowed opponent to all tests of faith.His pulpit compositions were perspicuous,and his mode of delivery unexceptionable.His works, in which hedisplayed considerable learning andtalent, consist of Prayers for the Use ofFamilies ; Free Thoughts on the Inconsistencyof conforming to any ReligiousTest, as a Condition of Toleration ;Observations in Defence of the Libertyof Man, as a Moral Agent, in reply toPriestley's Illustrations of PhilosophicalNecessity ; An Appendix to that production,and A Letter to Priestley onthe same subject ; A Summary Viewof the Grounds of Christian Baptism ;and some other pieces. He died on the26th of June, 1790.FLETCHER, (JOHN WILLIAM,)youngest son of Colonel de la Fletcher,a Swiss, in the French service, wasborn on the 12th of September, 1729,near Geneva, where he appears tohave commenced and completed hiseducation. Evincing a predilection foramilitary life, he proceeded, at anearly age, contrary to the wishes of hisfriends, who considered him to be morequalified for the church than the camp,to Portugal, where he obtained thecaptaincy of a company of volunteers,who were destined to serve in Brazil ;but, on the morning of his intended departure,a servant, by accident, scaldedhim so severely that he was incapableof embarking. The man of war, inwhich he had been ordered to sail,consequently, put to sea without him,and was never heard of again. Hesubsequently procured a commission inthe Dutch service ; but, an unexpectedpeace putting an end to his hopes ofpromotion, he abandoned the army, andremoving to England, became tutor inthe family of Mr. Hill, of Shropshire;and, at length, a preacher among theWesleyan Methodists. Having obtaineda title for holy orders, he was ordaineddeacon by the Bishop of Bangor, on the6th of March, 1767, and priest on the followingsabbath. After having officiatedat various places in the country, andpreached to the French prisoners atTunbridge, in their own language, hewas appointed assistant to CharlesWesley. Although his pronunciationof the English language was imperfect,the correctness of his manner in thepulpit, procured him many admirers,one of whom, presented him, in 1759,to the vicarage of Medley, which heheld during the remainder of his life.In 1770, he visited his native country;and, on his return to England, in thefollowing summer, became gratuitoussuperintendant of the Countess ofHuntingdon's college of divinity; but,owing to a schism among the students,on the subject of predestination, he resignedhis office in 1771; and, subsequently,produced several controversialworks. In 1777, he proceeded to thesouth of France, for the benefit of hishealth; and soon after his return, in1781, married a lady, named Banquet.His death took place on the 18th ofAugust, 1785. His mode of living wassimple, his devotion pure, his temper benignant,and his conduct exemplary.For a long period he regularly devotedtwo nights in the week to meditation andprayer. He also had a candle constantlyburning at his bed-side ; a custom whichonce nearly cost him his life, throughhis curtains catching fire, though he providentiallyescaped without the slightestpersonal injury. It appears that he refusedto enforce the payment of tithesfrom the Quakers who resided in hisparish, so that the income he derivedfrom his vicarage did not exceed 100per annum. It was said, by one of hisfriends, that he would rather hear oneof his sermons than read a volume ofhis works : these consist of A Vindicationof the Reverend Mr. Wesley'sCalm Address to our American Colonies,in some Letters to Mr. Caleb Evans ;A Sermon on an Earthquake in Shropshire; American Patriotism furtherconfronted with Reason, Scripture,and the Constitution ; The Doctrinesof Grace and Justice equally essentialto the Pure Gospel ; and An Essay onthe Peace of 1783.Toulon, (JOSHUA,) was born inLondon, on the llth of May, 1740, andAPPENDIX.educated at St. Paul's school, and at adissenting academy, kept by DoctorsJennings and Savage. He first officiatedas a divine at Cotton, in Devonshire,where he zealously advocatedadult baptism by complete immersion.In 1765, he removed to Taunton, andbecame a bookseller, a schoolmaster,and pastor to a Baptist congregation.Some time afterwards, he received thedegree of M. A. from the Baptist's collegeof Rhode Island, in New England; and, in 1794, that of D. D. fromHazard college, Cambridge, in thesame state. In 1804, he was appointedpastor of the Unitarian congregation,at Birmingham, where he officiateduntil his decease, which took place onthe 23rd of July, 1815. By his wife,Jane, daughter of Mr. S. Smith, ofTaunton, he had twelve children, fiveof whom survived him. " His discoursesare said to have been appropriate ; andhis manner and delivery solemn andaffectionate. He preached on variouspublic occasions ; was a firm supporterof civil and religious liberty ; and contributedgenerously to many religiousand charitable institutions. His works,some of which possess considerablemerit, consist of The Life of Socinus ;A History of Taunton ; A Dissertationon the Evidences of Christianity ; AReview of the Life, Character, andWritings of John Biddle; Biographyof Doctor Priestley ; a new edition ofNeal's History of the Puritans ; AnHistorical View of the Protestant Dissenters; Memoirs of Samuel Brown ;The Injustice of Classing the Unitarianswith Deists and Infidels ; A Sermonon the Death of the Rev. RobertRobinson ; and some other pieces.DISNEY, (JoHN,) the son of a clergyman,was born at Lincoln, on the28th of September, 1746, and finishedhis education at Peterborough college,Cambridge, where he took the degreeof L.L. B. On entering into holy orders,he was appointed chaplain to BishopLaw, and soon afterwards obtained thevicarage of Wintery, with the rectoryof Panton ; both of which he resignedin the autumn of 1782, having becomea proselyte to Unitarianism. He thenpublished his reasons for quitting theestablished church, in which he confessed,that the just claims of an infantfamily had pleaded hard against hisconscientious determination. Shortlyafterwards, he was chosen assistant,and, in 1793, successor, to his brother-in-law,the celebrated Lindsey, at theUnitarian chapel, in Essex-street ; wherehe continued to officiate until 1805,when ill health compelled him to resign.He died on the 26th of December,1816, leaving two children, by his wife,Jane, eldest daughter of ArchdeaconBlackburne. Out of pure esteem forthe character of this able, benevolent,and, apparently, conscientious divine, agentleman named Dodson bequeathedhim half of his fortune; and Mr. BrandHollis made him sole devisee of all hisestate and effects, real and personal,with the exception of a few inconsiderablelegacies. Dr. Disney publishedmemoirs of his two munificent benefactors; Biographical Sketches of Law,Sykes, Jebb, Jortin, Farnham, andHopkins; a tract, entitled, Animadversionson Dr. Rutherford ; A ShortView of Confessional and Clerical PetitionControversies; Remarks on BishopKurd's Charge, published in 1777, (aboutwhich time he received a diploma ofD. D. from one of the Scotch universities,and became a fellow of the Societyof Antiquaries] ; Considerations on theClergy acting in the Commission of thePeace ; A Friendly Dialogue between anAthanasian and Trinitarian; Observationson the Homilies ; An ArrangedCatalogue of Publications on Toleration,Corporation, and Test Acts ; The Bookof Common Prayer Reformed, for theUse of Unitarian Congregations, firstpublished in 1792, to which were added,Psalms and Hymns, in 1802 ; TheGreat Importance of a Religious LifeConsidered; four volumes of sermons ;and some other works.BENSON, (JOSEPH,) was born atKirk Oswald, in Cumberland, on the25th of January, 1748, and educated inhis native village. At the age of sixteenhe became teacher in a school atGamblesley ; and, on the 1 th of March,1766, received from John Wesley theappointment of classical master atKingswood academy, of which he becameprincipal in 1771. Sometimeafter, while keeping a term at Oxford,of which university he had entered himselfin 1769, certain disputes occurredMiss fc Enters.among his pupils at Kingswood, relativeto the doctrine of predestination,on account of which he thought properto resign. After having been twice refusedordination, on the first occasion,because he had preached contrary tothe statutes, and, on the second, forwant of a degree, he became a professedWesleyan minister, and preached,successively, at London, Newcastle,Edinburgh", and Manchester. In July,1800, he was appointed superintendantof the London circuit, in which hecontinued to officiate, with great success,preaching in the open air as wellas in chapels, until a short time beforehis death, which took place on the 16thof February, 1821. He was so disinterested,that he refused to accept agrant of 500, voted to him by aconference of Methodists, in 1815, assome reward for his literary labours ;among which were Remarks on Dr.Priestley's System of Materialism ; AnEssay on the Separate Existence ofthe Soul; A Vindication of the Methodists,in answer to the Bishop ofLincoln ; the life of his friend, theRev. J. W. Fletcher ; A Commentaryon the Historical Books of the Old andNew Testament ; An Answer to theDefence of Kilham ; and a volume ofSermons. He also edited the Methodists'Magazine, from the month ofAugust, 1802, up to the period of hisdeath. As an author, he was clear andargumentative ; as a preacher, he skilfullyadapted his discourses to theminds and circumstances of those whomhe was addressing; and the effect heproduced was often so great as to causefainting and convulsions among hisaudience. At one time he is said tohave entertained a doubt as to the truthof Christianity ; but his scepticism wasnot of long duration. He also exposedhimself to a suspicion of Arianism,from which, however, he fullycleared himself before a conference.He was married in 1780, to a MissThompson, at Leeds, by whom he hadissue.Pelham, (THOMAS,) brother ofWilliam Pelham, the historian, wasborn at Coventry, in 1753, and educatedat a dissenting academy, in hisnative place ; of which, on the expirationof his pupilage, he became anassistant-tutor. In 1778, he obtainedthe charge of a small congregation, atWorcester; and, in 1781, succeeded toan important pastoral office, and thesituation of principal, or theologicaltutor, at Coventry ; both of which heresigned in 1789, on becoming a convertto Unitarianism. In vindication of hisconduct, he published, in 1790, a sermonOn the Importance of Truth ; andanother, in 1794, entitled, DishonestShame, the primary Source of Corruption.His ability and learning soonprocured him the appointments of divinityprofessor at Hackney college,and successor to Priestley, in the chargeof a congregation at Kensington. Graduallyacquiring an increase of reputation,he was, at length, chosen ministerof the chapel in Essex-street, and recognisedas the head of the Unitarianchurch. He officiated with great success,until age and infirmity compelledhim to abandon his pulpit ; in which hislanguage was always perspicuous, andfrequently elegant; but he is said tohave been cold and formal in his manner,and entirely destitute of oratorical action.Besides the two pieces alreadynamed, his works consist of A Life ofPriestley ; Elements of the Philosophyof Mind and Morals ; Memoirs of theRev. Mr. Lindsey ; and A New Translationof the Epistles of St. Paul, inwhich he is charged with having misinterpretedthe original, in order tomake it accord with his own theologicalopinions.EVANS, (JOHN,) was born at Dusk,in Monmouthshire, on the 2nd of October,1767, and, at the age of seventeen,began to preach at Bristol, where hehad, for some time previously, studiedunder the celebrated Robert Hall. In1787, he was matriculated at the universityof Aberdeen, whence he proceeded,in 1790, to that of Edinburgh, where heobtained the degree of M.A. About theyear 1792, he succeeded Mr. AnthonyRobinson, as pastor of a congregation,in Worship-street; on which occasion,he published An Address designed topromote the Revival of Religion amongthe General Baptists. Shortly afterwards,appeared his Address to YoungPeople, on the Necessity and Importanceof Religion ; and, in 1795, he producedhis Sketch of the Denominations ofAte Nix.the Christian World. He now openedan academy for a limited number ofpupils, and soon acquired considerablereputation as an instructor of youth.In 1815, he was attacked with a complaintthat deprived him of the use ofhis legs during the remainder of hislife ; in 1819, he received the degreeof D. C. L. from one of the Americanuniversities ; and in 1821, he resignedhis school, on the death of his third son,who had been his intended successor.Although entirely incapable of locomotion,being carried, it is stated, to andfro, between his couch and his pulpit,he continued to preach until a fewweeks before his death, which tookplace on the 25th of January, 1827.He evinced, it is said, throughout life,an ardent desire to render those aroundhim happy, and to reconcile conflictingopinions among all denominations ofChristians. He excelled in extemporaneouscomposition ; and was muchadmired for the simple and unambitious,yet, impressive style of his discourses,in which, practical utility appears tohave been his primary object. Besidesthe works already noticed, he publishedseveral topographical, miscellaneous.andtheological pieces. In the preface to afourteenth edition of his Sketch of theDenominations of the Christian World,he states that although one hundredthousand copies of the work had thenbeen sold, he had received only 10for the copyright.CHALMERS, (THOMAS,) professorof moral philosophy in the universityof St Andrews, was born about theyear 1770, in Scotland, and proceededto the degree of D. 1)., in one of theuniversities of his native country. Hofficiated for many years as minister ofVillany ; but, having become famousfor his oratory, he was invited to Edinburgh,and his reputation still extending,he at length obtained the valuable ministryof St. John's, Glasgow. In 1823,during a brief visit to London, hepreached repeatedly to immense congregations.His works consist of AnAddress to the Inhabitants of the Parishof Villany, on the Duty of giving animmediate Diligence to the Business ofChristian Life; Scripture References;The Utility of Missions Ascertained fromExperience; An Inquiry' into the Extentand Stability National Revenues;The Influence of Bible Societies on theTemporal Necessities of the Poor ; TheEvidence and Authority of the ChristianRevelation; A Series of Discourses onthe Christian Revelation viewed inConnexion with Modern Astronomy ;Sermons preached at the Tron church,Glasgow ; The Doctrine of ChristianCharity applied to the Case of ReligiousDifference; The Two Great Instrumentsappointed for the Propagationof the Gospel ; Speech delivered in theGeneral Assembly respecting the Billfor augmenting the Stipends of theClergy of Scotland ; Thoughts on UniversalPeace; and various tracts andother pieces, political and religious.Although many of his productions arehighly honourable to the talents of Dr.Chalmers, his reputation principallyrests on his pulpit eloquence, which isremarkable for the power with which itappeals to the feelings, and convincesthe judgment of his auditors.END OF VOL. I.